Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 9-18-2003 by Ord. No. 420]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
The ordinances of the Town of Elsmere, County of New Castle, State of
Delaware, of a general and permanent nature, adopted by the Town Council
of the Town of Elsmere, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters
and sections by General Code Publishers Corp. and consisting of Chapters
1 through 225, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as the Code of the Town of Elsmere, hereinafter
known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of the Code
by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and
not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date
from the date of adoption of the prior ordinance. All such provisions are
hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to
their adoption by the Town Council of the Town of Elsmere, and it is the
intention of said Council that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in the Code.
§ 1-3. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
Town Manager of the Town of Elsmere and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and,
if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the
Town Manager of the Town of Elsmere by impressing thereon the Seal of
the Town, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said
Town Manager to be made available to persons desiring to examine the
same during all times when said Code is in effect.
§ 1-4. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code or
any new ordinances, when enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate
the intention of the Town Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed
to be incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be
understood and intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments
or supplements. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or
supplements to the Code shall be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter
be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book
containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:3
§ 1-5. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Town Manager or such other authorized person
to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the Code of the
Town of Elsmere required to be filed in the office of the Town Manager for
use by the public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted by
the Town Council subsequent to the enactment of this ordinance in such
form as to indicate the intention of said Council to be a part of said Code
shall, when finally enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary
attachment of copies of such changes or ordinances until such changes or
ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which time
such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-6. Severability.
A. Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an
independent section or part of a section, and the holding of any section
or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause
shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
section or part thereof.
B. Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding
of any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective
for any cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or
constitutionality of any other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-7. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
A. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the Town of Elsmere
in force upon the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in such Code or recognized and continued in force by
reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date
of this ordinance.
B. In particular, the former Code of the Town of Elsmere, adopted May 30,
1996, by Ordinance No. 326, is hereby repealed. The following chapters
from the 1996 Code are specifically repealed:
(1) Chapter 13, Court, Mayors, adopted 9-30-1981 by Ordinance No.
165, as amended.
(2) Chapter 25, Fees, Remittance of, adopted 1-5-1996 by Ordinance No.
62.
(3) Chapter 41, Playground Advisory Committee, adopted 9-9-1971 by
Ordinance No. 107.
(4) Chapter 91, Disorderly Conduct, adopted 1-5-1956 by Ordinance No.
60.
(5) Chapter 135, Loitering, Art. I, Disturbing the Peace, adopted
10-13-1966 by Ordinance No. 85.
(6) Chapter 139, Mechanical Standards, adopted 9-28-1983 by
Ordinance No. 187.
(7) Chapter 163, Plumbing Standards, adopted 9-28-1983 by Ordinance
No. 186.
§ 1-5 ELSMERE CODE § 1-8
1:4
§ 1-8. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of ordinances provided for in § 1-7 of this ordinance shall not
affect the following classes of ordinances, rights and obligations, which are
hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Town of Elsmere prior to the effective date of
this ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement
of such right or liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Town of Elsmere
or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Town of Elsmere.
D. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Town of Elsmere or any municipal or intermunicipal
agreement.
E. Any ordinance of the Town of Elsmere providing for the laying out,
opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing
grade, changing name, improvement acceptance or vacation of any
right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or other place within
the Town of Elsmere or any portion thereof.
F. Any ordinance of the Town of Elsmere appropriating money or
transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or
authorizing the issuance and delivery of bonds of the Town of Elsmere
or other instruments or evidence of the Town's indebtedness.
G. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
J. Any legislation relating to salaries.
K. Any ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
L. Any legislation adopted subsequent to January 9, 2003.
M. Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
N. All resolutions.
§ 1-9. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the Town of Elsmere for
adoption and revision as part of the Code, certain grammatical and other
changes were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention
of the Town Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code
as if the ordinances so changed had been previously formally adopted to
read as such.
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance as
set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof (chapter
and section number references are to the ordinance as they have been
renumbered and appear in the Code).1
§ 1-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-10
1:5
§ 1-10. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this ordinance are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1, and
the sections shall be numbered §§ 1-1 through 1-11, inclusive.
§ 1-11. When effective.
All provisions of the Code shall be in full force and effect on and after the
effective date of this ordinance, which shall take effect immediately upon its
final adoption.
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-9B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 9-18-2003 by Ord. No. 420." Schedule
A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the Town offices.
§ 1-10 ELSMERE CODE § 1-11
1:6
Chapter 5
BUDGETARY EVALUATION PROGRAM
§ 5-1. Installation of program.
A system known as the "Budgetary Evaluation Program" shall be installed.
§ 5-2. Departmental notification.
A. The first component of said program shall be a departmental notification
by the Finance Director of any budgeted line items approaching 80% of
its yearly budget.
B. Notification shall be served one month prior to reaching the expectant
eighty-percent mark, based on previous expenditures, and the history of
each line item in question.
C. Notice shall be served to department heads and/or directors, Mayor and
Council and Town Manager simultaneously.
§ 5-3. Duration of program.
This program shall be used until the eighth month of each fiscal year. At
this time, a full review of the Town's budget shall take place by the Mayor
and Council, Town Manager, directors and department heads, to determine
current status of budget and possible improvements to the management of
tax dollars in the next fiscal period.
§ 5-4. Purpose of eight-month program.
The purpose of having this program cut off and budget review starting at
the eighth month of each fiscal year is as follows:
A. During the ninth month of any fiscal year, all line items of our total
budget naturally should be approaching their respective eighty-percent
mark.
B. The ending of the Budgetary Evaluation Program and the beginning of an
annual review is a consistent and reliable way to evaluate all tax dollars
expended during the fiscal year while increasing the knowledge base for
those who review and prepare future budgets.
§ 5-5. Response by departments.
The second component of this process shall be a procedure of response by
the department heads and/or directors. This component shall consist of an
acknowledgment of receipt of notice, a verification that said line item is
approaching the eighty-percent mark, or a statement of disagreement. This
is to be sent to the Director of Finance.
A. If said line item can be assured by department heads and/or directors
that it will not exceed its budgeted amount, a simple response of that fact
shall be forwarded to the Finance Director, Town Manager and Mayor
and Council.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-5
1:7
B. If said line item can't be kept within its budgeted amount, a response
form should be completed stating reasons for over-expenditures,
methods to be used to curtail excessive spending, if any, and possible
ways to resolving the situation. If transferring from one line item budget
to another is one possible solution, this shall also be stated.
§ 5-6. Transfers between line item budgets.
Transfers between line item budgets shall be listed with account numbers
and amounts to be transferred.
§ 5-7. Response form.
Response form shall be sent to the Finance Director, Town Manager and
Mayor/Council within one week of receipt of notification.
§ 5-8. Oral presentation.
The Department shall have an oral presentation prepared for the next
scheduled work session of the Mayor/Council, if the budgeted line item will
exceed 100% of that fiscal year.
Chapter 9
CABLE TELEVISION RATES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cable Television Franchise — See Ch. A230.
§ 9-1. Authority to enforce cable rate regulations.
The Town of Elsmere, as the Franchising Authority for the Town of Elsmere,
has the legal authority to administer and shall enforce against any nonmunicipally-
owned cable television system operator, as permitted therein,
the provisions of Part 76, Subpart N, of the Rules and Regulations of
the FCC, concerning cable rate regulation, 47 CFR 76.900 et seq., as
they currently read and hereafter may be amended, which are herewith
incorporated by reference.
§ 9-2. Consideration of views of interested parties; proceedings.
Any rate regulation proceedings conducted under § 9-1 hereto shall provide
a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of any interested
party, including but not limited to the Franchising Authority or its designee,
the cable operator, subscribers and residents of the franchise area. In
addition to all other provisions required by the laws of the State of Delaware
and the Town of Elsmere for such proceedings, and in order to provide for
§ 5-5 ELSMERE CODE § 9-2
1:8
such opportunity for consideration of the views of any interested party, the
Franchising Authority shall take the following actions:
A. The Franchising Authority shall publish in a local newspaper (and/or,
as appropriate, post in a conspicuous place in Town Hall), and mail,
by certified mail, to the cable operator a public notice of the intent to
conduct a public proceeding on basic service tier rates and/or charges
for equipment to receive such basic service tier, as defined by the FCC,
the cable operator will pay for any costs associated with the public
notice.
B. Said public notice shall state, among other things, that cable television
rates are subject to municipal review and explain the nature of the rate
review in question; that any interested party has a right to participate in
the proceeding, that public views may be submitted in the proceeding,
explaining how they are to be submitted and the deadline for submitting
any such view; that a decision concerning the reasonableness of the
cable television rates or equipment rate in question will be governed
by the Rules and Regulations of the FCC; and that the decision of the
Franchising Authority is subject to review by the FCC.
C. The Franchising Authority shall conduct a public proceeding to
determine whether the rates or proposed rate increase or decrease are
reasonable and shall be vested with all powers of a presiding officer to
conduct such public proceeding.
(1) Nature of the proceeding. The nature of such proceeding will be
determined by the Franchising Authority and may include public
hearing, opportunities for the submission of written or oral
comment, informal meetings or as the Franchising Authority
otherwise determines appropriate under the circumstances.
(2) Record. The Franchising Authority will maintain a record of all
written submission. At the discretion of the Franchising Authority,
in appropriate cases, a transcript of any statement made at a public
proceeding will be maintained; provided, however, that the cable
operator may request, at the time it submits any proposed rates or
changes in rate, that the Franchising Authority direct a transcript
of such proceeding, provided further that upon such request the
cable operator shall pay all costs of such transcript, including copies
for the Franchising Authority, and shall provide two copies of such
transcript to the Franchising Authority as soon as reasonably
possible.
(3) Delegation. The Franchising Authority may delegate the
responsibility to conduct the proceeding to any duly qualified and
eligible individual(s) or entity.
(4) Orders. If the Franchising Authority or its designee cannot
determine the reasonableness of a proposed rate increase within the
time period permitted by the FCC Rules and Regulations, it may
toll the effective date of the proposed rates for an additional period
of time as permitted by the FCC Rules and Regulations, and issue
any other necessary or appropriate order and give public notice
accordingly.
§ 9-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-2
1:9
D. In the course of the rate regulation proceeding, the Franchising
Authority may request additional information from the cable operator
or any other party that is reasonably necessary to determine the
reasonableness of the basic service tier rates and equipment charges.
(1) Verification. Any such additional information submitted to the
Franchising Authority by the cable operator shall be verified by an
authorized representative of the cable television system supervising
the preparation of the response on behalf of the entity, and
submitted by way of affidavit or under penalty of perjury, stating
that the response is true and accurate to the best of that person's
knowledge, information and belief formed after reasonable inquiry.
(2) Proprietary information. The Franchising Authority may request
propriety information, provided that the Franchising Authority shall
consider a timely request from the cable operator that said
proprietary information shall not be made available for public
information, consistent with the procedures set forth in Section
0.459 of the FCC Rules and Regulations. Furthermore, said
proprietary information may be used only for the purpose of
determining the reasonableness of the rates and charges or the
appropriate rate level based on a benchmark rate or a cost-of-service
showing submitted by the cable operator.
(3) Powers. The Franchising Authority may exercise all powers under
the laws of evidence applicable to administrative proceedings under
the laws of the State of Delaware and of the Town of Elsmere to
discover any information relevant to the rate regulation proceeding,
including but not limited to subpoena, interrogatories, production of
documents and deposition. The Franchising Authority may require
the attendance as witness of one or more representatives of the
cable operator.
E. Upon termination of the rate regulation proceeding, the Franchising
Authority shall adopt and release a written decision as to whether the
rate or proposed rate increase are reasonable or unreasonable, and
if unreasonable, its remedy, including prospective rate reduction, rate
prescription and refunds.
F. The Franchising Authority may not impose any fines, penalties,
forfeitures or other sanctions, other than permitted by the FCC Rules
and Regulations, for charging an unreasonable rate or proposing an
unreasonable rate increase. However, the Franchising Authority may
impose fines or monetary forfeitures on a cable operator that does not
comply with a rate decision or refund order of the Franchising Authority,
directed specifically at the cable operator, pursuant to the laws of the
State of Delaware, the Codes, Rules and Regulations of the Town of
Elsmere.
G. Consistent with FCC Rules and Regulations, the Franchising Authority's
decision may be reviewed only by the FCC.
H. The Franchising Authority shall be authorized, at any time, whether or
not in the course of a rate regulation proceeding, to gather information
as necessary to exercise its jurisdiction as authorized by the laws of
the State of Delaware, the Communications Act of 1934, as amended,
§ 9-2 ELSMERE CODE § 9-2
1:10
and the FCC Rules and Regulations. Any information submitted to the
Franchising Authority shall be verified by an authorized representative
of the cable television system supervising the preparation of the
response on behalf of the entity, and submitted by way of affidavit or
under penalty of perjury, stating that the response is true and accurate
to the best of that person's knowledge, information and belief formed
after reasonable inquiry.
§ 9-3. Certification by FCC.
The Franchising Authority shall file with the FCC the required Certification
form (FCC Form 328). Thirty days later, or as soon thereafter as
appropriate, the Franchising Authority shall notify the cable operator that
the Franchising Authority has been certified by the FCC and that it has
adopted all necessary regulations so as to begin regulating basic service
tier cable television rates and equipment charges.
§ 9-4. Notification of changes in rates, equipment or nature of
service.
With regard to the cable programming service tier, as defined by the
Communications Act of 1934, as amended, and the FCC Rules and
Regulations, and over which the Franchising Authority is not empowered
to exercise rate regulation, the cable operator shall give notice to the
Franchising Authority of any change in rate for the cable programming
service tier or tiers, any change in the charge for equipment required to
receive the tier or tiers, and any changes in the nature of the services
provided, including the program services included in the tier or tiers. The
cable operator shall provide such notice 30 days before the charges are to
become effective.
§ 9-5. Powers of designated authority.
Except with respect to final rate orders, the Franchising Authority may
delegate its powers to enforce this chapter to any qualified and eligible
individuals. Such designee will have the authority to:
A. Administer oaths and affirmations.
B. Issue subpoenas.
C. Examine witnesses.
D. Rule upon questions of evidence.
E. Take or cause depositions to be taken.
F. Conduct proceedings in accordance with this chapter.
G. Exclude from the proceeding any person engaging in contemptuous
conduct or otherwise disrupting the proceedings.
H. Hold conferences for the settlement or simplification of the issues by
consent of the parties.
I. Issue notices and orders, take actions and make decisions or recommend
decisions in conformity with this chapter.
Chapter 17
§ 9-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-5
1:11
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
§ 17-1. Right of representation.
Any law enforcement officer of the Town of Elsmere who may become
a defendant in a civil or criminal action against him arising out of his
employment with the Town shall be entitled to an attorney to represent his
interest, said representation to be paid for by the Town of Elsmere. This
section shall apply to all actions filed in the state or federal courts within
the State of Delaware.
§ 17-2. Indemnification against judgments, fines and costs.
In addition to the right of representation provided for in § 17-1 of this
chapter, any law enforcement officer of the Town of Elsmere who, but
for the application of any provision of the Constitution or Laws of the
United States or the State of Delaware to the contrary, would be entitled
to immunity in accordance with Section 4011 of Title 10 of the Delaware
Code, shall be indemnified by the Town of Elsmere against any expenses
(including attorney's fees and disbursements), judgments, fines and costs
actually and reasonably incurred by such public officer or employee
defending against the action, suit or proceeding giving rise thereto.
§ 17-3. Limit of liability of town.
The limits of the Town's liability under §§ 17-1 and 17-2 of this chapter in
respect of any one incident, regardless of the number of law enforcement
officers involved, shall be $300,000 as well as all defense expenses.
§ 17-4. Exclusions.
Sections 17-1 and 17-2 of this chapter notwithstanding, the Town shall
not be responsible for defense or indemnification of any law enforcement
officer for claims arising out of actions not within the scope of the law
enforcement officer's employment or out of actions performed with wanton
negligence of willful and malicious intent. This exclusion shall only apply
where a judgment or final adjudication establishes that the actions of the
law enforcement officer were not within the scope of his employment or
were performed with wanton negligence or willful and malicious intent.
§ 17-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Members of the police force of the
Town of Elsmere as well as those employees of the Town as are regularly
employed in law enforcement duties or control but only in the furtherance
of the official pursuits of the Public Safety Department of the Town.
Chapter 19
§ 9-5 ELSMERE CODE § 17-5
1:12
ELECTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nominations and elections — See Charter,
Art. IX.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 34.
Resignation upon filing for elected
office — See Ch. 36, Art. I.
§ 19-1. General provisions.
A. The Town of Elsmere shall conduct all elections for local office using
voting machines that the Department of Elections shall provide.
(1) Two members of the Board of elections shall certify the voting
machines to be used in the election prior to the voting machines
being delivered to the polling place(s). [Added 10-11-2018 by Ord.
No. 639]
B. Where a deadline in this chapter is a Saturday, Sunday, or a holiday in
the Town of Elsmere, the deadline shall be the next day that is not a
Saturday, Sunday, or a holiday in the Town of Elsmere.
C. Deadlines shall be no earlier than 4:30 p.m. local time.
D. The term "Department of Elections" as used in this chapter refers to the
Department of Elections for New Castle County.
§ 19-2. Purpose.
This chapter enables the Town of Elsmere to comply with legislation
codified in Subchapters IV and V of Chapter 75 of Title 15 of the Delaware
Code, governing the conduct of municipal elections.
§ 19-3. Board of Elections.
A. A Board of Elections, consisting of three members, shall be appointed by the
Mayor and confirmed by the Council. The Board of Elections shall oversee
the election of the Town of Elsmere's government.
B. Each member of the Town of Elsmere Board of Elections shall be a qualified
elector in the Town of Elsmere and shall not be an elected official or
candidate or an immediate family member of an elected official or candidate
(mother, father, son, daughter, brother, sister, including half brothers and
sisters, stepfamily members and in-laws).
C. Members of the Town of Elsmere Board of Elections shall serve two-year
terms.
D. Upon confirmation of a member to the Town of Elsmere's Board of Elections,
the Town of Elsmere shall issue a certificate of appointment to the member,
and the member shall swear or affirm the following oath orally and in
writing:
§ 17-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-3
1:13
I, ____________, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the
Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of
Delaware, and that I will faithfully discharge the duties as a member of
the Board of Elections for the Town of Elsmere by ensuring that elections
within the Town of Elsmere are conducted fairly, impartially, and in
accordance with the Delaware Code and Town of Elsmere Charter and
ordinances to the best of my ability.
E. A Town of Elsmere Board of Elections member shall not participate in
electioneering. Electioneering includes political discussion of issues,
candidates, or partisan topics; the wearing of any button, banner, or other
object referring to issues, candidates, or partisan topics; the display,
distribution, or other handling of literature or any writing or drawing
referring to issues, candidates, or partisan topics; and the deliberate
projection of sound referring to issues, candidates, or partisan topics from
loudspeakers or otherwise. A Town of Elsmere Board of Elections member
who violates this section shall be fined not more than $500 and shall forfeit
that Board of Election member's position on the Board.
F. The Town of Elsmere Board of Elections shall oversee the absentee ballot
process for elections conducted in accordance with this chapter.
G. The Town of Elsmere shall post the names and contact information for its
Board of Elections in the Town Hall and on the Town of Elsmere's website
(www.elsmere.delaware.gov).
H. The Town of Elsmere shall notify the State Election Commissioner and the
Department of Elections of the members of its Board of Elections when such
members are installed.
§ 19-4. Notices; posting.
A. For all Town elections, the Town of Elsmere shall post a notice of election
conspicuously within the Town no later than 20 days prior to the date
of the election. Such notice shall include the date, time, and location
of the election; the candidates for each office on the ballot; and the
qualifications to vote in the election.
B. For all Town elections, the Town of Elsmere shall post a notice of
solicitation of candidates conspicuously within the Town 20 days prior
to the filing deadline for the offices up for election. Such notice shall
include the term or terms of each office up for election, the deadline and
procedure for declaring candidacy for an office up for election, and the
qualifications for holding each office.
C. All notices required by this section shall include information about how
to obtain an absentee ballot.
D. The Town shall post the notices required by this section, at minimum, in
compliance with the Delaware Freedom of Information Act, Chapter 100
of Title 29.
E. The Town shall post all election notices on its website.
F. The Town shall provide a copy of each election notice to the Department
of Elections.
§ 19-5. Elective offices and candidacy requirements.
§ 19-3 ELSMERE CODE § 19-5
1:14
A. Elective offices. The government of the Town and the exercising of all
powers conferred in the Town's Charter shall be vested in a Mayor and a
Town Council. The Mayor shall be elected at large by the qualified voters
of the Town. One person shall be elected to the Town Council by the
qualified voters of each of the Town's six districts.
B. Eligibility.
(1) The Mayor. A candidate for Mayor shall be at least 21 years of age on
or before the date of the election, shall have been a qualified elector
of the Town of Elsmere for at least one year prior to the date of the
election and shall not have been convicted of a felony.
(2) Councilpersons. A candidate for Councilperson shall be at least 21
years of age on or before the date of the election, shall have been
a qualified elector and resident of the Town of Elsmere for at least
one year prior to the date of the election, shall at the time of the
election reside in the district for which elected, and shall not have
been convicted of a felony.
C. Terms of elective office.
(1) The Mayor. The Mayor shall be elected at large for a term of two
years or until a successor shall be duly elected and qualified. If
any of the following occur, there shall be an automatic forfeiture
of the office, thereby creating a vacancy: loss of residence in the
Town, a conviction of any misdemeanor relating to the conduct of the
Mayor's office or any felony, or a failure to attend three consecutive
regular meetings of Council without being excused by the Council.
Before entering the duties of his/her office, the Mayor shall be sworn
or affirmed by a Justice of the Peace, or by a notary public, to
perform the duties thereof honestly, faithfully, and diligently.
(2) Councilpersons. One Councilperson shall be elected from each
district for a term of two years or until a successor shall be duly
elected and qualified. If any of the following occur, there shall be
an automatic forfeiture of the office, thereby creating a vacancy:
loss of residence in the Town or in the district from which elected,
a conviction of any misdemeanor relating to the conduct of the
Councilperson's office or any felony, or a failure to attend three
consecutive regular meetings of Council without being excused by
the Council.
(3) In case of a vacancy for any cause, a special election, conducted in
the same manner as a regular election, except that the nominating
petitions shall be filed no later than 20 days before the date of the
special election, shall be held within 60 days after the occurrence
of the vacancy, as may be proclaimed by the Council; provided,
however, that if the vacancy occurs within 365 days of a regular
election, the vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor
subject to confirmation by a majority of the Council.
D. Declaration of candidacy.
(1) Any person desiring to be a candidate or to be voted for as a
candidate for nomination for Mayor or Councilperson must file
notice in writing to the Town Manager. Such notification shall be
made on forms provided by the Town on or before 7:00 p.m. of
§ 19-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-5
1:15
the first Monday in February prior to the biennial Town of Elsmere
elections, or the fifth Monday prior to a special election. No person
may file as a candidate for more than one office.
(2) All candidates at the time of giving notice, as required in this
section, shall tender to the Town a filing fee equal to 3% of the total
salary for the entire term of office for which the candidate is filing.
(3) A candidate for office within the Town of Elsmere shall file a
certificate of intention, or a statement of organization, establishing
a campaign committee with the State Election Commissioner no
later than seven days after declaring that candidate's candidacy. A
certificate of intention is submitted by a candidate when the yearly
salary for the office for which that candidate has filed a declaration
of candidacy is less than $1,000 or who does not intend to receive
more than $2,000 in contributions, or expend more than $2,000 for
campaign expenses during the campaign pursuant to § 8004 of Title
15. Otherwise, no later than seven days after making expenditures
or receiving contributions on behalf of the candidate or committee,
the candidate shall notify the Commissioner and file a statement of
organization.
(4) The State Election Commissioner shall notify the Town of Elsmere
Board of Elections when a candidate has failed to comply with the
provisions of Subsection D(3) of this section above.
(5) Excepting candidacies otherwise provided for in the Town Charter
and which have complied with the provisions of Subsection D(3)
of this section within five days after the election, the Town of
Elsmere Board of Elections shall declare a candidate who has failed
to comply with the provisions of Subsection D(3) of this section
ineligible to be a candidate and shall order that candidate's name
removed from the ballot subject to the appeal provisions of § 19-6
of this chapter. Administrative errors or oversights by Town of
Elsmere or state officials shall not be grounds for declaring a
person ineligible to be a candidate.
(6) Officials receiving any document required in this section shall
provide the person filing the document with a receipt showing the
date and time that the document was filed and the name of the
person who received the document.
(7) Officials receiving any document required in this section shall
immediately notify the person submitting the document of any
deficiency in the submission. The person submitting the document
shall have two business days to correct the deficiency even if the
extension extends beyond the applicable deadline. If the person
does not correct the deficiency by the end of the second business
day, the Town of Elsmere shall reject it.
(8) All documents filed in accordance with this section are public
records, and the Town of Elsmere shall make them available for
inspection by the public in accordance with the Delaware Freedom
of Information Act (Chapter 100 of Title 29).
§ 19-5 ELSMERE CODE § 19-5
1:16
(9) Where the number of qualified candidates for an office is equal to or
less than the number of seats up for election, the Board of Elections
shall declare the candidate or candidates elected.
(10) The Commissioner of Elections shall prepare a package of
municipal candidate forms required by this section and instructions
for completing and filing the forms. The Commissioner shall provide
the Town of Elsmere copies of the municipal candidate forms
package and publish the package on the Commissioner of Elections'
website. The Town of Elsmere and the Department of Elections
shall publish the municipal candidate forms package on their
websites. The Town of Elsmere shall maintain a sufficient supply of
municipal candidate forms packages to meet demand.
(11) The Town of Elsmere shall submit the names of candidates for
each office up for election to the Department of Elections no later
than one business day following the filing deadlines for the elected
positions.
(12) A person may withdraw as a candidate by filing the form
promulgated by the State Election Commissioner for that purpose
with the Town of Elsmere. The notice of withdrawal shall be filed
before 12:00 noon of the second Monday in February prior to the
biennial Town of Elsmere elections, or the fourth Monday prior to a
special election. The filing fee shall be refunded after receipt of the
notice of withdrawal. [Amended 10-11-2018 by Ord. No. 639]
(13) If there are two or more candidates remaining on the ballot for
the office and there are 14 or more days prior to the date of the
election, the Town of Elsmere shall mail new absentee ballots to
all persons to whom it had issued absentee ballots. If an absentee
voter does not return the replacement absentee ballot before 12:00
noon the day before the election, the Town of Elsmere shall count
the original ballot.
(14) Any votes cast for a person who has withdrawn that person's own
candidacy are invalid, and the Town of Elsmere shall not tally,
canvass, or report such votes.
§ 19-6. Complaint procedure.
A. A citizen of the Town of Elsmere may submit a written complaint
regarding any aspect of pre-election activity that is contrary to the
provisions of this chapter to the Town of Elsmere Board of Elections.
The complainant shall state with specificity the action or activity that is
contrary to the provisions of this chapter. The Town of Elsmere Board
of Elections shall meet in a special public meeting held, as soon as
practicable, in compliance with the Delaware Freedom of Information
Act (Chapter 100 of Title 29) following receipt of the complaint and
determine if the complaint has any merit. Within 24 hours of the special
public meeting, the Town of Elsmere Board of Elections shall issue
a written decision on whether the pre-election action or activity was
legally incorrect and ordering lawful action necessary to correct such
legal error in the pre-election action or activity. The Board of Elections
shall immediately make its decision available to the public.
§ 19-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-6
1:17
B. Decisions and orders of the Town of Elsmere Board of Elections may
be appealed to the State Election Commissioner in writing within two
business days of the Board's decision and order. The Elections
Commissioner shall take testimony at a special public hearing that the
Commissioner conducts within four business days following receipt of
the appeal. The Commissioner shall hold the hearing in accordance with
the Administrative Procedures Act (Chapter 101 of Title 29) except as
provided in this section. The Commissioner shall give 48 hours' prior
notice to all parties to such special public hearing in lieu of the notice
provisions of § 10122 of Title 29. Notice of the hearing shall be posted
as well as published on the Commissioner's website in lieu of the notice
provisions of § 10124 of Title 29. The Commissioner shall issue a written
decision no later than two business days following the hearing. Decisions
of the Commissioner may be appealed in writing to Superior Court no
less than 48 hours before the date of the election.
C. Notwithstanding the foregoing, at the option of the complainant, he or
she may elect to appeal the decision of the Town of Elsmere Board of
Elections in writing to the Superior Court no less than 48 hours before
the date of the election.
§ 19-7. Voter eligibility.
Voter eligibility shall be as specified in the Town of Elsmere Charter.
§ 19-8. Form of ballot.
For the purpose of Town elections, a separate form of ballot shall be
provided for each district. Each ballot shall contain, in addition to the names
of the candidates for the Town Council running in that district, the names of
the candidates for those offices which are voted upon at large. The ballots
provided for the purpose of the Town of Elsmere election shall bear no
political party designation.
§ 19-9. Elections.
A. A regular Town of Elsmere election shall be held on the last Saturday in
April 2007 and on the last Saturday of April in each two years thereafter.
Council shall, by ordinances, set the hours during which the polls shall
be open. The Council shall designate the place or places of election
and make all necessary rules and regulations not inconsistent with this
chapter, or with the general laws of the State of Delaware for the
conduct of elections, for the prevention of fraud in elections and for the
recount of ballots in case of doubt or fraud. Unless otherwise specified in
this chapter, write-in votes shall not be permitted in any Town of Elsmere
election.
B. At all such elections, the voters shall be received at each polling place by
three qualified voters of the Town of Elsmere appointed by the Council.
One of the said persons for each polling place shall be designated as
the "Inspector" and the other two as "Judges" of the election, and the
three at each polling place shall be known as "Election Officers," and
no such person shall be a candidate for office at any such election. In
§ 19-6 ELSMERE CODE § 19-9
1:18
addition to the Election Officers, there shall be two clerks at each polling
place. The clerks shall be appointed by the Council from a list of three
names from each district. The result of the balloting at each polling place
for said officers of said Town shall be ascertained by the said Election
Officers, who shall certify said results under their hands to the Council.
The Council may appoint clerks to assist the officers of election.
C. The Inspector shall be the Chief Election Officer in the polling place.
D. The Inspector shall determine all challenges and all other issues
involving the conduct of the election at the polling place. The Board of
Elections may provide advice and guidance to the Election Officers.
E. Election Officers, individually and collectively, shall conduct elections in
a fair and equal manner.
F. Election Officers who violate the provisions of this chapter shall be
removed forthwith by the Board of Elections.
G. In case of referenda or special elections, the same procedure shall be
followed to the extent applicable as with respect to the regular elections,
and the penalty for fraud and misconduct shall be the same.
§ 19-10. Conduct of election.
A. Election Officers shall admit the following persons to the voting room:
(1) Board of Elections members;
(2) Election Officers;
(3) Persons voting and waiting to vote;
(4) A child, or children, 17 years of age or less accompanying the voter;
(5) Department of Elections administrators or employees identified by
badge or other authorization;
(6) The State Election Commissioner, or an employee of the Commissioner
of Elections' office, identified by badge or other authorizations;
(7) Any person accompanying a Board of Elections member, a Department
of Elections administrator, or the State Election Commissioner, except
for an elected official of the Town of Elsmere, a candidate on the ballot,
or a person associated in any way with the campaign of a candidate on
the ballot;
(8) Any other person deemed necessary to the conduct of the election by
the Inspector, except for an elected official of the Town of Elsmere, a
candidate on the ballot, or a person associated in any way with the
campaign of a candidate on the ballot; or
(9) A person or persons required by a voter to assist the voter in voting who
is not the voter's employer, agent of that voter's employer or union, or
an elected official of the Town of Elsmere, a candidate on the ballot, or
a person associated in any way with the campaign of a candidate on the
ballot.
B. Electioneering.
(1) No Election Officer, challenger, or any other person within the polling
place or within 50 feet of the entrance to the building in which the
voting room is located shall electioneer during the conducting of the
election. No political headquarters or gathering shall be permitted
within that building during the conducting of the election.
§ 19-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-10
1:19
(2) Whoever violates Subsection B(1) of this section shall be fined not more
than $200 or imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.
(3) Whoever, being an Election Officer, violates Subsection B(1) of this
section shall be deemed to have knowingly and willfully violated his or
her official duty.
(4) For the purposes of this section the following definition shall apply:
"Electioneering" includes political discussion of issues, candidates or
partisan topics, the wearing of any button, banner, or other object
referring to issues, candidates, or partisan topics; the display,
distribution, or other handling of literature or any writing or drawing
referring to issues, candidates, or partisan topics; the deliberate
projection of sound referring to issues, candidates, or partisan topics
from loudspeakers, or otherwise, into the polling place or the area
within 50 feet of the entrance to the building in which the voting room
is located.
C. Challenges and challengers.
(1) At the Town of Elsmere elections, each candidate on the ballot may
appoint and accredit one or more suitable persons as challengers. One
challenger at a time for each candidate on the ballot at each voting
location in a building may be present to observe the conduct of the
election and all election records. The challengers may be changed, and
their places filled in like manner during the day. Each challenger shall
present the Inspector a challenger authorization for that election.
(2) The Inspector shall issue each challenger a challenger badge that the
challenger shall wear while in the polling place. If the person leaves the
polling place, the challenger shall surrender the badge to the Inspector
and retrieve the challenger authorization from the Inspector.
(3) Challengers may act as peace officers with the same powers of
preserving the peace as Election Officers. The Election Officers shall
protect them in the discharge of their duty, as long as the challengers
do not create any disturbance or obstruction and do not unreasonably
prolong any challenge. The Inspector shall caution challengers
concerning the foregoing. If a challenger persists in objectionable
behavior, the Inspector may eject the challenger. Nothing in this
subsection of this section shall prevent the substitution of another
challenger for one whom the Inspector ejected.
(4) If an Inspector willfully ejects a challenger without cause, that Inspector
shall be deemed to have knowingly and willfully violated that Inspector's
own official duty.
(5) Any person legally in the polling place may challenge any voter for
identity, address, or bribery. The Inspector shall hear each challenge
before the person being challenged enters a voting machine. Once
the Inspector decides the challenge, the matter is decided, and the
challenged person will be either permitted to vote, or not permitted
to vote, depending on the decision. A person denied permission to
vote shall leave the polling place immediately. A person challenged for
bribery may take and subscribe to the oath as provided in § 4940 of Title
15. Once the person has taken and subscribed to the oath, the person
shall be permitted to vote.
§ 19-10 ELSMERE CODE § 19-10
1:20
D. Voting machines; election supplies; certification.
(1) Two members of the Town of Elsmere Board of Elections conducting an
election shall certify the voting machines to be used in the election prior
to the voting machines being delivered to the polling place or places.
(2) The Town of Elsmere shall be responsible for providing pens, rubber
bands, tape, and other supplies needed at the polling place.
E. Oath of office. Before opening the election, the Inspector, and any other
appointed Election Officer, shall subscribe to the following oath:
I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that in the election to be held on the _____
day of _____ A.D., I will not knowingly or willfully receive or consent to the
receiving of the vote of any person who is not a citizen, and also that I will
not receive or consent to the receiving of the vote of any person whom I
shall believe not entitled to vote, unless my associates shall adjudge such
person to be entitled to vote. That I will not receive or reject, nor concur in
receiving or rejecting any vote through partiality or under bias, and that I
will determine every matter that shall come before me and perform every
act and duty by law required of me, touching the election, truly, faithfully
and impartially, according to the best of my skill and judgment; that I have
not received, nor will I receive directly or indirectly from or through any
candidate to be voted for at such election, or any other person, any money,
pay or other valuable thing or reward; that I have not been promised,
or in any manner been led to believe that I will at any time directly or
indirectly receive any money, pay or other valuable thing or reward from
such candidate or other person other than that provided by law and if
I shall discover any partiality, unfairness or corruption in the conduct of
the election, I shall disclose the same to the Board of Elections that is
conducting the election and to the Attorney General to the end that the
subject may be investigated, so help me God (or so I solemnly affirm).
F. Bribery.
(1) No person who is accused of receiving or accepting or offering to
receive or accept, or who pays, transfers or delivers, or offers or
promises to pay, transfer or deliver, or who contributes or offers or
promises to contribute to another to be paid or used any money or other
valuable thing as a compensation, inducement or reward for giving or
withholding or in any manner influencing the giving or withholding
a vote at any Town of Elsmere election shall vote at such election
unless such person being challenged for any of said causes takes and
subscribes to the oath or affirmation as provided for in § 4940 of Title
15.
(2) Such oath or affirmation shall be conclusive evidence to the Election
Officers of the truth of such oath or affirmation, but if any such oath or
affirmation shall be false, the person making the same shall be guilty of
perjury, and no conviction thereon shall bar any prosecution under § 8
of Article V of the Constitution of this state. Such oath or affirmation,
when signed and attested as provided in this section shall be competent
evidence in any proceeding against the party making the same.
G. Polling places. Polling places shall be convenient and readily accessible to
the voters.
§ 19-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-10
1:21
H. Preparing the polling place prior to the election.
(1) The Election Officers for each polling place shall arrive at least one
hour prior to the time set for opening of the polls and shall proceed to
arrange the furniture, documents, forms, envelopes, signs, posters and
voting machines for the conduct of the election. They shall inspect the
ballot cover and curtain of the machine or machines to make certain
that the machine or machines have not been damaged or tampered with
in any manner. The Election Officers shall also take reasonable steps
to ensure that no mirror or camera is in a position that would permit
anyone to view the ballot.
(2) The Election Officers shall post or place the following posters and signs
as follows:
(a) In the voting room:
[1] A voter information poster that includes information on voter
eligibility, the date of the election and the hours that the polling
place or places are open, general information on the right to
vote, instructions on how to contact the appropriate officials
if these rights are alleged to have been violated, and general
information on the prohibition of acts or frauds and
misrepresentation;
[2] A sample ballot; and
[3] Instructions on how to use the voting machine.
(b) At each voting machine:
[1] A sample ballot; and
[2] Instructions on how to use the voting machine.
(c) At the entrance to the voting area:
[1] A poster that indicates that the room or area is a polling place;
[2] A voter information poster as described above; and
[3] A sample ballot.
(d) Signs marking the route between the entrance and the accessible
entrance and the voting room.
(e) A poster or other visible object at the entrance to the building used
by voters and at the accessible entrance, if different, that marks the
building as a polling place.
(f) Outside of the building where the polling place is located:
[1] Signs that mark that the building is a polling place;
[2] Signs that mark the accessible route from parking to the
accessible entrance; and
[3] Signs that mark or point to the accessible entrance.
(3) The Department of Elections shall provide a voting machine certificate
that lists the serial number, ballot number, machine case seal number,
printer door number, and the protective counter number for each voting
machine assigned to the district (where voting by district is permitted)
or polling place. Each Election Officer shall witness and verify that
the numbers listed on the voting machine certificate are the same as
the voting machine serial number, case seal number, printer door seal
number, ballot number and protective counter number on the voting
machine. If a number is different, the Inspector shall strike through the
§ 19-10 ELSMERE CODE § 19-10
1:22
number, enter the appropriate correction, and initial the entry on each
of the certificates.
(4) The Election Officers shall then observe the opening of the polls
procedure for each voting machine assigned to the district or polling
place. If the light in the "polls ready to open" box on the officer's control
panel is in any other but the top position prior to the Inspector pressing
the open polls button, stop the procedure and contact the Board of
Elections. The machine cannot be used. If, during the opening of the
polls procedure, the paper tape shows "error all counters not zero," stop
the procedure and contact the Board of Elections. The machine cannot
be used. At the conclusion of the open polls procedure for each voting
machine assigned to the district or polling place as appropriate, each
Election Officer signs the paper tape. Each Election Officer shall then
sign § 1 of the voting machine certificate after any discrepancies that
were observed were noted on the certificate.
(5) At the time the polls are scheduled to open, the Inspector shall admit
voters and authorized challengers to the voting room.
I. Voting procedure.
(1) Since the Town uses the state's voter registration information as the
basis of permitting a person to vote, the following procedure applies:
A person shall show proof of identity and address, the Election Officer
shall circle the person's name on the poll list, have that person sign
the voter log, give the person an authorization to vote, and direct that
person to the voting machine.
(2) If the Election Officer determines that the person is not eligible to
vote in the election, the Election Officer shall refer the person to the
Inspector. The Inspector, after hearing and considering evidence, shall
determine whether to permit the person to vote. Upon making the
decision, the Inspector shall appropriately annotate the poll list and/or
voter log.
(3) If a person's eligibility to vote is challenged by anyone for any reason,
the Inspector shall immediately hear and consider the evidence and
then decide whether the person is eligible to vote. Once the Inspector
has made that Inspector's decision, there is no appeal at the polling
place.
J. At the close of the polls; unofficial results.
(1) Thirty minutes prior to the closing of the polls, the Inspector shall
announce or have another Election Officer announce that the polls shall
close in 30 minutes, both in the voting room and outside of the entrance
of the building used by voters.
(2) At the time that the polls close, the Inspector shall announce or have
another Election Officer announce that the polls have closed, both in the
voting room and outside of the entrance to the building used by voters.
The Election Officers shall permit any person to vote who was in line at
the time the polls closed.
(3) The Election Officers shall remove the cartridges and tapes from each
voting machine, record the protective counter and seal numbers on the
voting machine certificate, close the voting machines, complete the vote
§ 19-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-10
1:23
tabulation for the election, and post a copy of the results tape from each
voting machine on the door of the polling place.
(4) The Election Officers, as soon as possible after the polls have closed and
the unofficial results announced, shall deliver all election documents,
envelopes and absentee ballots to the Town of Elsmere's Board of
Elections.
(5) The Town of Elsmere's Board of Elections shall secure the documents,
envelopes and absentee ballots until such time that they need to canvass
the election.
§ 19-11. Rules regarding constitution of legal vote.
A. Votes cast on a direct recording electronic voting machine shall be
considered legal votes once the voter has taken the necessary action(s)
to cast a ballot. A voter who has cast a ballot on a direct recording
electronic voting machine shall not be permitted to cast a second ballot
under any circumstances.
B. Votes cast at any election on paper ballots shall be counted for whom
they are intended as far as can be ascertained by the marks on the
ballot. The following rules shall be observed in determining those votes
on paper ballots that shall be counted:
(1) The voter shall mark the ballot for the voter's selections by placing
a distinct mark in the box at the right of the name of the candidate
and/or response to a question for which the voter wants to vote;
(2) Where a voter indicates the voter's own selections in a manner
not in accordance with Subsection B(1) of this section, the Election
Officers shall attempt to determine from the marks on the ballot the
candidate or response that the voter intended to select;
(3) If it is not possible to determine a voter's choice for an office or
response to a question, the ballot shall not be counted for that office
or question but shall be counted for all other offices and questions
on the ballot where the voter's intention can be determined;
(4) A voter may only vote for two or more choices for any office or
question when specifically instructed on the ballot that it is
allowable;
(5) Where a voter is permitted to make more than one choice for
candidates and/or responses to a question, the voter may make fewer
than the allowable number of choices;
(6) If a ballot is marked for more names or responses than are
permitted, it shall not be counted for that office or question, but it
shall be counted for all other offices or questions on the ballot in
accordance with these rules; and
(7) If a ballot has been defaced or torn so that it is impossible to
determine the voter's choice for one or more offices or questions,
it shall not be counted for such offices or questions but shall be
counted for all other offices and questions where the voter's
choice(s) can be determined.
C. The State Election Commissioner, in collaboration with the Department
of Elections, shall promulgate the documents, forms, and envelopes
required by this chapter.
§ 19-10 ELSMERE CODE § 19-11
1:24
D. The Town of Elsmere shall contract with the Department of Elections to
conduct an election to elect members of the Town of Elsmere at least 60
days prior to the date of the election.
E. A voter may ask a person or persons of that voter's choice, who is not
that voter's employer or an agent of that voter's employer or union, to
assist that voter in voting.
§ 19-12. Election results; recounts; contests.
A. General. [Amended 10-11-2018 by Ord. No. 639]
(1) The Town of Elsmere Board of Elections shall announce the
unofficial results of an election as soon as possible following the
close of the polls.
(2) No later than 48 hours following the closing of the polls, the Board
of Elections shall convene within to determine the result of the
election and certify the names of the winning candidates.
(3) The Board of Elections shall recount the absentee ballots if the
difference between the top two candidates is 1/2 of 1% or less than
the total votes cast for the office. Where electors vote for more than
one candidate for an office, the Board of Elections shall recount
absentee ballots if the difference between the last candidate elected
and the next closest candidate is 1/2 of 1% or less than the total
votes cast for the office.
(4) If, following certification of the election and the resolution of any
contest, there is a tie vote, then the State Election Commissioner
shall order a new election in which only the candidates or positions
tied will be on the ballot. The Town shall conduct the special election
in accordance with this chapter; provided, however, that the
Department of Elections shall defray the cost of such election to a
cap of $2,500.
(5) The Board of Election, following certification of the election and the
resolution of any contest, shall audit the election records in order to
reconcile the number of voters who cast ballots as compared to the
number of voters who returned absentee ballots and voted on voting
machines. The results of this audit shall be reported to the Mayor
and be made available for public review.
(6) A person certified as being elected shall not take office before the
seventh day following certification of the election.
(a) After a biennial election, on the date to which the candidates
take office, a special meeting of the Mayor and Council shall
be held which shall be known as an "Organizational Meeting."
At such meeting, the President Pro Tempore and Secretary of
Council shall be elected by the Council from among the
members of the Council.
(b) At the quadrennial organization meeting, the Council shall
appoint an attorney at law who shall be an officer of the Town
who shall have the title of Town Solicitor and shall meet the
requirements set forth in § 601 of the Charter of the Town of
Elsmere.
§ 19-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-12
1:25
B. Who may contest; causes. Any person claiming to be elected to an office
within the Town of Elsmere may contest the right of any person declared
to be duly elected to such office for any of the following causes:
(1) For malconduct on the part of the Election Officers or clerks holding
the election, or any one of them.
(2) When the person whose right to the office is contested was not at
the time of the election eligible for such office.
(3) When the person whose right is contested has given to any elector,
Inspector, Judge, or clerk of election any bribe or reward or shall
have offered any bribe or reward for the purpose of procuring his or
her election.
(4) On account of illegal votes.
C. Irregularities not invalidating election. No inequality or improper
conduct in the proceedings of the Election Officers or clerks or any one
of them shall be construed to amount to such malconduct as to annul
or set aside any election unless the inequality or improper conduct
shall have been such as to procure the person whose right to the office
may be contested to be declared duly elected when he or she has not
received the highest number of legal votes cast at the election.
D. Requirements to set aside election because of illegal voting. Nothing in
§ 19-12 of this chapter shall be so construed as to authorize an election
to be set aside or annulled on account of illegal votes unless it shall
appear that an amount of illegal votes has been given to the person
whose right to the office is contested which, if taken from the person,
would reduce the number of the person's legal votes below the number
of votes given to some other person for the same office, after deducting
therefrom the illegal votes which may be shown to have been given to
such other person.
E. Circumstances under which contestant need not claim to have been
elected. When an election is contested because of alleged malconduct of
the Election Officers holding the election, or because the person whose
right to office is contested was not eligible for such office, a proceeding
may be instituted under § 19-12 of this chapter against such person by
the person who received the next highest number of votes for the office
at the election under which such ineligible person was declared elected,
notwithstanding the person so contesting the election does not claim to
have been elected.
F. Statement of contestant; contents. When any person authorized to do so
under § 19-12 of this chapter desires to contest the right of any person
declared duly elected to such office, he or she shall, within 20 days
after the result of the election shall have been officially ascertained
by the Board of Canvass or officers legally authorized to ascertain
the same, and at least 60 days before the first day of the term of
court at which the contest shall be tried or called for trial, file with
the Prothonotary in the county in which the contest is made a full,
particular, and explicit statement setting forth fully and specifically
the names of any and all Election Officers upon the malconduct of
whom he or she will rely and respecting which he or she intends
to procure evidence, and setting forth the election districts of such
§ 19-12 ELSMERE CODE § 19-12
1:26
Election Officers and the particular malconduct of each, respectively,
and the names and residences of the witnesses and the substance of
their testimony, by whom he or she expects to prove such malconduct.
If such contest is based upon ineligibility of a person to hold the office,
the statement shall specifically, fully, and explicitly state the grounds
and causes of the ineligibility of the person whose right to the office
is contested. When such contest is based on alleged bribe or reward,
or the offer of a bribe or reward, the statement shall explicitly, fully,
and clearly state the name of any elector, Election Officer, or other
person to whom any bribe or reward shall have been offered and the
time, place and amount of such bribe or reward and the name and
residence of the witnesses by whom the contestant expects to prove
the offering of any bribe or reward, with a brief statement of their
testimony. When the contest shall be on the ground of illegal votes,
the statement shall specifically, fully, and explicitly set forth the names,
residences and respective causes of disqualification of each person
alleged to have illegally voted, the polls at which such illegal vote
has been received, the names of the Election Officers favoring the
acceptance of such vote, whether such vote was challenged by the duly
accredited challenger of the party of which the contestant was the
candidate, and whether all the judges or inspectors present at such polls
concurred in accepting and receiving such vote. If it appears that all
of such judges or inspectors concurred in accepting or receiving such
vote, or that the right of the voters respectively, to deposit such votes
was not at the time challenged by the duly accredited challenger of the
party of which the contestant was a candidate, the legality or illegality
of such vote shall not be brought into question in any such contest.
The statement shall further set forth the names and residences of the
witnesses who shall be produced on behalf of the contestant to prove
such illegal votes and the substance of the testimony to be given by
each.
G. Verification of contestant's statement. The statement shall be verified by
the oath of the contestant that the matters therein set forth are, so far
as they relate to his or her own act and deed, true and that what relates
to the act and deed of any other person he or she believes to be true.
H. Security for costs. Any person contesting any election under § 19-12 of
this chapter shall be required to give security for costs in such amount
and manner as the Court shall order. Such security, however, shall in
no case be enforced unless judgment for costs is rendered against the
contestant.
I. Citation; service and return. Before the statement is filed, the
Prothonotary shall docket the case in the appearance docket and
immediately issue a citation for the person whose right to the office is
contested to appear on the first day of the second term of the Superior
Court to make such defense as he or she may have, which citation shall
be delivered to the Sheriff or, if the Sheriff is a party to the contest,
to the coroner of the county, and be served by him or her upon the
party defendant in person or, if the party defendant cannot be found,
by leaving a copy thereof at the house where the party defendant
§ 19-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-12
1:27
last resided at least five days before the day to which such citation is
returnable. The original citation shall be returned to the Prothonotary
on or before the first day of the next term of Court after it is issued,
and the manner of service shall be endorsed thereon and signed by the
officer serving the same.
J. Dismissal of proceedings. The Court may dismiss the proceedings if
the statement of the cause or causes of contest do not conform to
the requirements set forth in § 19-12 of this chapter or for want of
prosecution.
K. Trial. If proceedings are not dismissed, the case shall proceed upon its
merits and be tried and determined by the Court by the rules of law and
evidence governing the determination of questions of law and facts in
the Superior Court, so far as the same are applicable.
L. Trial by Court; by jury. All cases of contest under § 19-12 of this chapter
shall be fully heard and determined by the Court, without the aid or
intervention of a jury, unless one or both of the parties to the contest
shall claim a trial by jury, and the Court shall, in its judgment, determine
that it is a case which, under the Constitution and laws of this state, the
party or parties are entitled to a trial by jury. In such case, a jury shall be
empanelled and the cause proceeds according to the rules and practice
of the Court in jury trials.
M. Proof and evidence limited by statement. At the trial of any contest
under § 19-12 of this chapter, the contestant shall be limited in his or her
proof and in the admission of evidence to the witnesses named in the
statement, and the witnesses shall be limited in their testimony to the
facts set forth in the statement with respect to which it shall be stated
that they will be expected to testify.
N. Examination of ballots by Court. In the trial of any contested election
under § 19-12 of this chapter, the Court may make an examination of
the ballots given in such election, except that wherever the ballot boxes,
ballots, poll lists, tally sheets, or other books or records pertaining to
any election, excepting the certificate of election of the officer against
whom the contest may be made, duly signed by the Court constituting
the Board of Canvass and under the seal of court and delivered
according to law, shall have come in any way, legally or illegally, into
the possession, care or custody of any person, officially or otherwise,
who shall have been a candidate and voted for upon the same official
ballot as a candidate of the same political party as the contestant,
no such ballot boxes, poll lists, tally sheets or other books or records
pertaining to the said election, excepting the certificate of election, shall
be offered in evidence in any contest begun or prosecuted under the
provisions hereof, and the Court may make and enforce by attachment
all necessary orders to obtain possession of the same.
O. Judgment.
(1) After hearing the allegations and proofs in the cause, the Court shall
render judgment (in accordance with the verdict of the jury, if a
jury shall have tried the cause) either confirming or annulling such
election altogether.
§ 19-12 ELSMERE CODE § 19-12
1:28
(2) If it appears by the judgment of the Court or the verdict of the jury
(if there be a jury) that any other person than the one whose election
is contested received the highest number of legal votes, judgment
shall be rendered declaring such person duly elected.
(3) When the person whose election is contested is proved to be
ineligible to the office, judgment shall be rendered declaring the
election void and the office vacant, and such proceedings shall then
be had as in vacancies happening from any other cause. When
it shall appear that two persons have received an equal number
of legal votes for the same office, the provisions of law for the
settlement of such cases shall prevail, if there be any such provision;
if there be none, then the office shall be adjudged and declared
vacant, and such proceedings shall then be had as in vacancies
happening from any other cause.
P. Costs.
(1) Costs in all cases under § 19-12 shall be awarded against the
unsuccessful party to the contest.
(2) Charges for costs shall be as near as possible to the charges for
similar services in other cases tried in the Superior Court.
(3) Execution may issue to collect costs.
§ 19-13. Unopposed candidates; cancellation of biennial election.
A. Individual candidates who are unopposed. If upon the expiration of the
date and time provided for withdraw of nomination in § 19-5D(1) of this
chapter, only one candidate has filed for a particular council district or
for a particular office that is voted upon at large, neither the candidate
nor the particular office shall appear on the official ballot of the Biennial
Town Election. These unopposed candidates shall be deemed to have
been elected to the office to which they filed.
B. Cancellation of the biennial election. If upon the expiration of the date
and time provided for withdraw of nomination in § 19-5D(1) of this
chapter, only one candidate has filed for each particular council district
and for each of the offices that are voted upon at large, there shall be
no Biennial Town Election. Each of the unopposed candidates shall be
deemed to have been elected to the office to which they filed. Town
Council shall make public notice that the General Town Election is
canceled and shall list the names of all unopposed candidates and the
office to which they will serve.
§ 19-14. Absentee voting.
A. Persons eligible to vote by absentee ballot. Any qualified elector who is duly
registered may vote by absentee ballot in any Town of Elsmere election for any of
the following reasons:
(1) Because such person is in the public service of the United States or of this state,
or is a citizen of the United States temporarily residing outside the territorial
limits of the United States and the District of Columbia, or such person's spouse
or dependents when residing with or accompanying the person, or is absent
from this state because of illness or injury received while serving in the Armed
Forces of the United States.
§ 19-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-14
1:29
(2) Because such person is in the Armed Forces of the United States, or the
Merchant Marines of the United States, or attached to and serving with the
Armed Forces of the United States in the American Red Cross, Society of
Friends, or United Service Organizations.
(3) Because of the nature of such person's business or occupation, including the
business or occupation of providing care to a parent, spouse or that person's
child who is living at home and requires constant care due to illness or injury.
(4) Because such person is sick or physically disabled.
(5) Because such person is absent from the Town of Elsmere while on vacation.
(6) Because such person is unable to vote at a certain time, or on a certain day, due
to the tenets or teachings of that person's religion.
B. Request for ballot; affidavits for absentee ballots; delivery of absentee ballots.
(1) An elector desiring to vote by absentee ballot in a Town of Elsmere election for
which the elector is a qualified elector may request an absentee ballot from the
Town of Elsmere by filing a written affidavit with the Town of Elsmere no later
than 12:00 noon the day before the election.
(2) An affidavit may be filed pursuant to this section by mailing it, delivering it, or
causing it to be delivered to the Town of Elsmere.
(3) Affidavits filed pursuant to this section shall:
(a) Indicate the election or elections for which the elector is requesting an
absentee ballot;
(b) Include at least the following information:
[1] The elector's name;
[2] The address within the Town of Elsmere at which the elector establishes
eligibility to vote;
[3] The address to which the elector requests that the absentee ballot be
mailed;
[4] The elector's date of birth;
[5] The elector's expected location on election day;
[6] The reason that the elector cannot appear at the regular polling place
on the day of the election which reason shall be any of the reasons listed
in § 19-14A of this chapter;
[7] A telephone number, if available, to assist in resolving any challenge;
[8] An e-mail address, if available, to assist in resolving any challenge; and
[9] The elector's signature.
(c) Be subscribed and sworn to by the elector, before an officer authorized
by law to administer oaths, affirming that, under penalty of perjury, the
information on the affidavit is correct and true, except that the affidavit for
a person voting in person at the Town of Elsmere shall not be notarized but
shall be accepted upon the voter presenting a form of ID acceptable by a
notary.
(4) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the contrary, the affidavit
of any elector desiring to receive an absentee ballot because the person
qualifies under any of the reasons set forth in § 19-14A(1), (2) or (4) of this
chapter may be self-administered.
(5) The State Election Commissioner shall create an absentee affidavit template
that the Town of Elsmere shall use in creating its own absentee affidavit by
adding additional reasons that a person may vote by absentee ballot. The state
election shall also designate envelopes and create a set of instructions for
§ 19-14 ELSMERE CODE § 19-14
1:30
voters casting their votes by absentee ballot that the Town of Elsmere may use
to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(6) The Town of Elsmere may adopt a printed or electronic affidavit form (or both),
containing blanks associated with each item required by this section to be listed
on an affidavit, which may be completed by any elector wishing to receive an
absentee ballot pursuant to this section. An elector may submit a written or
electronic request to the Town of Elsmere for the Town's prepared affidavit
form, which the Town of Elsmere shall forward to the elector upon receipt of a
request therefor.
C. Distribution of ballots, envelopes, and instructions; envelope specifications; prepaid
postage.
(1) Upon receipt of an affidavit from an elector pursuant to § 19-14B of this chapter,
the Town of Elsmere shall process the same and confirm that the elector
qualifies for an absentee ballot pursuant to § 19-14A of this chapter.
(2) Not more than 60 nor less than four days prior to an election, and within
three days after the absentee ballots, envelopes, and instructions therefor
become available, the Town of Elsmere shall mail, to each elector who requests
and qualifies for an absentee ballot pursuant to § 19-14A of this chapter, the
following:
(a) An absentee ballot for the Town of Elsmere election in which the elector is
qualified to vote;
(b) Instructions for completing the absentee ballot and returning it to the
Town of Elsmere, marked "INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPLETING AND
RETURNING AN ABSENTEE BALLOT"; and
(c) An envelope marked "BALLOT ENVELOPE," which shall be:
[1] Of the type known as a "security mailing envelope," designed to securely
protect the contents thereof from tampering, removal, or substitution
without detection;
[2] Large enough to carry the ballot; and
[3] Addressed for return to the Town of Elsmere.
(3) Postage for all mailings made pursuant to this subsection shall be prepaid by
the Town of Elsmere.
(4) Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the issuance of an absentee
ballot to those lawfully entitled thereto when the request is made less than four
days prior to the election.
D. Requirements for ballot envelope; numbering and coding; voter identification label;
affidavit of eligibility.
(1) The Town of Elsmere shall provide to each elector to whom it sends an absentee ballot
an envelope which shall be:
(a) A color other than white;
(b) Large enough to hold a completed ballot; and
(c) Designed to protect its contents from tampering, removal or substitution without
detection.
(2) Upon each envelope provided pursuant to this section shall appear:
(a) The words "BALLOT ENVELOPE";
(b) An alphanumeric symbol and/or barcode for use in accounting for the absentee (c) Identification information for the elector receiving the absentee ballot, including: name of the municipality where the elector is qualified to vote; the elector's name; elector's mailing address; the address within the Town of Elsmere that establishes § 19-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-14
1:31
elector's eligibility to vote if different from the elector's mailing address; and such other
information as the Town of Elsmere may require; and
(d) The following oath:
"I do solemnly swear (affirm) that to the best of my knowledge I am a bona fide resident
of the Town of Elsmere and will be on the date of the election, that I am eligible vote in this Town of Elsmere election, and that the address that appears on the label
on this envelope is the address at which I am qualified to vote in this Town of Elsmere
election. I also do solemnly swear (affirm) under penalty of perjury that I have received or accepted, or offered to receive or accept, any money or other item of value
as compensation, inducement or reward for the giving or withholding of a vote at this
Town of Elsmere election, nor that I am acting under duress or threat of duress harm."
(e) The voter's signature.
E. Voting procedure; execution of affidavit; return of ballot. The procedure for
completing an absentee ballot and returning it to the Town of Elsmere is as follows:
(1) An elector who receives an absentee ballot pursuant to this chapter shall
complete the ballot by marking it with the elector's selections and shall place
the completed ballot in the envelope marked "BALLOT ENVELOPE."
(2) The elector shall confirm that the information about that elector on the ballot
envelope is correct and then sign the self-administered oath.
(3) The elector shall then seal the ballot envelope.
(4) The elector shall return the sealed ballot envelope to the Town of Elsmere by:
(a) Depositing it in a United States postal mailbox, thereby mailing it to the
Town of Elsmere; or
(b) Delivering it, or causing it to be delivered, to the Town of Elsmere before
the polls close on the day of the election.
F. Time limit for return of ballot; late ballots.
(1) The Town of Elsmere shall endorse the date and time of receipt on the ballot
envelope of each absentee ballot received by the Town of Elsmere.
(2) For an absentee ballot to be counted pursuant to this chapter, an elector voting
by absentee ballot shall return the elector marked ballot to the Town of Elsmere
before the polls close on the day of the election.
(3) The Town of Elsmere shall retain, unopened, any ballot envelope it receives
after the polls close on the day of the election for 60 days after the election, or
longer if directed by proper authority or required to do so by federal law.
G. Procedure on receipt of ballot envelope by the Town of Elsmere.
(1) Upon receipt of a ballot envelope, the Town of Elsmere, or a person authorized
by the Town of Elsmere, shall:
(a) Ascertain the names of each elector as they appear on the face of each
ballot envelope;
(b) Ascertain from the information on the ballot envelope the Town of Elsmere
election district with whose votes the ballot within it shall be tallied; and
(c) Place the ballot envelope in a secure location until such time as it is opened
and the ballot within it is counted.
(2) No agent or employee of the Town of Elsmere shall open or attempt to open
the ballot envelope, or change or alter or attempt to change or alter the ballot
envelope, or any writing, printing or anything whatsoever thereon.
§ 19-14 ELSMERE CODE § 19-14
1:32
H. Counting procedure for absentee ballots. At any time between the opening and the
closing of the polls on an election day, absentee election judges selected by Town
of Elsmere's Board of Elections shall count absentee ballots at a properly noticed
public meeting in the Town of Elsmere's offices or at the place of the election, at
the Town of Elsmere's discretion, in accordance with the procedures set out below.
Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, at the discretion of the Town of
Elsmere, the Board of Elections may itself act as the absentee election judges.
(1) The Town of Elsmere's Board of Elections shall appoint a sufficient number
of teams of absentee election judges, each consisting of an odd number of
electors, to open and tally the absentee ballots before the close of the polls.
The Board of Elections shall be responsible for deciding all challenges and
overseeing the process.
(2) The Town of Elsmere shall provide a list of persons who have returned
absentee ballots for review by the public and challengers at the meeting.
Challenges must be made prior to the opening of the ballot envelope for the
voter being challenged.
(3) If a person has challenged an absentee voter as provided in § 19-10C(5) of this
chapter, an absentee election judge shall give that person's ballot envelope
to the Board of Elections who shall then hear the evidence and decide the
challenge. If the Board of Elections upholds the challenge, the Chairperson
shall write the word "CHALLENGED" on the ballot envelope, the reason for
the challenge and then sign the Chairperson's own name. When the challenge
is denied, the ballot envelope shall be returned to the team to be opened and
counted. The Board of Elections, after the close of the polls, shall seal the
ballot envelopes for all voters who were successfully challenged in a carrier
envelope along with a log sheet showing the serial number of the carrier
envelope.
(4) Where absentee ballots have been prepared for counting in advance of the
opening of the polls in accordance with § 19-14I of this chapter and are
in a carrier envelope, the absentee election judges, upon opening a carrier
envelope, shall verify that the serial number on the log sheet is the same as the
serial number on the carrier envelope. If the numbers are not the same, the
judges shall report the discrepancy to the Board of Elections and then follow
the instructions of the Board regarding that carrier envelope. If there are no
discrepancies or the discrepancy has been resolved, the team shall remove the
ballots from the carrier envelope.
(5) Where the ballots are in the ballot envelopes, a team of absentee election
judges shall:
(a) Check the ballot envelopes against the list of absentee voters. The teams
shall not process any ballot envelopes that the Town of Elsmere has not
listed as returned on the list of absentee voters until the discrepancy has
been resolved to the Board of Elections' satisfaction.
(b) Reject ballot envelopes that the voter did not sign or seal, or for a voter
who is known to be dead. An absentee election judge shall print the word
"REJECTED" and the reason for the rejection on the front of the ballot
envelope and then at least two of the absentee elections judges shall initial
beside the entry.
(c) Open each ballot envelope in such a manner as not to deface or destroy
the self-administered affidavit thereon or the absentee ballot enclosed and
§ 19-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-14
1:33
then remove the ballot in such manner as to avoid seeing the markings
thereon from the ballot envelope. If there is no ballot in the ballot envelope
or if there is more than one ballot in a ballot envelope, an absentee election
judge shall write the word "REJECTED" and the reason for the rejection
on the front of the ballot envelope and then at least two absentee elections
judges shall initial beside the entries. In the case where there was more
than one ballot in a ballot envelope, the team shall put the ballots back into
the ballot envelope.
(d) Once an absentee ballot judge has removed a ballot from a ballot envelope,
the judge shall put it face down on the table without examining it. The
team shall open ballot envelopes until they have a sufficient number
of ballots and ballot envelopes to fill a carrier envelope, create a
predetermined batch, or they have opened all of the ballot envelopes for
a Town of Elsmere election district or the election, whichever occurs first.
The team shall then shuffle the ballots and then proceed to tally the votes
for that group of ballots.
(6) The team of absentee election judges shall then tally the votes for a group of
ballots on absentee vote tally sheets with one person reading the votes and two
others tallying the votes on separate absentee vote tally sheets. Once the team
has tallied a group of ballots, they shall verify that the results on both absentee
vote tally sheets are the same. If the results are not the same, the team shall
retally the votes until the result is the same. During the tally process, the
team shall attempt to determine the voters' intent pursuant to § 19-11 of this
chapter in the event that a voter did not mark the ballot as instructed.
(7) Once a team has tallied the absentee votes for a group of ballots, the members
shall sign both copies of the absentee vote tally sheet and then put the voted
ballots, rejected ballots, ballot envelopes, and one copy of the absentee vote
tally sheet into a carrier envelope. The team shall then complete the log sheet
showing the serial number of the carrier envelope, put the log sheet into the
carrier envelope and then seal the carrier envelope. The team shall then give
the carrier envelope and the second copy of the absentee vote tally sheet to
the Board of Elections.
(8) Upon receipt of a carrier envelope and the second copy of the absentee vote
tally sheet for that carrier envelope, the Board of Elections shall:
(a) Put the carrier envelope in a secure location until such time as it is needed
for a recount, legal action, or is to be destroyed as provided in this chapter;
and
(b) Record the results from the absentee vote tally sheet onto a master
absentee vote tally sheet for the election. After the Board of Elections
has received all of the absentee vote tally sheets and has entered the
results for each candidate on the master absentee vote tally sheet, the
Board shall total the votes for each candidate and then, after the polls have
closed, enter the results on the vote tabulation for the election. The Board
of Elections shall then seal the absentee vote tally sheet, or sheets, in a
carrier envelope along with a log sheet showing the serial number of the
carrier envelope.
(9) Ballot envelopes received after the ballots have been counted, or the ballots
for a specific Town of Elsmere election district have been counted, shall be
opened and tallied in accordance with the above procedure except that they all
§ 19-14 ELSMERE CODE § 19-14
1:34
shall be sealed in one or more carrier envelopes, as necessary, after the polls
have closed.
(10) The teams shall repeat the above process as many times as necessary in order
to count the absentee ballots.
(11) The Town of Elsmere shall establish a procedure to insure that persons who
voted by absentee ballot shall not be permitted to vote at a polling place on
the day of the election.
(12) Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, when the number of
absentee ballots returned to the Town of Elsmere is less than five, the Town
of Elsmere may develop a counting procedure protective of the secrecy of the
ballot.
I. Preparing absentee ballots to be counted. Notwithstanding any other provision of
this chapter, the Town of Elsmere Board of Elections may open absentee ballot
envelopes in a public meeting in order to prepare them to be counted. Such meeting
shall take place, upon proper notice, at any time between 8:00 a.m. of the day
prior to the election and up to one hour before the polls are scheduled to open.
The Town of Elsmere shall notify each candidate on the ballot that they may have
challengers at the meeting during which the Board of Elections opens the absentee
ballots. At such meeting, the Board of Elections shall act in accordance with the
same procedures as set out in § 19-14H(1), (2), (3) and (5)(a) through (d) of this
chapter inclusive, with the exception that the absentee ballot judges shall not
proceed to tally the votes for any group of ballots, but shall then secure such ballots,
ballot envelopes, and any rejected ballot envelopes in a carrier envelope along
with the log sheet showing the serial number of the log sheet. The absentee ballot
judges shall then seal the carrier envelope, or envelopes, and deliver it/them to the
Board of Elections. The Board of Elections shall then secure the carrier envelope,
or envelopes, in locked cabinets until opened at a subsequent public meeting to
tally the ballots on the day of the election in accordance with § 19-14H(4) and (6)
through (10) of this chapter.
J. Carrier envelope specifications; carrier envelopes as ballot boxes.
(1) The Town of Elsmere shall purchase envelopes to be used as carrier envelopes,
which shall be security mailing envelopes, designed to securely protect the
contents thereof from tampering, removal, or substitution without detection
and shall be large enough to accommodate multiple absentee ballots cast in the
election.
(2) Carrier envelopes shall:
(a) For all purposes of this chapter be considered the official ballot boxes for
absentee votes cast during a given election;
(b) Contain voted absentee ballots from Town of Elsmere;
(c) Be labeled to reflect that the Town of Elsmere's absentee ballots are held
inside; and
(d) Ensure the security of said ballots in the event they must be moved for the
purposes of certifying an election or recounting votes cast in an election.
(3) A sealed carrier envelope may be reopened only when necessary to certify an
election or recount votes cast in an election.
(4) In the event the Town of Elsmere must move absentee ballots for the purposes
of certifying an election or recounting votes cast in an election, it shall select
the carrier envelopes for the affected Town of Elsmere election districts and
§ 19-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-14
1:35
move them, in a secure fashion, to the location where the carrier envelopes will
be opened and the votes inside inspected.
(5) Upon completion of any inspection of votes pursuant to this subsection,
absentee ballots shall be returned to the carrier envelopes from which they
were removed and the carrier envelopes shall be:
(a) Resealed in a secure manner or shall be placed in another security
envelope, for the purposes of securely protecting the contents thereof from
tampering, removal, or substitution without detection; and
(b) Put in a secure location until such time as it is needed for a recount, legal
action, or is to be destroyed as provided in this chapter.
K. Challenges.
(1) The ballot of any elector choosing to vote by absentee ballot may be challenged
for the same causes and in the same manner as provided in this chapter for
other voters.
(2) In addition, the vote of an absentee voter may be challenged:
(a) On the ground that the affidavit filed by the voter in compliance with
§ 19-14B of this chapter is false; or
(b) On the ground that the self-administered affidavit on the ballot envelope is
not signed.
(3) If a challenge is made pursuant to Subsection K(1) of this section, an absentee
judge shall return the ballot to its ballot envelope, shall mark the ballot
envelope as "CHALLENGED," and shall set the envelope aside in a secure
location for consideration at a later time as provided elsewhere in this chapter.
If a challenge is made pursuant to Subsection K(2) of this section, an absentee
judge shall mark the ballot envelope as "CHALLENGED" and shall set it aside
in a secure location for consideration at a later time as provided elsewhere in
this chapter.
(4) All challenges to absentee ballots must be resolved before the counting of votes
may be considered complete. Any challenge not resolved by the absentee judges
within a reasonable time of the challenge having been made shall be referred to
the Town of Elsmere's Board of Elections for the Town of Elsmere for resolution.
L. Rejected ballots.
(1) No vote shall be accepted or counted if:
(a) The affidavit of the absentee voter that appears on the front of the ballot
envelope is found to have been altered or is not signed; or
(b) The absentee voter is not a duly qualified elector entitled to vote in the Town
of Elsmere;
(c) The ballot envelope is open; or
(d) It is evident that the ballot envelope has been opened and resealed;
(e) It is evident that the ballot envelope has been tampered with or altered.
(2) If the ballot envelope has not been opened at the time an absentee judge
decides that the offered ballot contained therein should not be accepted or
voted for any of the reasons set forth in Subsection L(1) of this section, it shall
not be opened but shall instead be endorsed thereon as, "REJECTED," giving
reason therefor.
(3) If the ballot envelope has been opened at the time an absentee judge decides
that the offered ballot contained therein should not be accepted or voted for
any of the reasons set forth in Subsection L(1) of this section, the ballot shall
§ 19-14 ELSMERE CODE § 19-14
1:36
be returned to its ballot envelope and the absentee judge shall endorse on the
ballot envelope "REJECTED," giving reason therefor.
(4) Whenever it is made to appear by due proof to an absentee judge that any
absentee voter who has marked and forwarded the absentee voter's ballot has
died, the ballot envelope containing the ballot shall not be opened but shall be
marked "REJECTED, DEAD," and shall be preserved and disposed of as other
rejected ballots.
(5) Whenever a ballot has not been counted but has been rejected pursuant to this
section, the appropriate notation shall be made on the absentee ballot tally, and
the number of ballots so rejected shall be noted on the certificates of election.
(6) Ballots rejected pursuant to this section shall be deposited in a carrier envelope
for the Town of Elsmere election district to which they apply.
M. Validity of absentee voter's ballot for wrong Town of Elsmere election district. If an
absentee voter marks and returns an absentee ballot for a Town of Elsmere election
district other than the one of which the absentee voter is a duly registered elector,
such ballot, because thereof, shall not be adjudged invalid, but, as indicated by the
marking of the ballot by the voter, shall be counted as a vote for every candidate
appearing thereon who is a candidate for an office to be duly voted for in the Town
of Elsmere election district.
N. Procedure if requests or ballots sent to wrong official; absentee ballots received by
election officers. If any request for an absentee ballot and accompanying envelopes
or any marked ballot of any such elector is addressed to and returned to any
official other than the proper official of the Town of Elsmere, then the official shall
immediately transfer such request or returned marked ballot to the proper officer
of the Town of Elsmere where the elector is qualified to vote, to be acted upon by
the Town of Elsmere as provided by § 19-14 of this chapter.
O. File of absentee voters.
(1) The Town of Elsmere shall maintain records providing for the prevention of
fraud and to make possible the tracing and detection of any attempt to do so.
Such records shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following entries:
(a) The name of elector;
(b) The address at which the elector establishes eligibility to vote;
(c) The address where ballot is to be mailed;
(d) The date the affidavit is received by the Town of Elsmere;
(e) The elector's Town of Elsmere election district, if applicable;
(f) The ballot envelope identification number;
(g) The date the ballot is mailed or delivered to the elector; and
(h) The date the ballot is returned.
(2) The Town of Elsmere shall compile from its files a list of names and addresses
of all applicants for absentee ballots and shall, upon request, send current
and complete copies thereof without cost to candidates on the ballot in the
forthcoming election. Such lists shall be provided no later than two weeks prior
to the date of the election.
Chapter 21
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS
§ 19-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-1
1:37
§ 21-1. Powers of Mayor and Council.
Whenever the Mayor receives information and/or advice that a situation has
occurred or exists which in the opinion of the Mayor is sufficient to lead him
to believe that a threat exists which has the capacity to pose a significant,
imminent, and/or dangerous threat to the health, safety, and welfare of the
inhabitants of the Town of Elsmere, Delaware, its visitors and guests, as
well as their real and personal property, the Mayor is authorized to declare
a state of general emergency throughout the Town or any part thereof.
§ 21-2. Declaration of state of emergency.
Any state of emergency declared by the Mayor shall be in the form of a
proclamation and shall include at a minimum the following:
A. The event that gave rise to the emergency.
B. The fact that the event has the capacity to pose a significant, imminent,
and dangerous threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the inhabitants
of the Town of Elsmere, Delaware, its visitors and their real and personal
property.
C. The beginning date and time as well as the ending date and time for
which the state of emergency shall be in effect.
§ 21-3. Effects of declaration of state of emergency.
By declaring a state of emergency, the Mayor is given the authority to waive
any and all procedures and formalities otherwise required of the Town of
Elsmere pertaining to any steps taken in order to prepare for, respond to,
or recover from an emergency, such as, but not limited to, the following:
A. Performance of public works and any other prudent action necessary to
ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the Town.
B. Entering into contracts.
C. Incurring obligations.
D. Employment of temporary workers.
E. Utilization of volunteer workers.
F. Rental of equipment.
G. Acquisition and distribution, with or without compensation, of supplies,
materials, and facilities.
H. Appropriation and expenditure of public funds.
§ 21-4. Delegation of authority.
By declaring a state of emergency, the Mayor thereby empowers,
authorizes, and directs the Town Manager or his designee to exercise, on
behalf of the Mayor and Council of the Town of Elsmere, such emergency
powers necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter of the code
of the Town of Elsmere, including, but not limited to, the powers to direct
and compel evacuation of all or part of the population from stricken or
threatened areas within the Town, if such action is deemed necessary to
reduce the vulnerability of people in the Town to damage, injury, and loss of
life and property resulting from the imminent threat, as well as any other
§ 21-1 ELSMERE CODE § 21-4
1:38
powers expressly or implicitly conferred pursuant to the Charter of the
Town of Elsmere, and any other provision of law or Town ordinance or code.
This authority shall extend only for the period of the state of emergency, as
determined by the Town Manager or his designee, or until further action by
the Mayor terminates such authority or declares that the state of general
emergency has ended.
Chapter 27
FINANCE COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Finance — See Ch. 29.
§ 27-1. Creation.
Council may at any time create a committee to be known as the "Town of
Elsmere Finance Committee."
§ 27-2. Purpose.
The primary purpose of the Finance Committee shall be to play an advisory
role to the Mayor and Council concerning financial issues which the Mayor
and Council have directed the Committee to examine. The Committee shall
have no authority except to view and review all financial matters directly
related to the issue which the Mayor and Council have directed it to
examine and to make a recommendation to the Mayor and Council
concerning only those specific issues.
§ 27-3. Committee makeup.
A. The Committee shall consist of three members.
B. The three members shall consist of the following:
(1) The Town Treasurer, who shall serve as Chairperson of the
Committee.
(2) Two residents of the Town who may be nominated by any member of
the Council or the Mayor but must be approved by a majority vote of
the Mayor and Council.
§ 27-4. Qualification of members.
A. The members of the Committee collectively shall possess the expertise
and experience in accounting, finance and financial reporting or the
good common sense needed to understand and resolve issues raised in
the review of financial matters.
B. However, all Committee members shall:
(1) Be residents of the Town and shall have been residents for at least
two years.
§ 21-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-4
1:39
(2) Submit to the Mayor and Council a written summary of their
financial experience and background.
(3) Not be delinquent in property taxes, fees or other assessments or
fines due to the Town.
(4) Not have been convicted of a crime, which constituted a felony, or
any crime involving theft, dishonesty or financial impropriety.
§ 27-5. Term of office. [Amended 6-11-2009 by Ord. No. 508]
With the exception of the Treasurer, the Committee shall be appointed for
a period of two years, and their terms shall be staggered, with one being a
one-year term and the second being a two-year term.
§ 27-6. Removal from office.
A. Committee members, with the exception of the Town Treasurer, shall
serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and Council and may be removed at
any time by a majority vote of the Mayor and Council for any reason.
B. The Committee may make a recommendation to dismiss a particular
member of the Committee to the Mayor and Council by a simple majority
vote.
C. Failure of a Committee member to attend two consecutive meetings
(without valid reason) shall be reported to the Mayor and Council, which
shall consider dismissing that member from the Committee.
§ 27-7. Assignment of tasks.
The Mayor and Council shall determine by a majority vote what issues shall
be reviewed by the Committee.
§ 27-8. Meetings of Committee.
A. Once it has been determined that the Committee will be needed, the
Town Manager shall notify the Treasurer of the specific nature of the
assignment by the Council. The Treasurer shall then call for meetings
of the Committee to accomplish the assigned task. All pertinent records
and reports will be made available to the Finance Committee, at no cost,
by submitting the request through the Town Manager.
B. Once assigned a task, the Committee shall meet at the call of the
Treasurer in order to accomplish a specific task which has been
assigned. All meetings shall be open to the public. The public shall be
afforded an opportunity to comment on meeting agenda items. Public
comment will be the first and last items on the agenda. An official record
shall be kept of all meetings.
§ 27-9. Action by Committee.
A. The Committee shall give careful review and consideration to each item
appearing on its agenda. All of the Committee's recommendations to the
Mayor and Council shall be made pursuant to a majority vote of the
Committee.
B. It is anticipated there could be a tie vote under some circumstances.
In such a case the Committee shall submit a summation of the factual
§ 27-4 ELSMERE CODE § 27-9
1:40
information to the Mayor and Council without a specific
recommendation. The absence of a recommendation shall indicate a
neutral position of the Committee and is not to be considered as an "in
favor of" or an "against" the issue presented.
§ 27-10. Report to Mayor and Council.
A. The Treasurer shall report the activity of and any recommendations
made at the most recent meeting of the Committee. The report given
to the Mayor and Council concerning any recommendation made by
the Committee shall be reported simply as recommended or not
recommended and the count of the actual vote, such as: "The Committee
voted to recommend that the Council approve (list the particular item
recommended) by a vote of two in favor and one opposed.
B. The Committee shall also report any conditions placed upon any
recommendation of approval.
C. Additionally the Mayor and Council may at any time inquire into who
may have cast a dissenting vote and inquire of them the reason for their
dissent.
§ 27-11. Attendance at Committee meetings by Town officials or
employees.
The Town Manager shall attend all meetings of the Committee and shall be
permitted to take part in discussions but may not vote. Other Town officials,
department heads or employees shall attend if requested or deemed
necessary by the Committee and may attend of their own accord.
Chapter 29
FINANCE, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Finance Committee — See Ch. 27.
§ 29-1. Creation.
The Department of Finance is hereby created.
§ 29-2. Position of Director of Finance.
The Director of Finance, formerly known as the "Town Accountant," shall be
appointed by the Town Manager. The Director of Finance shall be chosen by
the Town Manager on the basis of his or her professional and administrative
qualifications in municipal finances and accounting procedures. He or she
shall be either a college graduate in accounting or related field, or
otherwise qualified by education and experience in finance and accounting.
§ 27-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-3
1:41
§ 29-3. Powers and duties of Director. [Amended 6-12-1990 by Ord.
No. 256]
The Director of Finance shall be the chief financial officer of the Town
of Elsmere. He or she shall be responsible to the Town Manager for the
administration of all Town financial affairs placed in his or her charge by
or under the Charter and by ordinance or resolution. He or she shall have
the powers and duties enumerated in the Charter and by ordinance or
resolution, and:
A. He or she shall see that all provisions of the Charter, ordinances and
resolutions of the Council, directives of the Town Manager, subject to
enforcement by him or her or by the personnel subject to his or her
direction or supervision, are faithfully executed;
B. (Reserved)2
C. He or she shall establish and maintain bank accounts, payroll,
reconciliations and other necessary transactions;
D. He or she shall maintain the daily fiscal operations of the Town;
E. He or she shall prepare all checks to accounts and agencies;
F. He or she shall prepare federal and state reports for all grants;
G. He or she shall record receipts from all sources and deposit them in such
banking institutions as designated by the Council;
H. He or she shall invest all moneys in secured institutions in accordance
with any investment policy that may be approved by Council;
I. He or she shall assist in the preparation and administration of the
budget;
J. He or she shall prepare monthly financial reports for Council;
K. He or she shall prepare statistical reports and records presenting the
same as required;
L. He or she shall perform other related duties as required by Mayor,
Council and the Town Manager.
Chapter 31
INCIDENT MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency operations — See Ch. 21.
§ 31-1. Establishment of standard.
The Town of Elsmere does hereby establish the National Incident
Management System (NIMS) as the Town standard for incident
management.
Chapter 34
2. Editor's Note: Former § 29-3B, concerning hiring and supervising of subordinate and
clerical staff, was repealed 9-18-2003 by Ord. No. 420.
§ 29-3 ELSMERE CODE § 31-1
1:42
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 17. Personnel policies — See Ch. 36.
§ 31-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-1
1:43

ARTICLE I
Town Manager
[Adopted 7-9-1970 by Ord. No. 104]
§ 34-1. Creation of office.
The office of Town Manager is hereby created.
§ 34-2. Appointment.
A. The Town Manager shall be appointed by the members of the Council for
an indefinite term. The Town Manager shall be chosen by the Council on
the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications in municipal
government. He shall be either a graduate civil engineer or its equivalent
in experience, or be otherwise qualified by education and experience in
municipal administration. He need not be a resident of the Town or state
at the time of his appointment, but may reside outside the Town while in
office only with the written approval of the Council.
B. In the event of the temporary absence or disability of the Town Manager,
by letter filed with the Town Secretary, the Town Manager shall
designate, subject to the approval of the Council, a qualified Town
administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of
the Manager during his temporary absence or disability. The Council
may revoke such designation at any time.
§ 34-3. Removal from office.
The Council may remove the Town Manager from office in accordance with
the following procedures:
A. The Council shall adopt by affirmative vote of four or more of all its
members a preliminary resolution which must state the reasons for
removal and may suspend the Town Manager from duty for a period not
to exceed 45 days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered promptly
to the Town Manager.
B. Within five days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the Town
Manager, he may file with the Council a written request for a public
hearing. This hearing shall be held at a Council meeting not earlier
than 15 days nor later than 30 days after the request is filed. The Town
Manager may file with the Council a written reply not later than five days
before the hearing.
C. The Council may adopt a final resolution of removal which may be made
effective immediately by affirmative vote of four more of all its members
at any time after five days from the date when a copy of the preliminary
resolution was delivered to the Town Manager, if he has not requested a
public hearing, or at any time after the public hearing if he has requested
one. The Town Manager shall continue to receive his salary effective date
of the final resolution of removal. The action of the Council in suspending
or removing the Town Manager shall not be subject to review by any
court, but shall be in the sole discretion of the Council.
§ 34-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-4
1:45
§ 34-4. Compensation. [Amended 7-10-1990 by Ord. No. 254]
The annual compensation of the Town Manager shall be as fixed by the
Town of Elsmere Employee Payscale as approved by Council on November
30, 1989, as amended.
§ 34-5. Powers and duties.
The Town Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Town. He
shall be responsible to the Council for the administration of all Town affairs
placed in his charge by or under the Charter. He shall have the powers and
duties enumerated in the Charter and by ordinance or resolution, and:
A. He shall serve as personnel officer with such responsibilities as set by
the personnel policy of the Town of Elsmere as set by resolution or
ordinance. [Amended 7-10-1990 by Ord. No. 254]
B. He shall direct and supervise the administration of all departments,
offices and agencies of the Town, except the Department of Public Safety
and as otherwise provided by the Charter.
C. He shall attend all Council meetings and shall have the right to take part
in discussion but may not vote.
D. He shall see that all laws, provisions of the Charter, franchises and acts
of the Council, subject to enforcement by him or by the officers subject
to his direction and supervision, are faithfully executed.
E. He shall prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to
the Council on or before May 15 of each year.
F. He shall submit to the Council and make available to the public a
complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the Town
as of the end of each fiscal year.
G. He shall make such other reports as the Council may require concerning
the operations of Town departments, offices and agencies subject to his
direction and supervision.
H. He shall keep the Council fully advised as to the financial condition
and future needs of the Town and make such recommendations to the
Council concerning the affairs of the Town as he deems desirable.
I. He shall perform such other duties as are specified in the Charter or by
ordinance or as may be required by Council in the legal exercise of its
duties and functions. [Amended 7-10-1990 by Ord. No. 254]
J. The Town Manager or his designee shall purchase all materials, supplies
and equipment and enter into contracts for the furnishing of services
for which funds are or have been appropriated by Council, provided
that every such purchase and every such contract exceeding the sum
of $10,000 shall be subject to the following requirements: [Amended
7-10-1990 by Ord. No. 254; 12-13-2001 by Ord. No. 396; 1-8-2009
by Ord. No. 501]
(1) The Town Manager or his designee shall publicly invite sealed
proposals or bids for the furnishing of such materials, supplies,
equipment and services and shall present a report tabulating all bids
received to Council, who shall be the issuing authority for a contract
for the furnishing of such materials, supplies, equipment or services.
§ 34-4 ELSMERE CODE § 34-5
1:46
(2) The Council, in deciding which bid or proposal will be the most
advantageous to the Town, if any, may take any facts it considers
relevant into consideration and shall not be bound to award a
contract based solely upon the lowest bid price.
(3) The Council may consider items such as but not limited to price,
quality of service, the contractor's qualifications and capabilities to
provide the specified service, or the contractor's history with the
Town.
(4) If the Council does not intend to award a contract fully on the basis
of any response made to the proposal; the Council reserves the
right to consider proposals for modifications at any time before a
contract would be awarded, and negotiations would be undertaken
with that provider whose proposal is deemed to best meet the Town's
specifications and needs.
(5) The Council may, at its discretion, reject any bid which it deems
insufficient or inadequate, not in the best interest of the Town or may
reject all bids.
(6) In cases where the Town Manager or his designee advises Council
that it would be useless or inadvisable to solicit bids because of
a single source of supply, because the services required are of a
professional nature, because a bid process for the item or services
sought has already been completed by another municipality, or any
other reason acceptable to the Council, the Council may waive the
requirements of this subsection and approve the purchase of or
contracting for such materials, supplies, equipment or services
without soliciting bids therefor.
(7) In any case where the Town Manager or his designee deems it
necessary or desirable, he may, in soliciting bids, require that a bond
be posted by all bidders to secure the performance of any contract.
(8) The Town Manager may transfer materials, supplies and equipment
between departments, offices and agencies, and may sell or
otherwise dispose of the same.
K. He shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by the
Council, not inconsistent with the Town Charter, law or ordinances.
L. He shall serve as Chief Code Enforcement Officer and shall have the
powers, duties and functions assigned to the position of Code
Enforcement Officer as set by ordinance. [Added 7-10-1990 by Ord.
No. 254]
§ 34-6. Council not to interfere with appointments or removals.
No member of the Council and none of the committees of the Council shall
attempt to coerce or influence the Town Manager in the appointment or
removal of any person to or from office or employment in the administrative
service of the affairs of the Town under his charge. Except for the purpose
of inquiry, the Council and its members shall deal with that portion of the
administrative service for which the Town Manager is responsible solely
through the Town Manager.
§ 34-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-7
1:47
§ 34-7. Creation of departments.
The Council may establish Town departments, offices or agencies in
addition to those created by the Charter and may prescribe the functions
of all departments, offices and agencies; provided, however, that there shall
be no more than 12 departments, offices and agencies, each of which shall
be headed by and under the direction and supervision of a single executive
who shall be appointed and removed by, and directly responsible to, the
Town Manager; provided, however, that offices, commissions, committees
and boards appointed or selected by the Council shall not be included
in the above numerical limitation. The Town Manager may recommend
the creation or abolition of departments, offices and agencies and the
transfer of functions between departments, offices and agencies, but where
the reassignment of functions does not involve the creation or abolition
of a department, office or agency, or the transfer of functions between
departments, offices or agencies, he may reassign such functions by written
administrative order, a copy of which shall be presented to the Council at
its next regular meeting.
§ 34-8. Emergencies.
In case of accidents or other circumstances creating an emergency, the
Town Manager may, with the consent of the Council, award contracts and
make purchases for the purpose of repairing damages caused by said
accident or meeting said public emergency; but he shall file promptly with
the Council a certificate showing such emergency and the necessity for such
action, together with an itemized account of all expenditures.
§ 34-9. Investigations by Council.
The Council shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any office,
officer or employee of the Town and to make investigations as to municipal
affairs, and for that purpose may administer oaths and request the
appearance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and other
evidence.
§ 34-10. Bond.
He shall give bond to the Town of Elsmere in such amount and in such
form and with such surety as the Council shall approve for the faithful
performance of his duties. He shall give over to the Council in case of his
resignation or removal from office all books, papers, vouchers, money and
other property of whatever kind in his possession belonging to the Town.
The premium of the bond shall be paid by the Town.
§ 34-11. Vacancy in office.
Any vacancy in the office of Town Manager shall be filled promptly and
within 60 days after the effective date of such vacancy, if feasible.
§ 34-7 ELSMERE CODE § 34-11
1:48
ARTICLE II
Code Enforcement Officer
[Adopted 11-26-1991 by Ord. No. 277]
§ 34-12. Chief Code Enforcement Officer; deputies; appointment.
[Amended 10-9-2008 by Ord. No. 498]
A. The Town Manager shall be the Chief Code Enforcement Officer. The
Chief Code Enforcement Officer may employ Deputy Code Enforcement
Officers as the need arises. The Council must approve any creation of
the Deputy Code Enforcement Officer position if additional moneys must
be allocated to fund the position. In the event that a vote of approval for
the allocation of funds for the Deputy Code Enforcement Officer position
results in a tie, the Mayor, acting as a member of Council, shall break the
tie.
B. He shall have the authority to administratively grant a dimensional
variance to Chapter 225 of the Code of the Town of Elsmere for existing
conditions that do not exceed one foot of the required dimension
restrictions without the application being considered by the Board of
Adjustment.
C. He shall develop any standards, procedures or conditions needed for the
implementation of this authority.
§ 34-13. Duties; authority; issuance of citations.
A. The Code Enforcement Officers and deputies appointed or employed
pursuant to the provisions of this article may enforce those ordinances
pertaining to building, housing, sanitation, zoning, animal control or
public health codes and may do so by issuing written citations, in lieu
of arrest, to any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity,
or to the agent for any of the same, for violations of the provisions of
the aforesaid ordinances and codes. The issuance of citations pursuant
to this section shall also be a procedure in lieu of, and not in addition to,
the issuance of a "notice of violation" as may otherwise be provided in
any of the aforesaid codes. No citation so issued shall be construed to be
a "notice of violation" as that term is used in any of the aforesaid codes.
B. The citation for code violations as aforesaid shall require the appearance
by the person to whom it is issued in the Justice of the Peace Court on
the date or within the time specified in the citation; provided, however,
that for certain violations as deemed appropriate by the Chief Code
Enforcement Officer, a violator may pay the fines prescribed for the
violation as a voluntary assessment, in lieu of a court appearance, either
in person or by mailing the citation and the amount of the fine to the
Mayor's Court. If the person to whom a citation has been issued fails
to appear in answer to the citation or to pay the fine prescribed for
the violation on the date or within the time specified in the citation, a
warrant for his or her arrest may be issued, and he or she may be found
in contempt of the Court.
C. A Code Enforcement Officer may lawfully issue a citation as aforesaid to
any person he or she has reasonable grounds to believe has committed
a violation of any building, housing, sanitation, zoning, animal control or
§ 34-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-13
1:49
public health ordinance or code provision, whether or not the violation
was committed in his or her presence. A citation may be lawfully issued
to any person or apparent owner or person in control of any animal he or
she has reasonable grounds to believe has committed a violation of the
animal control ordinances.
§ 34-14. Limitations of authority.
A. Code Enforcement Officers appointed or employed pursuant to the
provisions of this article shall be authorized to enforce only those
provisions of the code and ordinances pertaining to building, housing,
sanitation, zoning, animal control or public health.
B. Deputy Code Enforcement Officers employed by the Chief Code
Enforcement Officer shall be subject to a mandatory training period
and written test before being allowed to issue citations without prior
approval of the Chief Code Enforcement Officer. All Deputy Code
Enforcement Officers operate under the direct supervision of the Chief
Code Enforcement Officer.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law, a Code Enforcement
Officer appointed or employed pursuant to the provisions of this article
shall not have jurisdiction outside the limits of the Town of Elsmere.
D. Code Enforcement Officers appointed or employed pursuant to the
provisions of this article shall not be permitted to carry firearms while
on duty as Code Enforcement Officers.
§ 34-15. Concurrent powers.
Code Enforcement Officers appointed or employed pursuant to the
provisions of this article shall exercise concurrent powers with the Building
Inspector and the Plumbing Inspector with respect to the administration
and enforcement of the Building Code3 of and Plumbing Code of the Town
of Elsmere, respectively.
§ 34-16. Monthly report.
The Chief Code Enforcement Officer shall submit to the Council of the Town
of Elsmere a monthly report, providing Council with a record of activities of
the officer(s).
§ 34-17. Right of entry.
Subject to the limitations of the Constitution of the United States and of
the State of Delaware, the Code Enforcement Officer, or his deputy, in the
performance of their duties, may at any reasonable hour, without hindrance,
enter, examine and inspect all vessels, vehicles, premises, grounds,
structures, buildings and underground passages of every sort, including
their contents and occupancies, and may likewise examine, inspect and test
any substance, article, equipment or other property.
3. Editor's Note: See Ch. 76, Building Construction.
§ 34-13 ELSMERE CODE § 34-18
1:50
§ 34-18. Penalties for interference.
Any person who impedes or interferes with a Code Enforcement Officer in
the lawful execution of his or her duties shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be punished
by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding
six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 34-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-18
1:51
Chapter 36
PERSONNEL POLICIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 17. Officers and employees — See Ch. 34.
§ 34-18 ELSMERE CODE § 34-18
1:52
ARTICLE I
Resignation Upon Filing for Elected Office
[Adopted 3-27-1997 by Ord. No. 336; amended in its entirety
5-8-2014 by Ord. No. 580]
§ 36-1. Submission of letter of resignation.
Any nonelected Town of Elsmere employee hired or contracted by the Town
for services performed who wishes to file as a candidate for any elected
position within the Town of Elsmere must submit in writing to the Mayor
and Council a letter of resignation. This letter of resignation must be
submitted no later than the next scheduled public meeting following the
date of his or her official filing as a candidate for the elected office.
§ 36-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-1
1:53
Chapter 38
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
196.
Zoning — See Ch. 225.
§ 38-1. Creation; membership. [Amended 4-8-2004 by Ord. No. 429]
There is hereby created a Planning Commission for the Town of Elsmere
which shall consist of seven members, all of which members shall be
citizens of the Town of Elsmere.
§ 38-2. Terms of office; appointment; compensation. [Amended
4-8-2004 by Ord. No. 429]
Such appointments shall be for a term of three years each. The
appointments shall be made by the Mayor subject to confirmation by the
Council. Vacancies shall be filled by appointments for unexpired terms only.
All members of the Planning Commission shall serve without compensation,
except that if the Council deems it advisable, the Secretary of such Planning
Commission may receive such compensation as may be fixed from time to
time by the Council and provided for by ordinance. Any member of the
Planning Commission may be removed for cause, after a public hearing, by
the Mayor with the approval of Council.
§ 38-3. Organizational meeting; recordkeeping; annual report.
Immediately following their appointment, the members of the Planning
Commission shall meet, organize and elect a Chairman and a Secretary
from its own members and may employ experts, clerical and other
assistants. The Planning Commission shall keep written records of its
proceedings which shall be open at all times to public inspection. The
Planning Commission shall file an annual report with the Mayor and Council
setting forth its transactions and recommendations.
§ 38-4. Powers and duties.
The Planning Commission shall have the powers and duties as specified and
set forth in full in 22 Delaware Code, § 701 et seq, and shall include the
following:
A. To prepare and recommend to the Town Council a comprehensive plan
of public improvements, looking to the present and future development
and growth of the Town. Such a plan after its adoption by the Council
will be known as the "Official Plan." Such plan shall include reasonable
requirements in reference to streets, alleys and public grounds within
the corporate limits.
§ 36-1 ELSMERE CODE § 38-4
1:54
B. To prepare and recommend to the Council from time to time such
changes in the plan or any part thereof as may be deemed necessary by
the Council or by the Planning Commission.
C. To prepare and recommend to the Council from time to time plans and/or
recommendation for specific improvements in pursuance of such Official
Plan.
D. To give aid to the Town officials charged with the direction of projects for
improvements, embraced within the Official Plan, to further the making
of such improvements, and generally to promote the realization of the
official plan.
E. To arrange and conduct any form of publicity relative to its activities for
the general purpose of public understanding.
F. To cooperate with municipal or regional planning commissions and other
agencies or groups to further the local planning program and to assure
harmonious and integrated planning for the area.
G. To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted by
statute.
H. To serve as the Town's Tree Advisory Committee and as such perform
the following tasks: [Added 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 500]
(1) Study, investigate and develop a tree ordinance and a written plan
for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, removal or disposition
of trees and shrubs in public areas in Elsmere.
(2) Update and present this plan annually to the Town Council. Upon its
approval, this plan shall constitute the Official Comprehensive Tree
Plan for the Town of Elsmere.
(3) Investigate, report and make recommendations on any special
matter of question coming within the scope of its work, at the
request of the Town Council and/or the Town Manager.
§ 38-5. Official Map.
The Planning Commission shall recommend to the Council for adoption by
the Council an Official Map of the Town of Elsmere showing the public ways
and parks therein as theretofore laid out and established by law and the
private ways then existing and used in common by more than two owners.
Such Official Map is hereby declared to be established to conserve and
promote the public health, safety and general welfare. Upon the adoption
of such a map and upon any change therein or addition thereto made as
herein provided, the Town Clerk shall forthwith file such with the Recorder
of Deeds in and for New Castle County. Any change or addition to the
Official Map shall not become effective until after a public hearing in
relation thereto before the Council at which parties in interest shall have an
opportunity to be heard. At least 10 days' notice of such a public hearing
shall be given by advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in
the Town of Elsmere. No such change or addition which has not been
previously recommended by the Planning Commission established by the
provisions of this chapter shall be adopted until after a report thereon by
said Commission, and no variance from a plan prepared or approved by
said Planning Commission shall be made except by a two-thirds vote of all
the members of the Council; provided, however, that the last-mentioned
§ 38-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-5
1:55
requirement shall be waived in case the matter has been offered to said
Planning Commission for a report and it has failed to report within 30 days
thereafter.
Chapter 45
POLICE PENSION FUND; RETIREMENT PLANS
Chapter 48
(RESERVED)
Chapter 55
(RESERVED)
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 60
LICENSES AND PERMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensed businesses — See Ch. 131. Appeals to Board of Adjustment — See Ch.
225, § 225-40.
§ 38-5 ELSMERE CODE § 38-5
1:56
ARTICLE I
Revocation for Ordinance Violations
[Adopted 6-10-2004 by Ord. No. 433]
§ 60-1. Purpose.
It is the policy of the Town of Elsmere to not allow any person involved in
continued violations of the ordinances of the Town of Elsmere to be able to
continue activities that are subject to permits or licenses from the Town of
Elsmere while those violations are occurring.
§ 60-2. Revocation of permits or licenses; reinstatement.
Should it appear to the Town Manager that any person holding a permit
or license issued by the Town of Elsmere shall have committed any of the
acts set forth in § 60-3 of this article, the Town Manager, after providing 30
days' written notice and an opportunity to be heard on why action under
this article should not be taken, may revoke the Town of Elsmere license
or permit of any such person. The license or permit shall be reinstated
upon a showing satisfactory to the Town Manager that the acts complained
of leading to the revocation have ceased and any violation of the Town of
Elsmere's ordinances have been corrected.
§ 60-3. Acts warranting revocation.
Any of the following reasons are sufficient to warrant revocation of a permit
or license issued by the Town of Elsmere:
A. The license or permit holder has failed to pay any tax, fee or other
amount due to the Town of Elsmere, including, but not limited to, rental
permits, property taxes or business licenses;
B. The license or permit holder has failed to complete work described in
other permits within a reasonable time or in a safe and workmanlike
manner; and
C. The license or permit holder has failed to correct, within a reasonable
time and after notice, any work described in other permits that the
Building Official has determined violates the Building Code.
§ 60-4. Prohibition against issuance of permits or licenses.
No permit or license shall be issued to any person who is found to have
committed any of the acts set forth in § 60-3 of this article until such acts
are corrected.
§ 60-5. Hearing.
Any determination to revoke a permit or license or to deny issuance of a
permit or license shall be appealed to the Board of Adjustment and shall be
conducted in accordance with the provisions of § 225-40.
§ 60-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-6
1:57
§ 60-6. When effective.
This article shall be effective immediately upon adoption.
§ 60-6 ELSMERE CODE § 60-6
1:58
ARTICLE II
Doubling of Fees for Failure to Obtain Licenses or Pay Fees
[Adopted 1-11-2007 by Ord. No. 475]
§ 60-7. Circumstances under which fees are doubled.
Any owner, person, firm, company, or corporation who is required by the
Code of the Town of Elsmere to obtain a permit or license or to pay to
the Town any fee, prior to engaging in any business, profession, pursuit
or calling or performing any act until a license or permit has been issued
or a fee has been paid, who fails to obtain the required license or permit
or pay to the Town the appropriate fee prior to engaging in said business,
profession, pursuit or calling or performing any such act shall, in addition
to any other penalty prescribed by the Code of the Town of Elsmere, have
the cost of the appropriate license, permit or fee doubled.
§ 60-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-7
1:59

ARTICLE III
Failure to Comply With Intent of Permit
[Adopted 4-12-2012 by Ord. No. 550]
§ 60-8. Fine for failure to comply.
A. Any person who obtains a permit for a specific activity and after
receiving that permit goes on to take an action which is not authorized
by the permit shall be guilty of failing to comply with the intent of a
permit and shall be penalized as follows.
(1) The issued permit shall be revoked; and
(2) The work site shall be returned to the condition it was in prior to the
permit being issued; and
(3) The person shall be required to reapply for the permit; and
(4) For a first offense the property owner shall pay a fine of $250.
B. For a second or subsequent offense occurring within one year of a first
offense, the following penalties shall be imposed.
(1) The issued permit shall be revoked; and
(2) The work site shall be returned to the condition it was in prior to the
permit being issued; and
(3) The property shall be prohibited from being issued any type of
permit for a period of one year from the date of the second or
subsequent offense unless in the opinion of the Code Enforcement
Officer an emergency exits which necessitates the issuance of a
permit; and
(4) The property owner shall pay a fine of $500.
C. Any owner, person, firm, company, or corporation who violates § 60-7
of this chapter shall in addition to having the cost of the appropriate
license, permit or fee doubled, be fined an amount of not less than $300
for a first offense nor less than $600 for a second or subsequent offense.
[Added 7-9-2015 by Ord. No. 597]
§ 60-9. Exemption. [Added 10-13-2016 by Ord. No. 619]
The prohibition against the issuance of permits or licenses contained in
§ 60-4 of this chapter shall not apply when the permit is made in an attempt
to improve the life or living conditions of a person with a physical disability
or who is handicapped.
§ 60-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-9
1:61
Chapter 63
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 143.
§ 63-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is as follows:
A. To require a minimum standard of quality for all burglary, robbery and
panic alarms in the Town of Elsmere that have been or will be installed
in any structure or on any premises.
B. To promote a quick and safe responses to the need for police service
while discouraging the misuse of the limited resources of the Elsmere
Public Safety Department, thereby reducing a potentially unnecessary
emergency response to false burglary, robbery and panic alarms.
C. To promote a uniform standard of responsibility for alarm vendors, alarm
owners and all operators of alarm systems in any structure or on any
premises installed to prevent or detect entries that could result in a
burglary, robbery or other crime.
D. To regulate burglary, robbery and panic alarms and require the
necessary permits for the operation of such units while establishing a
user's fee for those owners or operators of such systems who's system
repeatedly emit false alarms.
§ 63-2. Definitions.
The following words terms and phrases shall have the following meanings
to them for the purpose of interpreting, administrating and enforcing this
chapter:
ALARM PERMIT — A certificate issued by the Elsmere Public Safety
Department, which bears the signature of the Chief of Police and provides
the expiration date of the permit.
ALARM SYSTEM — Any assembly of equipment, mechanically or
electronically arranged to signal the occurrence of an attempted or illegal
entry, robbery or other activity on or within a building or improvement
requiring urgent attention to which the police are normally expected to
respond.
ALARM USER — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind which is in control of any building,
structure or facility wherein an alarm system is installed, maintained or
operated. In cases where the actual location in which the alarm is installed,
maintained or operated is rented, leased or under some other arrangement
not occupied or used by the owner, the actual lessee, renter or person(s)
occupying the location shall be known as the "alarm user."
§ 60-9 ELSMERE CODE § 63-2
1:62
ALARM VENDOR — Any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity
that, sells, leases, maintains, services, repairs, alters, replaces, moves or
installs any alarm system.
ANSWERING SERVICE — A telephone answering service providing among
its services the receiving on a continuous basis, through trained employees,
emergency signals from alarm systems that are thereafter relayed by live
voice to the ECC.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE — A device which is interconnected to
a telephone line and programmed to select a predetermined telephone
number and transmit by voice message or code signal an emergency
message indicating a need for an emergency response.
CENTRAL STATION SYSTEM — A system, or group of systems, operated
for customers by a firm, corporation or other entity in which the operations
of electrical protection circuits and devices are transmitted to, recorded in,
maintained or supervised from a central station having trained operators
or guards in attendance at all times who have the duty to take appropriate
action upon receipt of a signal or message, including the relay of messages
by direct line to the ECC.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of the Elsmere Public Safety Department.
COORDINATOR — The individual designated by the Chief of Police to issue
permits and to administer the provisions of this chapter.
DELAWARE ALARM ASSOCIATION — The incorporated association
representing the alarm and security companies doing business in the State
of Delaware.
DIRECT LINE — A telephone line leading directly from a central station
system or answering service to the ECC that is for use only to report
emergency signals on a person to person basis.
ECC — The Emergency Communications Center that is currently being
utilized by the Elsmere Public Safety Department, which is used to receive
emergency and general informational calls from the public which are to be
relayed to the on duty officers of the Elsmere Public Safety Department.
EMERGENCY NOTIFICATION INFORMATION — The card sticker or other
items that are supplied to anyone with an alarm by the Elsmere Public
Safety Department, so that it may be displayed in such a manner that makes
it visible from outside of the location that is alarmed and which contains
the name and telephone number of a person who will respond if an alarm is
activated at that particular location.
FALSE ALARM — The activation of an alarm system resulting in a police
response caused by a mechanical failure, mechanical malfunction, improper
maintenance or faulty installation, regardless of whether the alarm user
is at fault; or the negligent or intentional activation of the sensors of an
alarm system by act or omission of the alarm user, a person residing on
or visiting the alarm user's premises or an employee of the alarm user,
including but not limited to opening doors or windows protected by sensors,
walking through or walking on areas protected by sensors, or by failing to
§ 63-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-2
1:63
prevent the activation of sensors by animals, displays, mechanical devices
or other objects which the alarm user, a person residing on or visiting the
alarm user's premises, or an employee of the alarm user has or reasonably
should have control over.
INTERCONNECT — To connect an alarm system, including an automatic
dialing device, to a telephone line, directly or through a mechanical device
that utilizes a telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone line to
transmit a message upon the activation of an alarm system.
PERMIT YEAR — From January 1 to December 31 of the same calendar year,
beginning January 1 of 1995.
PRIMARY TRUNK LINES — A telephone line serving the ECC that is
designed to receive emergency calls.
TOWN — The Town of Elsmere, Delaware.
§ 63-3. Exemptions.
A. The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to any police agency
within the Town of Elsmere or to any alarm which is being operated for
the purpose of special police operation or electronic surveillance.
B. The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to automobile alarms.
§ 63-4. Multiple alarm systems.
Whenever a business or residence is comprised of more than one structure
which is not connected and when each independent structure has installed
in it an alarm system which is designed to detect an emergency in that
structure only, each alarm activation occurring in such an unattached
structure shall be considered as a separate premises.
§ 63-5. Alarm permit required; fine for failure to notify alarm user
of requirements.
A. Every alarm user shall annually obtain an alarm permit in accordance
with this chapter prior to the installation and/or operation of an alarm
system. Systems providing both burglary and robbery alarm services
shall require only one permit. A permit is required for each alarm system
installed in a building or improvement on a lot or parcel. The permit
shall be physically located within the principal building or improvement
on the premises, lot or parcel using the alarm system and shall be
available for inspection by any law enforcement official upon request.
An alarm is not false if the alarm is activated by conditions that were
not reasonably subject to the control of the alarm user, such as severe
weather conditions, or under circumstances that would have caused
a careful and prudent person to believe that criminal activity or an
emergency was in progress at the premises.
A.
It shall be presumed that the alarm was false if the police officer
responding to an alarm activation finds no evidence of criminal activity
or an emergency at the premises.
B.
§ 63-2 ELSMERE CODE § 63-5
1:64
B. Permits required by this chapter shall be available from the coordinator
by filing an application.
C. Each permit shall bear the signature of the Chief of Police and the
expiration date of the permit. The permit shall be valid from January 1
or the date of issue through December 31 of the current calendar year
at the time of the application. Every alarm permit shall automatically
expire on December 31 of each calendar year, and every alarm user
shall annually apply and renew an alarm permit as provided in this
subsection.
D. Alarm vendors shall notify alarm users, both at the time of the sale
and in the regular billings sent to the subscriber or alarm user (to the
extent that the alarm vendor and alarm user have a continued business
relationship), of the requirements of this chapter.
E. Every application for an alarm permit shall be made on forms which
are prepared and furnished by the Public Safety Department. A copy
of the application shall be provided to the alarm user, the Town's
administrative office, and a copy shall be maintained by the Public
Safety Department.
F. No application or the information contained thereon shall be made
available to the general public, or disseminated by the Public Safety
Department, except pursuant to a validly issued subpoena, or in the
furtherance of a law enforcement activity, in which case the information
may only be disseminated to other law enforcement agencies.
G. A user's fee of $50 is hereby established when a response by the Public
Safety Department is required, due to an alarm activation, to a building,
structure, parcel or lot when it is discovered that the alarm user does
not possess a valid alarm permit. This user fee shall be made payable to
the Town of Elsmere, Public Safety Department, and shall be paid within
10 days of the police response.
H. Any alarm vendor who fails to comply with Subsection D of this section
shall be fined $50 for each such violation. Repeated violations of
Subsection D could lead to a suspension or denial of the alarm vendor's
Town business license.
§ 63-6. User charges for false alarms.
A. Whenever repeated false alarms are encountered at a premises, during
the same permit year, the Public Safety Department shall assess the
alarm user at that premises who possesses a valid permit the following
user fees:
(1) One to three false alarms: no user fee.
(2) Four to five false alarms: $50 per occurrence.
(3) Six or more false alarms: $100 per occurrence.
B. The user fee shall become due and owing immediately upon the date that
notice is delivered to the alarm user's premises.
C. The user fee shall be made payable to the Town of Elsmere, Public Safety
Department, and shall be paid within 30 days of the date in which the
notice was delivered to the alarm user's premises. If the user fee is
not paid within the thirty-day period provided, or if an appeal is not
filed within that same thirty-day period, the alarm user's permit for
§ 63-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-6
1:65
that structure or premises shall become automatically revoked, and the
notice shall so state. If an alarm user's permit is revoked, a new permit
may be issued pursuant to § 63-8B, provided that the applicant complies
with the terms of that subsection, pays the unpaid fees that lead to the
revocation and an additional administrative fee of $100; such permit
shall only be valid for the balance of the permit year in which it was
issued. Any user fee assessed under this subsection shall automatically
be doubled for a newly issued permit that was the result of a prior
revocation within that permit year. The three-occurrence grace period
shall also not apply to such newly issued permits.
§ 63-7. Inspection of activated alarm system.
Any police officer responding to an activated alarm system shall inspect
the area protected by the alarm system and shall determine whether the
emergency response was in fact required as indicated by the alarm system.
If the police officer determines the alarm activation was false, the officer
shall note on the report the false alarm. A copy of all false alarms shall be
forwarded to the coordinator.
§ 63-8. Revocation of permits.
A. Once it is determined that an alarm user has had six false alarms within
a permit year, the coordinator shall send written notice to the alarm user
that the user's permit will be revoked. The permit will be considered
automatically revoked if the alarm user does not file an appeal within 15
days of the notice, and the notice shall so state.
B. If an alarm user's permit is revoked, a new permit may be issued
pursuant to § 63-6, provided that the applicant complies with the terms
of that section as well as any other requirements that the Chief may
deem necessary to reduce the number of false alarms, and that the user
pays an additional administrative fee of $100. If a permit is issued under
these circumstances, the permit shall only be valid for the balance of the
permit year in which it is issued.
C. Any user fee assessed under this subsection shall automatically be
doubled for a newly issued permit that was the result of a prior
revocation within that permit year.
D. The three-occurrence grace period shall not apply to newly issued
permits that were issued in accordance with this section.
§ 63-9. Appeal.
Any alarm user shall be entitled to an appeal pursuant to this section, so
long as the alarm user follows the following procedure:
A. The alarm user shall serve written notice upon the Chief within 15 days
of the date of the notice to revoke, or the notice that a user fee is
being imposed upon the alarm user, that the user requests to appeal the
revocation or assessment of a user's fee.
B. At the time that the written notice of appeal is served upon the Chief, the
alarm user shall also provide the Chief with a filing fee of $100.
§ 63-6 ELSMERE CODE § 63-9
1:66
C. The one-hundred-dollar filing fee shall be refunded to the alarm user if
the false alarm giving rise to the user fee assessment or the revocation
is determined to have been genuine or beyond the control of the alarm
user or his representative, by the Hearing Board.
D. If the Hearing Board renders any decision other than the one listed in
Subsection C of this section, the one-hundred-dollar filing fee shall be
paid to the Department of Public Safety.
§ 63-10. Scheduling and notice of appeal.
A. In the event that an alarm user request an appeal, the appeal shall be
scheduled within a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall this
time be more than 30 calendar days from the date which the alarm user
notified the Chief of his intent to appeal in accordance with § 63-9.
B. The alarm user shall be provided with written notice of the date, time
and location of the hearing at least 10 days prior to the date of the
hearing.
§ 63-11. Hearing Board.
A. The Hearing Board shall consist of the Chief of Police, the Town Manager
and a representative of the Down Town Revitalization Committee. The
Town Manager shall serve as Chairperson of the Hearing Board, and
each member shall have an equal vote.
B. Evidence presented at the hearing. The alarm user shall have the right
to present written and oral evidence, subject to the right of crossexamination
by the Board. Additionally, the Board may admit written
reports or oral statements of police officers and may take notice of
general, technical or scientific facts within its specialized knowledge.
C. Board action. Upon a two-thirds vote, the Board may reverse or affirm
the decision made by the coordinator.
D. Written notice and findings of fact following the hearing. A copy of the
Board's decision shall be prepared promptly, but in no event shall it be
delivered or mailed later than 15 calendar days after the Board vote.
Unless announced immediately after the hearing with the alarm user
present, a copy of the Board's findings shall be mailed or hand-delivered
to the alarm user or his representative.
E. Any person or persons, jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of
the Hearing Board, may appeal the Board's decision to the Justice of the
Peace Court pursuant to Delaware Code § 5917, Title 11. Any appeals to
the Justice of the Peace Court shall be made within 30 days of service, or
of the postmark date, of the copy of the written decision mailed by the
Hearing Board to the aggrieved parties.
§ 63-12. Loss of privileges.
Any alarm vendor, user or person owing an outstanding user fee, who
is subject to a revocation order, or who is otherwise in violation of the
provisions of this chapter, shall not be issued any new permits until the user
fees are paid and the alarm user complies with all of the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 63-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-13
1:67
§ 63-13. Temporary permits.
Any alarm vendor or person subject to the provisions of this chapter that
has an appeal outstanding at the beginning of a permit year shall be granted
a temporary permit, which shall be valid for a period of 30 days.
§ 63-14. Collection of fees.
A. Any fees imposed in accordance with the enforcement of this chapter
that are not paid in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall
be assessed against the land or improved premises and shall, until paid,
constitute a lien, from the time of filing against such land or improved
premises in favor of the Town. The lien shall be perfected upon filing by
the Town in the office of the Recorder of Deeds for New Castle County of
a certification of lien setting forth the amount of such expense, including
penalty.
B. The Town may at its discretion, instead of filing a lien in accordance with
Subsection A of this section, deny any and all licenses or permits applied
for by any person, persons or corporation that has failed to pay any fees
assessed in accordance with this chapter until such time as all unpaid
fees have been paid in full.
§ 63-15. Application for permits.
Applications for alarm permits shall be made on forms provided by the
Elsmere Public Safety Department. Each application shall be signed by the
legal owner of the structure or premises, or the legal owner's authorized
agent. The application shall state the alarm user's name, and the address
and telephone number of the alarm user's property to be serviced by the
alarm. Any nonresidential alarm user shall also include the name of an
individual employed by the applicant or his agent, who will represent the
business or entity as its agent to receive any notice issued in accordance
with this chapter. If the alarm user's alarm is serviced by an alarm company,
the alarm user shall also include the name address and telephone number
of that company. Every alarm user shall also provide the name, address
and telephone number of at least one person who can be notified of an
alarm activation and can respond to assist the police in the inspection of the
property. The alarm user shall ensure that the information concerning this
person is valid and that that person or their designee is available to respond
at all times.
§ 63-16. Automatic dialing devices.
A. It shall be unlawful for any alarm vendor or alarm user to program an
automatic dialing device to select a predetermined telephone number
assigned to the ECC, and transmitted by voice message or code signal
an emergency message indicating a need for an emergency response.
B. Within 60 days after the effective date of this chapter, all existing
automatic dialing devices programmed to select any telephone line
assigned to the ECC shall be reprogrammed or disconnected.
§ 63-13 ELSMERE CODE § 63-16
1:68
C. It shall not be unlawful for any alarm vendor or alarm user to program
an automatic dialing device to an answering service or central station
system with direct-line capabilities to the ECC.
D. Any financial institution that is required by regulations of federal
supervisory agencies issued pursuant to the Bank Protection Act of 1968
to have an appropriate device for notifying the police that a burglary
or robbery has occurred or is in progress may arrange to have the
particular signaling device so installed in the ECC, provided that they
have complied with all of the regulations, procedures and requirements
which have been set forth by New Castle County concerning the
installation of such devices.
§ 63-17. Audible alarm system; violations and penalties.
A. No alarm user shall install, have installed or maintain a burglary, robbery
or panic audible alarm system designed to be heard in the vicinity of the
premises being protected unless the alarm will automatically shut down
or cease emitting sound within 15 minutes after it is activated.
B. Anyone violating this section shall be fined not less than $50 nor more
than $200 for each activation of an alarm system which is installed or
maintained in violation of this section.
§ 63-18. Compliance; violations and penalties.
A. All existing burglary, robbery and panic alarm systems shall be brought
into compliance with this chapter no later than 60 days after the
effective date of this chapter by the Town Council.
B. Any alarm system, alarm user or alarm vendor not complying with any of
the provisions of this chapter within 60 days of its effective date shall be
in violation and shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $200.
Chapter 67
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 63-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-18
1:69

ARTICLE I
Consumption in Public
[Adopted 12-4-1952 by Ord. No. 46]
§ 67-1. Prohibited acts.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or offer to another a drink of
any alcoholic liquor on any street, sidewalk or other exterior public place
within the limits of the Town of Elsmere.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, while trespassing upon the exterior
portion of any private property within the limits of the Town of Elsmere,
to drink or offer to another a drink of alcoholic liquor.
§ 67-2. Applicability.
The aforesaid prohibitions shall apply both to pedestrians and to persons
riding in vehicles, whether moving or standing still.
§ 67-3. Definitions.
The term "alcoholic liquor" as used herein shall be defined as in the Liquor
Control Act of the State of Delaware.4
§ 67-4. Arrests; violations and penalties.
A. Arrests for violation of this article may be made upon lawful warrant
as in other cases; provided that any peace officer may arrest without
warrant upon actual view of the offense when committed, or upon fresh
pursuit following such view.
B. Persons convicted of a violation of this article shall be punished by
a fine of not more than $25 or, in default of payment of such fine,
by imprisonment for a period of not more than 30 days. [Amended
9-18-2003 by Ord. No. 420]
4. Editor's Note: See 4 Del. C. § 101 et seq.
§ 67-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-4
1:71
Chapter 71
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise disturbances created by animals — See
Ch. 143.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 155.
§ 71-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Town of Elsmere
Animal Regulation Code."
§ 71-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated. No attempt is made to define any words which are
used in accordance with their established dictionary meanings, except when
necessary to avoid misunderstandings.
WILD ANIMAL — Any nonhuman primate, raccoon, skunk, fox, poisonous
snake, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx, or any other animal so classified by
the Delaware Code.
§ 71-3. Permitting animal to commit a nuisance.
A. Defecation.
(1) It shall be a violation against the owner or one who harbors any
animal which defecates upon:
(a) Any sidewalk or public street; or
(b) Any public park or other public property, other than in areas
designated for that purpose; or
(c) Any private property not belonging to the owner of the animal.
(2) Notwithstanding the above, it shall not be a violation of this
subsection if said person makes an immediate attempt to remove any
feces deposited by the animal.
B. The actions of an animal constitute a nuisance when the animal disturbs
the rights or threatens the safety of or harms a member of the general
public, damages the property of someone other than the animal's owner
or trespasses upon the private property of another person not the owner
of the animal.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, possess, harbor or
maintain an animal in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance.
By way of example and not of limitation, the following acts or actions by
an owner or possessor of an animal are hereby declared to be a public
nuisance:
(1) Allowing or permitting any animal to bark, whine, howl, crow, cackle
or make other loud disturbing noise which, due to the volume,
continuance or hour of the day, results in a serious annoyance or
§ 67-4 ELSMERE CODE § 71-3
1:72
interference to neighboring residents and their enjoyment of their
property.
(2) Allowing or permitting an animal to continually damage the property
of anyone other than its owner, including, but not limited to, turning
over garbage containers or damaging gardens, flowers, or other
plant material or trespassing upon the property.
(3) Maintaining an animal with a medical condition that could lead to
a widespread epidemic that would ultimately be dangerous to the
public health, unless the animal is kept in a manner that minimizes
the public health threat and is undergoing treatment for the disease
in accordance with locally accepted veterinary standards.
(4) Maintaining an animal or animals in an environment of unsanitary
conditions, which results in offensive odors or is dangerous to the
animal or to the public health, welfare or safety or that of any
neighboring property within 200 feet.
(5) Placing of any food, drink or other consumable item(s) intending
that they be consumed by animals other than those owned by the
person placing the items for consumption, which would draw animals
not owned by the person to the area for the purpose of feeding or
obtaining water or other consumable items. This section shall not
include bird feeders.
§ 71-4. Harboring of stray animals.
It shall be a violation of this section for any person to harbor or feed any
stray animal unless he or she has notified the Code Enforcement Officer
within 48 hours of the presence of the stray animal. Upon receiving such
notification, the Code Enforcement Officer may direct that such animal be
placed with the State of Delaware Office of Animal Welfare. Refusal to
surrender any such stray animal upon request of the Code Enforcement
Officer shall be deemed an additional violation of this section.
§ 71-5. Interference with officer prohibited.
Any person who hinders, obstructs or otherwise interferes with an officer
while discharging his or her duties under this chapter, or who takes or
attempts to take any animal from any officer or from any vehicle used by the
officer to transport any animal, or who takes or attempts to take any animal
from the Town without proper authority, or knowingly interferes with any
animal trap set by an officer or persons obtaining said traps from the Town
shall be deemed in violation of this section.
§ 71-6. Ownership of wild animals prohibited.
A. No person shall own or harbor any wild animal as a pet without the
appropriate state permits or Town permits.
B. Zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions and circuses, which
utilize wild animals in their performances or exhibitions, shall be exempt
from the provisions of this section.
§ 71-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-7
1:73
§ 71-7. Dogs or cats prohibited in parks.
No person owning or having charge, care, custody or control of any dog or
cat shall permit or allow the dog or cat into or upon any public park within
the Town, unless in compliance with the Delaware Code or the Rules of the
Town's Dog Park.
§ 71-8. Enforcement of violations.
A. Any police officer or a law enforcement officer of the State of Delaware
and any Code Enforcement Officer of the Town of Elsmere who has
probable cause to believe that a person has committed an act in violation
of this chapter shall have the authority to enforce this chapter.
B. No person shall willfully refuse to sign and accept a citation issued by
an officer or willfully refuse to sign for and accept delivery of a citation
sent via certified mail return receipt requested by the Town or any officer
enforcing this chapter.
C. In the event an animal is impounded for violation of this chapter and
the owner of the animal abandons or surrenders the animal to the State
of Delaware Office of Animal Welfare, the owner remains liable for the
penalties imposed for violations of this chapter. In the event the animal
runs away, is lost or is given away, the owner of the animal shall be liable
for any penalty imposed for violations of this chapter.
§ 71-9. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person cited for an infraction under this chapter shall pay the civil
penalty specified for such infraction as set by resolution.
B. In addition to any civil penalties, any person who fails to pay all penalties
imposed within the ten-calendar-day payment period shall pay a
delinquency fee as set by resolution.
C. Any person who fails to come into compliance with any section of this
chapter for which he or she is in violation within the ten-calendar-day
payment period shall be subject to citation for second and subsequent
offense violations of the same sections of this chapter.
§ 71-10. Animals in vehicles.
A. No person shall leave an animal in a motor vehicle without adequate
ventilation or in such a manner as to expose the animal to extremes of
heat or cold.
B. An officer may remove and impound an animal from a vehicle if its safety
appears to be in immediate danger from heat or cold or lack of adequate
ventilation. The officer is authorized to take steps reasonably necessary
for the removal of such animal, including but not limited to breaking
into the vehicle. Neither the officer nor his or her agency shall bear civil
liability for damage.
C. No person shall transport any animal in a motor vehicle unless the
animal is safely enclosed within the vehicle, or if traveling in an
unenclosed vehicle (including but not limited to convertibles, pickups
and flatbed trucks) is confined by a container, cage, or other device that
will prevent the animal falling from or jumping from the motor vehicle.
§ 71-7 ELSMERE CODE § 71-10
1:74
Any such container or cage shall be anchored to the vehicle in order to
prevent its jostling about.
§ 71-11. Farm animals and livestock prohibited.
A. No person shall keep or harbor any animal commonly referred to as a
"farm animal" or "livestock."
B. For the purpose of this section, a farm animal or livestock shall include
all breeds of the following but shall not be limited to any of the following:
(1) Horses.
(2) Cows.
(3) Chickens.
(4) Pigs.
(5) Hogs.
(6) Goats.
(7) Hens.
(8) Sheep.
(9) Ducks.
(10) Fowl.
(11) Mules.
§ 71-12. Exemptions to farm animals and livestock prohibition.
A. Any person harboring or keeping an animal which would be prohibited
by § 71-11 of this chapter and who believes that his/her particular animal
has a real and legitimate medical, medicinal, psychological or emotional
benefit to him/her or a member of his/her family residing in the
residence may ask for a meeting with the Town Manager and request an
exemption from the provisions of § 71-11.
B. The Town Manager shall develop a list of criteria that the animal's owner
must present at the meeting and a general procedure concerning how
the meeting will be conducted.
C. If at the conclusion of the meeting the Town Manager is convinced
that the particular animal in question does in fact provide legitimate
medical or medicinal benefit to the animal's owner or a member of
his/her family residing in the residence and that harboring the animal
would not adversely affect the general value of property within the area,
nor adversely affect the right of other property owners to the safe and
comfortable enjoyment of their property, the Town Manager may issue
an exemption to § 71-11 of this chapter.
D. If the Town Manager decides to issue an exemption he may make the
issuance of the exemption contingent upon any terms, restrictions or
conditions he feels appropriate.
E. Any person aggrieved by the Town Manager's decision may appeal to the
Board of Adjustment.
§ 71-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-12
1:75
Chapter 76
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Notification of lessees in floodplains — See
Ch. 103.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 171.
§ 71-12 ELSMERE CODE § 71-12
1:76
ARTICLE I
Maintenance of Building Sites
[Adopted 4-8-1999 by Ord. No. 372]
§ 76-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING SITE — All land owned by the builder and all land used in
conjunction with construction, including all public and private rights-of-way
and easements.
§ 76-2. Building sites to remain clean and free of waste.
All building sites within the Town of Elsmere shall be maintained clean, safe,
sanitary and free from any accumulation of rubbish, trash, garbage, filth,
junk, discarded materials or equipment, unrepaired ground, debris of any
kind, toxic or hazardous wastes or other waste material.
§ 76-3. Runoff of soil or other materials.
All building sites within the Town of Elsmere shall be maintained in such
a manner that runoff of soil or other materials from the building site on to
lands adjacent to the building site does not occur.
§ 76-4. Inspection prior to temporary closing of building site.
[Amended 9-18-2003 by Ord. No. 420]
All building sites which are to be closed or unattended for a period
exceeding five days shall be inspected and approved by the Code
Enforcement Officer of the Town of Elsmere prior to the building site being
left closed or unattended for a period exceeding five days.
§ 76-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-18-2003 by Ord. No.
420]
Any person violating the provisions of this article and who shall fail to
comply with any notice or order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
relating to the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a fine of not less than $100
nor more than $300, or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both
such fine and imprisonment. Each day that each violation continues shall be
deemed a further offense punishable by a further sum of $50 per day, per
violation. The imposition of a penalty for any violation of this article shall
not excuse the violation nor permit it to continue.
§ 76-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-5
1:77

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Building, Residential, Plumbing, Mechanical and Fuel
Gas Standards
[Adopted 9-18-2003 by Ord. No. 420]
§ 76-6. Adoption of Building Code.
A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the Town
Manager of the Town of Elsmere being marked and designated
"International Building Code, 2000 Edition," and the "2001 Supplement to
the International Codes" as published by International Code Council, Inc.,
be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the Town of Elsmere for
the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International
Building Code are hereby adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out
in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in § 76-7 of this article.
§ 76-7. Inconsistent provisions repealed.
The BOCA National Building Code, Thirteenth Edition, 1996, and the CABO
One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code, 1995 Edition, adopted by reference
as Chapter 76 of the Elsmere Town Code, together with all supplements
thereto and amendments to the same, and all other chapters or parts of
chapters in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 76-8. Additions, insertions and changes to Building Code.
[Amended 11-8-2007 by Ord. No. 482]
Section 112 shall be deleted in its entirety and a new Section 112 shall be
inserted to read as follows.
§ 76-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-8
1:79
Section 112
APPEALS
112.1 Application for appeal. Any person directly affected by a decision
of the code official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have
the right to appeal to the Board of Adjustments of the Town of Elsmere,
provided that a written application for appeal is filed within 20 days
after the day the decision, notice or order was served. An application for
appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the
rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted or the
provisions of this code do not fully apply. Additionally, an application for
appeal may be based on a claim that an action other than what is required
by the code: 1) provides the same or better protections than what the code
requires; and 2) will not cost the Town of Elsmere any more money than
enforcing the code as written. If the appellant proves that an action other
than what is required by the code meets these two requirements, the Board
of Adjustments may, in its discretion, either enforce the code as written or
permit the proposed alternative action.
112.2 Notice of meeting. The Board of Adjustments shall meet upon
notice from the chairman, and conduct the appeal hearing within 20 days
of the filing of an appeal.
112.3 Open hearing. All hearings before the Board of Adjustments shall
be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the
code official and any person who has been called as a witness or whose
interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
112.4 Procedure. The Board of Adjustments shall set and make available
the procedures under which a hearing will be conducted. The procedures
shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall
mandate that only relevant information be received.
112.5 Postponed hearing. Either the appellant or the appellant's
representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the
hearing.
112.6 Board decision. After hearing the evidence provided at the
hearing, the Board of Adjustments shall modify or reverse the decision of
the code official only by a concurring vote of a majority board members
present.
112.7 Records and copies. The decision of the board shall be recorded.
Copies shall be furnished to the appellant and to the code official.
112.8 Administration. The code official shall take immediate action in
accordance with the decision of the Board of Adjustments.
112.9 Court review. Any person, whether or not a previous party of the
appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of
certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for review shall be made in
the manner and time required by law following the decision of the Board of
Adjustments.
§ 76-8 ELSMERE CODE § 76-8
1:80
Section 112
APPEALS
112.10 Stays of enforcement. Appeals of notice and orders (other than
Imminent Danger notices) shall stay the enforcement of the notice and
order until the appeal is heard by the Board of Adjustments.
§ 76-9. Adoption of Residential Code.
A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the Town
Manager of the Town of Elsmere being marked and designated
"International Residential Code, 2000 Edition," and the "2001 Supplement
to the International Codes" as published by International Code Council, Inc.,
be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the Town of Elsmere for
the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International
Residential Code are hereby adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set
out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if
any, prescribed in § 76-10 of this article.
§ 76-10. Additions, insertions and changes to Residential Code.
[Amended 11-8-2007 by Ord. No. 482]
Section R112.1, R112.2, and R112.3 shall be deleted in their entirety and a
new section R112.1 shall be inserted to read as follows.
Section R112.1
R112.1 Application for appeal. Any person directly affected by a
decision of the code official or a notice or order issued under this code
shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Adjustments of the Town of
Elsmere, provided that a written application for appeal is filed within 20
days after the day the decision, notice or order was served. An application
for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the
rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted or the
provisions of this code do not fully apply. Additionally, an application for
appeal may be based on a claim that an action other than what is required
by the code: 1) provides the same or better protections than what the code
requires; and 2) will not cost the Town of Elsmere any more money than
enforcing the code as written. If the appellant proves that an action other
than what is required by the code meets these two requirements, the Board
of Adjustments may, in its discretion, either enforce the code as written or
permit the proposed alternative action.
R-112.1(a) Notice of meeting. The Board of Adjustments shall meet
upon notice from the chairman, and conduct the appeal hearing within 20
days of the filing of an appeal.
R112.1(b) Open hearing. All hearings before the Board of Adjustments
shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative,
the code official and any person who has been called as a witness or whose
interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
§ 76-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-10
1:81
R112.1(c) Procedure. The Board of Adjustments shall set and make
available the procedures under which a hearing will be conducted. The
procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but
shall mandate that only relevant information be received.
R112.1(d) Postponed hearing. Either the appellant or the appellant's
representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the
hearing.
R112.1(e) Board decision. After hearing the evidence provided at the
hearing, the Board of Adjustments shall modify or reverse the decision of
the code official only by a concurring vote of a majority board members
present.
R112.1(f) Records and copies. The decision of the board shall be
recorded. Copies shall be furnished to the appellant and to the code official.
R112.1(g) Administration. The code official shall take immediate action
in accordance with the decision of the Board of Adjustments.
R112.1(h) Court review. Any person, whether or not a previous party of
the appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ
of certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for review shall be made
in the manner and time required by law following the decision of the Board
of Adjustments.
R112.1(i) Stays of enforcement. Appeals of notice and orders (other
than Imminent Danger notices) shall stay the enforcement of the notice and
order until the appeal is heard by the Board of Adjustments.
§ 76-11. Adoption of Plumbing Code.
A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the Town
Manager of the Town of Elsmere being marked and designated
"International Plumbing Code, 2000 Edition," and the "2001 Supplement to
the International Codes" as published by International Code Council, Inc.,
be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the Town of Elsmere for
the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International
Plumbing Code are hereby adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out
in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in § 76-12 of this article.
§ 76-12. Additions, insertions and changes to Plumbing Code.
[Amended 11-8-2007 by Ord. No. 482]
Section 109 shall be deleted in its entirety and a new Section 109 shall be
inserted to read as follows.
§ 76-10 ELSMERE CODE § 76-12
1:82
Section 109
APPEALS
109.1 Application for appeal. Any person directly affected by a decision
of the code official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have
the right to appeal to the Board of Adjustments of the Town of Elsmere,
provided that a written application for appeal is filed within 20 days
after the day the decision, notice or order was served. An application for
appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the
rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted or the
provisions of this code do not fully apply. Additionally, an application for
appeal may be based on a claim that an action other than what is required
by the code: 1) provides the same or better protections than what the code
requires; and 2) will not cost the Town of Elsmere any more money than
enforcing the code as written. If the appellant proves that an action other
than what is required by the code meets these two requirements, the Board
of Adjustments may, in its discretion, either enforce the code as written or
permit the proposed alternative action.
1109.2 Notice of meeting. The Board of Adjustments shall meet upon
notice from the chairman, and conduct the appeal hearing within 20 days
of the filing of an appeal.
109.3 Open hearing. All hearings before the Board of Adjustments shall
be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the
code official and any person who has been called as a witness or whose
interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
109.4 Procedure. The Board of Adjustments shall set and make available
the procedures under which a hearing will be conducted. The procedures
shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall
mandate that only relevant information be received.
109.5 Postponed hearing. Either the appellant or the appellant's
representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the
hearing.
109.6 Board decision. After hearing the evidence provided at the
hearing, the Board of Adjustments shall modify or reverse the decision of
the code official only by a concurring vote of a majority board members
present.
109.7 Records and copies. The decision of the board shall be recorded.
Copies shall be furnished to the appellant and to the code official.
109.8 Administration. The code official shall take immediate action in
accordance with the decision of the Board of Adjustments.
109.9 Court review. Any person, whether or not a previous party of the
appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of
certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for review shall be made in
the manner and time required by law following the decision of the Board of
Adjustments.
§ 76-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-12
1:83
Section 109
APPEALS
109.10 Stays of enforcement. Appeals of notice and orders (other than
Imminent Danger notices) shall stay the enforcement of the notice and
order until the appeal is heard by the Board of Adjustments.
§ 76-13. Adoption of Mechanical Code.
A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the Town
Manager of the Town of Elsmere being marked and designated
"International Mechanical Code, 2000 Edition," and the "2001 Supplement
to the International Codes" as published by International Code Council, Inc.,
be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the Town of Elsmere for
the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International
Mechanical Code are hereby adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set
out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if
any, prescribed in § 76-14 of this article.
§ 76-14. Additions, insertions and changes to Mechanical Code.
[Amended 11-8-2007 by Ord. No. 482]
Section 109 shall be deleted in its entirety and a new section 109 shall be
inserted to read as follows.
Section 109
APPEALS
109.1 Application for appeal. Any person directly affected by a decision
of the code official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have
the right to appeal to the Board of Adjustments of the Town of Elsmere,
provided that a written application for appeal is filed within 20 days
after the day the decision, notice or order was served. An application for
appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the
rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted or the
provisions of this code do not fully apply. Additionally, an application for
appeal may be based on a claim that an action other than what is required
by the code: 1) provides the same or better protections than what the code
requires; and 2) will not cost the Town of Elsmere any more money than
enforcing the code as written. If the appellant proves that an action other
than what is required by the code meets these two requirements, the Board
of Adjustments may, in its discretion, either enforce the code as written or
permit the proposed alternative action.
109.2 Notice of meeting. The Board of Adjustments shall meet upon
notice from the chairman, and conduct the appeal hearing within 20 days
of the filing of an appeal.
§ 76-12 ELSMERE CODE § 76-14
1:84
Section 109
APPEALS
109.3 Open hearing. All hearings before the Board of Adjustments shall
be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the
code official and any person who has been called as a witness or whose
interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
109.4 Procedure. The Board of Adjustments shall set and make available
the procedures under which a hearing will be conducted. The procedures
shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall
mandate that only relevant information be received.
109.5 Postponed hearing. Either the appellant or the appellant's
representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the
hearing.
109.6 Board decision. After hearing the evidence provided at the hearing
the Board of Adjustments shall modify or reverse the decision of the code
official only by a concurring vote of a majority board members present.
109.7 Records and copies. The decision of the board shall be recorded.
Copies shall be furnished to the appellant and to the code official.
109.8 Administration. The code official shall take immediate action in
accordance with the decision of the Board of Adjustments.
109.9 Court review. Any person, whether or not a previous party of the
appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of
certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for review shall be made in
the manner and time required by law following the decision of the Board of
Adjustments.
109.10 Stays of enforcement. Appeals of notice and orders (other than
Imminent Danger notices) shall stay the enforcement of the notice and
order until the appeal is heard by the Board of Adjustments.
§ 76-15. Adoption of Fuel Gas Code.
A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the Town
Manager of the Town of Elsmere being marked and designated
"International Fuel Gas Code, 2000 Edition," and the "2001 Supplement to
the International Codes" as published by International Code Council, Inc.,
be and is hereby adopted as the Fuel Gas Code of the Town of Elsmere for
the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International
Plumbing Code are hereby adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out
in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in § 76-16 of this article.
§ 76-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-16
1:85
§ 76-16. Additions, in insertions and changes to Fuel Gas Code.
[Amended 11-8-2007 by Ord. No. 482]
Section 109 shall be deleted in its entirety and a new Section 109 shall be
inserted to read as follows.
Section 109 (IFGC)
APPEALS
109.1 Application for appeal. Any person directly affected by a decision
of the code official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have
the right to appeal to the Board of Adjustments of the Town of Elsmere,
provided that a written application for appeal is filed within 20 days
after the day the decision, notice or order was served. An application for
appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the
rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted or the
provisions of this code do not fully apply. Additionally, an application for
appeal may be based on a claim that an action other than what is required
by the code: 1) provides the same or better protections than what the code
requires; and 2) will not cost the Town of Elsmere any more money than
enforcing the code as written. If the appellant proves that an action other
than what is required by the code meets these two requirements, the Board
of Adjustments may, in its discretion, either enforce the code as written or
permit the proposed alternative action.
109.2 Notice of meeting. The Board of Adjustments shall meet upon
notice from the chairman, and conduct the appeal hearing within 20 days
of the filing of an appeal.
109.3 Open hearing. All hearings before the Board of Adjustments shall
be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the
code official and any person who has been called as a witness or whose
interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
109.4 Procedure. The Board of Adjustments shall set and make available
the procedures under which a hearing will be conducted. The procedures
shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall
mandate that only relevant information be received.
109.5 Postponed hearing. Either the appellant or the appellant's
representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the
hearing.
109.6 Board decision. After hearing the evidence provided at the
hearing, the Board of Adjustments shall modify or reverse the decision of
the code official only by a concurring vote of a majority of board members
present.
109.7 Records and copies. The decision of the board shall be recorded.
Copies shall be furnished to the appellant and to the code official.
109.8 Administration. The code official shall take immediate action in
accordance with the decision of the Board of Adjustments.
§ 76-16 ELSMERE CODE § 76-16
1:86
Section 109 (IFGC)
APPEALS
109.9 Court review. Any person, whether or not a previous party of the
appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of
certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for review shall be made in
the manner and time required by law following the decision of the Board of
Adjustments.
109.10 Stays of enforcement. Appeals of notice and orders (other than
Imminent Danger notices) shall stay the enforcement of the notice and
order until the appeal is heard by the Board of Adjustments.
§ 76-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-16
1:87

ARTICLE III
Waiver of Building Permit Fees
[Adopted 10-9-2008 by Ord. No. 499; amended in its entirety
5-11-2017 by Ord. No. 627]
§ 76-17. Waiver of fees.
A. Annually during the months of October and May, the Town of Elsmere
will waive building permit fees for the following home improvements:
roofs, siding, driveways, doors, windows and sidewalks. However,
repairs made based upon a permit which was issued and had the fees
waived during the month of October shall be completed by no later than
November 30 of the same year, and the repairs made based upon a
permit which was issued and had the fees waived during the month of
May shall be completed by no later than June 30 of the same year, or the
normal building permit fees for these permits shall be assessed.
B. Those residents who receive the Town's senior/disabled tax credit shall
have the costs of any permit requested reduced by 25% of the permit's
normal costs.
C. Those residents who receive the Town's base tax credit shall not be
charged a fee for any permit requested.
§ 76-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-17
1:89
Chapter 79
BURNING, OPEN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dumping of yard waste and refuse — See Ch.
127.
§ 79-1. Open burning prohibited.
It shall be is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to set on fire or
burn any refuse weeds, leaves, limbs, trees, lawns, gardens, rubber tires,
plastics, wire, insulation and other smoke-producing materials or other
flammable or waste materials outdoors within the Town of Elsmere. This
shall be known as "open burning" and shall be prohibited.
§ 79-2. Exceptions.
The use of road flares, smudge pots, and similar devices associated with
safety or occupational uses typically considered open flames or the
following recreational fires: cooking fires such as barbecue grills;
campfires, patio fire pits, or chiminea; and ceremonial bonfires conducted
by established groups such as schools, Indian tribes, or other recognized
organizations shall not be considered or known as "open burning" and
therefore shall not be prohibited by this chapter.
Chapter 83
CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensed businesses — See Ch. 131.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 196.
Zoning — See Ch. 225.
§ 83-1. Definitions.
Unless a contrary meaning is clearly indicated from the context, the
following definitions shall apply in this chapter:
APARTMENT BUILDING — Any existing structure or group of structures
containing three or more dwelling units for the purpose of multifamily
occupancy.
COMMON ELEMENTS — Shall be defined as those words are defined in 25
Del. C. § 2202.
§ 76-17 ELSMERE CODE § 83-1
1:90
CONDOMINIUM — A building or complex of buildings governed by the
provisions of the Unit Property Act, 25 Delaware Code, Chapter 22.
CONDOMINIUM UNIT — A single unit as defined in the Unit Property Act,
25 Delaware Code, Chapter 22.
CONVERSION — The change of rental units into condominium units
resulting from the filing for recording with the Recorder of Deeds in New
Castle County of a declaration pursuant to the Unit Property Act.
DECLARATION — Shall be defined as that word is defined in 25 Del. C.
§ 2202, and shall contain the contents required by 25 Del. C. § 2219.
DECLARATION PLAN — Shall be defined as that term is defined in 25 Del.
C. § 2202.
DEVELOPER — Any person, group of persons, corporation, partnership,
association, trustee or other legal entity who undertakes the conversion of
an apartment building to a condominium.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling
and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or
intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
ENGINEER'S REPORT — The report of a duly registered engineer licensed
in this state stating the present condition of all structural and major utility
installations in the condominium, to include the type of construction or
utility installation, the age, approximate remaining useful life, and
approximate present replacement costs of all elements or components that
need replacement, including roofs, electrical wiring, plumbing, water
heaters, heating systems and units, and air-conditioning systems and units.
The engineer's report may be supplemented by reports of duly licensed
professional architects, with respect to structural elements, such as
foundations, bearing walls, perimeter walls and floors. The present costs of
remedying any structural deficiencies found shall be stated.
HANDICAPPED — Shall be defined as that term is defined in federal
legislation prohibiting discrimination against the handicapped, the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended.
OFFER OF SALE TO THE PUBLIC — Any advertisement, inducement,
solicitation or attempt by a developer to encourage any person, other than
a tenant, to purchase a condominium unit.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, trustee or
other legal entity.
RECORDED — That an instrument has been duly entered of record in the
Office of the Recorder of Deeds for New Castle County.
RECORDER — The Recorder of Deeds for New Castle County.
TENANT — Any person entitled to occupy a dwelling unit primarily for
purposes of habitation under a lease or rental agreement, written or oral.
UNLAWFUL PRACTICE — The violation of, failure to comply with or attempt
to avoid the application of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 83-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-1
1:91
VACANCY LISTING — The published identification of name and location or
locations of a substantial number of large apartment complexes within New
Castle County, and the comprehensive compilation of the total number of
dwelling units in said apartment complexes which are vacant and available
for occupancy and which are comparable in rental prices to what the
existing tenants are paying at the time of the recording of the developer's
declaration with the Recorder.
§ 83-2. Applicability; unlawful practices.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the conversion of any
apartment building within the Town of Elsmere to a condominium for
which declaration was first recorded with the recorder on or after the
effective date of this chapter by which recording such apartment
building becomes a condominium.
B. Any action of any kind undertaken by the developer toward completion of
the conversion by way of notice to tenants-in-possession or offer of sale
to the public or commencement of renovation without first complying
with the provisions required in §§ 83-4 through 83-9 of this chapter shall
constitute an unlawful practice.
§ 83-3. Notification requirements.
A. Notice of recording of declaration. A developer shall send a notice of the
recording of a declaration and a copy of said declaration to the Planning
Commission and the Building Committee of the Town of Elsmere by
registered or certified mail, within seven days of the recording of the
declaration with the Recorder of Deeds for New Castle County.
B. Subdivision approval. If, at the time of recording of the declaration,
a developer has not already done so, any developer converting an
apartment building to a condominium shall make application to the
Planning Commission and Building Committee, within seven days of the
recording of the developer's declaration, for review and approval of the
developer's subdivision plat (the declaration and declaration plan) and
shall file all other documents as required by this chapter for review and
approval by the Planning Commission and Building Committee.
§ 83-4. Review and approval by Planning Commission and Building
Committee.
A. No proposed condominium conversion project shall be approved for
development unless the Planning Commission and Building Committee
shall have first received from the developer the following documents and
shall have reviewed and approved them on the basis of their effect on
public health, safety and general welfare:
(1) A detailed development plan, including a report from a professional
engineer licensed to do business in the State of Delaware, stating
the engineer's observations regarding the condition of the structure
involved and the major utility installations in the building.
(2) A proposed operating budget for the condominium which shall be
based upon current operating expenses for the building.
§ 83-1 ELSMERE CODE § 83-4
1:92
(3) A listing of all rental charges for every type of apartment currently
available and a listing of proposed selling prices for every type of
condominium unit which shall be available for purchase.
(4) A copy of conditions, covenants, restrictions or other condominium
agreement for the project setting forth the occupancy and
management policies for the project.
(5) A statement of the overall impact a proposed conversion project
would have on displaced persons and families especially the elderly
and the handicapped.
(6) Submittal of vacancy listing as defined in § 83-1 of this chapter.
(7) Demonstration of applicability and conformity of the proposed
conversion project to all Zoning Codes of the Town of Elsmere.5
B. The Planning Commission and Building Committee shall, within 30 days
after receipt of notices and documents as required in §§ 83-3 and 83-4,
prepare and deliver to the applicant a conversion report, including
therein a recommendation for approval or denial, a listing of conditions
or requirements recommended as a basis for approval and supportive
reasons or justifications for such recommendations.
C. A developer shall have 30 days in which to respond to denial or
conditional approval and shall demonstrate compliance to the
satisfaction of the Planning Commission and Building Committee at
which time final approval shall be granted.
§ 83-5. Licenses required; operator's license; fee refunds; unlawful
practices.
A. Condominium conversion licenses. Within seven days following receipt
of final project approval by the Planning Commission and Building
Committee, a developer shall make application to the Tax Collector for
a condominium conversion license for each planned salable unit in the
conversion project. A condominium conversion license for each planned
salable unit shall be issued by the Tax Collector upon the payment of
a fee in the amount of $2,500 per planned salable unit in the project.
Each license required herein shall be a one-time charge paid prior to
the original sale of each new planned condominium conversion unit.
[Amended 9-18-2003 by Ord. No. 420]
B. Operator's license. A business operator's license is required annually
and may be obtained in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 131,
Licensed Businesses, governing dwelling units.
C. Fee refunds. In the event that a developer abandons the development
of condominium conversion units either in whole or in part before
substantial work is begun and before the expiration of six months
following the issuance of condominium conversion licenses, the Tax
Collector shall, upon receipt of evidence documented to his or her
satisfaction that the conversion project or part of the conversion project
has been abandoned, refund 50% of the total amount of fees paid for
said project or part of said project for which abandonment has been
substantiated, provided further that, in the event of such refund, it
5. Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Zoning.
§ 83-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-5
1:93
shall be unlawful for any person to proceed in any way with further
development of the project without first applying for and receiving the
applicable condominium license or licenses. In the event that a
developer abandons the development of condominium conversion units
either in whole or in part after substantial work has begun and after
the expiration of six months following the issuance of condominium
conversion licenses, no fee refunds shall be given.
D. Unlawful practices. It shall be unlawful to engage in, permit, suffer or
assist in the development or construction or to occupy any condominium
for which a license has not been obtained as provided in this section.
Failure to apply and pay for the required condominium conversion
licenses shall constitute an unlawful practice. Each fee that remains
unpaid shall be a separate offense.
§ 83-6. Notice of intent to sell; tenant's rights.
A. Notice of intent to sell. Within seven days of obtaining the required
condominium conversion licenses, the developer shall send to each
tenant residing in a unit and to the Code Enforcement Officer, by
certified mail, return receipt requested:
(1) A notice of intent to sell the tenant's unit;
(2) A report from a professional engineer licensed to do business in the
State of Delaware, stating the engineer's observations regarding the
condition of the structure involved and the major utility installations
in the building;
(3) A proposed operating budget for the condominium which shall be
based upon current operating expenses for the building;
(4) A listing of all rental charges for every type of apartment currently
available and a listing of proposed selling prices for every type of
condominium unit which shall be available for purchase; and
(5) A copy of vacancy listing as defined in § 83-1 of this chapter.
B. Form of notice. The form of the notice of intent to sell shall contain the
following:
(1) The name and address of the current owner.
(2) The name and address of the proposed developer.
(3) A copy of the Planning Commission and Building Committee's
conversion report.
(4) The approximate date on which the unit is to be vacated by
nonpurchasing tenants.
(5) A statement of the tenant's right of written notification to vacate by
a certain date as governed by Subsection D herein.
(6) A statement detailing the rights of tenants as set forth in Subsection
D hereof.
(7) Such other information as the Planning Commission and Building
Committee may deem to be required.
C. Other forms of notice. Any notice by way of public advertisement, or any
other form of notice not in conformity with this section, or any notice of
any kind given to any tenant prior to the date specified in Subsection A
shall not be deemed to be sufficient notice under this section.
D. Rights of tenants.
§ 83-5 ELSMERE CODE § 83-6
1:94
(1) Exclusive right to purchase. A tenant of a unit at the time of sending
of the notice of intent to sell shall have the exclusive right to
purchase his or her unit for a period of 90 days commencing with
the receipt of the notice set forth in Subsection B above, unless the
tenant, during said ninety-day period, signs a written waiver of such
right.
(2) Right of privacy. Unless a tenant has sooner execute a written waiver
of his or her exclusive right to purchase, the developer shall not
show or offer the unit for sale to persons other than the tenant
during the first 45 days following receipt by the tenant of the
aforesaid notice of intention to convert. Following said forty-fiveday
period, or such waiver, the developer shall show the unit to
prospective purchasers only during reasonable hours of the day and
only upon not less than 24 hours' notice to the tenant.
(3) Nontermination of lease. After 90 days, or after such waiver, the
tenant deciding not to purchase shall not have his or her lease
terminated by the building owner or developer for a minimum period
of 90 additional days, during which time the tenant shall continue to
try to find an alternative residence.
(4) Rent increases. In any instance in which a tenant has decided not
to purchase his or her unit, no increase in rent charged to such
tenant during the periods of time herein established shall result in
an amount of rent exceeding that most recently charged a tenant of
a comparable unit in the same complex; provided further, however,
that in no event shall such increase exceed 10% of the rent
previously charged to such tenant.
(5) Tenant's right to terminate lease. Any tenant with more than 60
days remaining on a lease who receives a notice of intent to convert
shall at any time after receipt of such notice have the right to
terminate such lease with 60 days' written notice to the landlord.
Such termination shall be without penalty or other termination
charge to the tenant.
(6) Terms of purchase. The exclusive right to purchase granted to
tenants under this subsection shall include the right of a tenant
to purchase his or her unit upon at lease as favorable terms and
conditions as said units are offered to the general public.
(7) Access. The tenant in a conversion condominium shall not
unreasonably withhold consent to the developer to enter the unit in
order to inspect the premises, make necessary or agreed repairs,
supply necessary or agreed services or show the unit to prospective
or actual workmen or purchasers in accordance with this section.
The landlord shall not abuse right of access or use it to harass the
tenant. Except as provided in Subsection D(2) hereof and except in
case of emergency, or unless it is impractical to do so, the developer
or landlord shall give the tenant at least two days' notice of his intent
and may enter only at reasonable times between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(8) Provisions for special tenants. Those tenants of a dwelling unit of
which at least one occupant is 62 years of age or older or who is a
§ 83-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-6
1:95
handicapped person shall not be evicted for a period of not less than
18 months from the date of receipt of the notice of intent to sell.
(9) No impairment of rights and obligations. This subsection shall not
be construed as in any way impairing any rights and obligations
expressly or impliedly provided for either in the specific terms of
the lease or under the provisions of the Landlord-Tenant Code of the
State of Delaware except for the additional requirements set forth in
this subsection.
§ 83-7. Inspection of buildings and units.
A. The Building, Plumbing and Health Inspectors of the Town of Elsmere
shall inspect all buildings being converted from apartments to
condominiums.
B. In no instance shall a waiver of a presale inspection be valid. No
condominium unit subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be sold
in "as is" condition.
§ 83-8. Inspections and repair.
A. Conversion standards. Any apartment building under going conversion
to condominium ownership must meet all applicable provisions of the
zoning, housing and building codes of the Town of Elsmere, the fire
prevention codes of the State of Delaware, and the provisions of this
chapter.
B. Duties of the developer. The developer shall:
(1) Arrange for access to all parts of any apartment building undergoing
conversion so that required inspections shall be conducted;
(2) Correct all violations in a unit as noted in the inspection reports
required by Subsection C of this section at least seven days prior to
the sale of that unit;
(3) Correct all violations of the common elements as noted in the
inspection reports required by Subsection C of this section at least
seven days prior to the sale of any unit;
(4) Warrant all repairs and improvements made by the developer to each
condominium unit for one year from the date of sale of each unit;
(5) Warrant all repairs and improvements made by the developer to the
common elements for one year from the date of sale of each unit;
(6) Obtain a certificate of occupancy issued by the Town for each unit at
least seven days prior to the date of sale of each unit;
(7) Obtain a certificate of occupancy issued by the Town for all common
elements at least seven days prior to the date of sale of the first unit;
and
(8) Pay to the Town all fees established for all applicable certificates of
occupancy and permits.
C. Duties of Town and state inspectors. The Building, Plumbing and Health
Inspectors of the Town of Elsmere shall:
(1) Conduct inspections of all apartment buildings undergoing
conversions;
(2) Issue inspection reports listing all violations of applicable code
provisions discovered during the inspections;
§ 83-6 ELSMERE CODE § 83-8
1:96
(3) Conduct inspections of all repairs and improvements in accordance
with all permits authorized; and
(4) Issue a certificate of occupancy for each condominium unit and
for the common elements to the developer only upon satisfactory
completion of all repairs and improvements.
§ 83-9. Information for prospective purchasers.
A developer shall provide the following information to prospective
purchasers at least seven days before any agreement of sale is signed:
A. A copy of the inspection reports required by § 83-8C(2).
B. A copy of all documents filed pursuant to the Unit Property Act, 25
Delaware Code, Chapter 22.
C. An itemization of specific repairs and improvements made to the
building and to the unit during the six months preceding the recording
of the declaration.
D. An itemization of specific repairs and improvements to be completed.
§ 83-10. Enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Officer of the Town of Elsmere is authorized to
conduct all necessary investigations, and, if there appears to be any
unlawful practice, the Code Enforcement Officer shall undertake one or
both of the following:
A. Attempt to arbitrate the matter and to secure a written conciliation
agreement with the developer; or
B. Initiate appropriate court action.
§ 83-11. Filing complaint.
Any person who has been the object of an unlawful practice under this
chapter may file a complaint with the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 83-12. Private right of action.
Any person who has been the object of an unlawful practice as defined in
this chapter or any purchaser in a contract which may be voided under
this chapter may rely on the provisions of this chapter to institute civil
proceedings against the developer to secure compliance with this chapter.
§ 83-13. Violations and penalties.
A. Fine. A person who commits an unlawful practice under this chapter
shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum of $500 for each offense. Each
day's unlawful practice shall constitute a separate offense. [Amended
9-18-2003 by Ord. No. 420]
B. Remedial action. Any binding agreement of sale entered into by a
developer which results in an unlawful practice under this chapter is:
(1) Void, if the tenant was an object of the unlawful practice; or
(2) Voidable at the option of the purchaser, if the purchaser was the sole
object of the unlawful practice.
§ 83-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-13
1:97
Chapter 87
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Loitering — See Ch. 135.
§ 87-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be
defined as follows:
ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately owned place of business carried on for
a profit or any place of amusement or entertainment to which the public is
invited.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
OFFICIAL TOWN TIME — Eastern standard time, except from the first
Sunday in April to the last Sunday in October, when it means Eastern
daylight saving time.
OPERATOR — Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation,
or other entity operating, managing or conducting any establishment. When
used in any clause prescribing a penalty, the term "operator," as applied
to an association or partnership, includes the members or partners thereof
and, as applied to a corporation, includes the officers thereof.
PARENT — Any natural or adoptive parent of a minor, a guardian of a minor
or any adult person who is responsible for the care and custody of a minor.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground,
wharf, dock, public building or vacant lot.
REMAIN — To loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon.
§ 87-2. Curfew hours; exceptions.
A. No minor shall remain in or upon any public place or any establishment
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day,
official Town time. [Amended 1-12-2006 by Ord. No. 460]
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any minor who is
accompanied by a parent, or to a minor who is upon an errand or other
legitimate business directed by such minor's parent or to any minor who
is engaged in gainful, lawful employment during the curfew hours.
C. This section shall not apply when a minor is returning home by way
of a direct route from any activity that is sponsored by an educational,
religious or nonprofit organization when such returning is within 60
minutes following the termination of the activity.
§ 87-3. Unlawful conduct of parents.
§ 83-13 ELSMERE CODE § 87-3
1:98
A. No parent shall knowingly permit any minor to remain in or upon any
public place or establishment between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. of the following day, official Town time. [Amended 1-12-2006 by
Ord. No. 460]
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any parent who
accompanies a minor, or to a parent who directs a minor upon an errand
or other legitimate business, or to any parent or a minor who is engaged
in gainful, lawful employment during the curfew hours.
§ 87-4. Unlawful conduct of operators of establishments. [Amended
1-12-2006 by Ord. No. 460]
No operator of an establishment or the agents or employees of the operator
shall knowingly permit any minor, other than a minor who is an employee of
the operator, to remain upon the premises of such establishment between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, official Town
time.
§ 87-5. Violations; referrals; opportunity to explain conduct;
penalties.
A. Any police officer who finds a minor violating any provisions of this
chapter shall obtain such information from such minor as to his name
and address, age and the name of his parent or parents. The minor
shall thereupon be instructed to proceed to his home forthwith. The
information obtained from the minor shall be forwarded to the State of
Delaware Division of Protective Services or the Family Court for such
action as is deemed appropriate in accordance with the rules of the
Family Court, and shall include a written notice to be mailed by the
Public Safety Department to the parents of the minor advising of the
violation of this chapter. The police officer may charge the minor with a
curfew violation, the prosecution of which shall be in the Family Court,
and may charge the minor's parent(s), or the operator(s), or both the
parent(s) and the operators, as the case may be, with violation(s) of the
provisions of this chapter, and the same shall be duly prosecuted in the
court of appropriate jurisdiction.
B. Any parent who violates any provisions of this chapter after having
received notice of a prior violation shall be fined in an amount not to
exceed $600 and costs for each violation, and in default of payment
thereof, shall be imprisoned for not more than 90 days.
C. Any operator of an establishment or any agent or employee thereof who
violates any provisions of this chapter shall be fined in an amount not
to exceed $600 and costs for each violation and, in default of payment
thereof, shall be imprisoned for not more than 90 days.
D. Any violation of any provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate
offense.
E. No arrest of any minor, or parent, or operator shall be made for a
violation of this chapter unless the arresting officer first affords the
person an opportunity to explain his or her conduct, and no person shall
be convicted of a violation of this chapter if it is determined at trial that
the explanation so given was true and disclosed a lawful purpose.
§ 87-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-5
1:99
Chapter 93
EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Lawn care companies — See Ch. 123.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 190.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
196.
§ 93-1. Permit required.
No person shall excavate or regrade any property, public or private, within
the Town of Elsmere without first obtaining a permit as provided herein.
§ 93-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as
follows:
EXCAVATION — The removal of more than six cubic yards of any natural
material, including earth, black dirt, peat, sand, rock, gravel, or sod from
any property.
REGRADING — The redistribution of more than six cubic yards upon the
same lot of any natural materials including earth, black dirt, peat, sand,
rock, gravel, or sod.
§ 93-3. Process for obtaining permit.
A. Any person desiring a license or permit shall make application to the
Code Enforcement Department on forms provided by the Department,
such application to contain at a minimum the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The address and legal description (Property Tax Identification
Number) of the place where such excavation or removal is to take
place.
(3) The kind and quantity of material to be removed, the depth to which
it is to be excavated, and the condition in which the property is to be
left after removal of such materials.
B. Each application for permit shall be accompanied by a plan showing the
following.
(1) Lines and grades.
(2) Any drainage patterns which are not or are properly altered.
(3) That stormwater runoff is not increased.
(4) The topography of the land both before and after the work.
(5) That standard erosion control practices are met.
C. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall pay the actual cost
incurred by the Town for all engineering, professional reviews and legal
expenses incurred by the Town to process and consider the application.
§ 87-5 ELSMERE CODE § 93-3
1:100
D. Upon receipt, an application shall be forwarded to the Town Engineer
who shall review the application and prepare a report to be submitted to
the Code Enforcement Department. The Engineer's report shall discuss
the effect upon the land as to drainage, future use, possible effect upon
adjoining properties, compliance with codes and any other data related
to these factors.
E. Once the Engineer's report has been received, the application, together
with the Engineer's report, shall be reviewed by the Code Enforcement
Department personnel who shall grant or deny the permit. If the Code
Enforcement Department finds that granting the application would not
adversely affect surrounding properties, a permit may be granted.
F. If granted, the permit shall specify the nature and extent of the
excavation or regrading and prescribe conditions for carrying on such
work.
§ 93-4. Applicability.
This chapter is intended to cover the excavation and regrading of natural
materials from lands but shall not apply to lands located within the
floodplain, basement excavation or other excavation or earth removal
activities which are already covered by the building or other codes.
Chapter 95
EXPLOSIVES AND FIREWORKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firearms and weapons — See Ch. 99.
§ 95-1. Explosives and fireworks.
No person shall store, sell, offer or expose for sale, have in possession
with intent to sell or use, discharge or cause to be discharged, ignite,
fire or otherwise set in action any explosive(s), firework(s), firecracker(s),
rocket(s), torpedo(es), roman candle(s), fire balloon(s) or other fireworks
or substances of any combination designed or intended for pyrotechnics
display within the Town limits of Elsmere without first obtaining a permit as
provided for in 16 Del. C. §§ 6903 and 6906, and § 95-3 of this chapter.
§ 95-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EXPLOSIVE — Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture, whether
commercially or homemade, that is commonly used or intended for the
purpose of producing an explosive that contains any oxidizing and
combustible units, or other ingredients in such proportions, quantities or
§ 93-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-2
1:101
packing that when ignited by fire, friction, concussion, percussion or
detonator may cause a sudden generation of highly heated gases that
are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects or of
destroying life or limb and including but not limited to the articles specified
below:
FIREWORK — Any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance
or combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of
producing visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or
detonation, and shall include blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy
canes or toy guns in which explosives are used, balloons which require fire
underneath to propel, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles,
daygo bombs, sparklers or other fireworks of like construction and any
fireworks, caps, tablets or other device containing an explosive or
flammable compound, whether commercially or homemade. The term
"firework" shall not include toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices
in which paper caps manufactured in accordance with the United States
Interstate Commerce Commission regulations for packing and shipping of
toy paper caps are used and toy pistol paper caps manufactured as provided
therein, the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times.
HOMEMADE DEVICE — Includes commercial or homemade devices that
are of combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or
combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing
visible or audible effect by combustion explosion, deflagration or
detonation.
§ 95-3. Storage and detonation.
A. Explosives or fireworks may be stored and/or detonated on property
within the corporate limits of the Town of Elsmere only for a special
event, activity or assembly of limited duration and only after obtaining
a permit as provided for in 16 Del. C. §§ 6903 and 6906, and a permit
from the Council of the Town of Elsmere and conducted according to a
prearranged schedule approved by the Council of the Town of Elsmere.
B. The Council, in granting any exclusionary waiver pursuant to this
section, may require any conditions it deems necessary to protect the
public interest against any adverse impact on the health, safety and
welfare of persons and property within the Town.
A. Liquid nitroglycerin.
Explosives containing over 60% of nitroglycerin (except gelatin
dynamite).
B.
Explosives having an unsatisfactory absorbent or one that permits
leakage under any condition during transportation or storage.
C.
D. Nitrocellulose in dry condition, in quantities greater than 10 pounds.
Fulminate of mercury in dry, bulk condition and fulminate of all other
metals in any condition, except as a component or manufactured
article.
E.
§ 95-2 ELSMERE CODE § 95-3
1:102
C. Noncompliance with any provision of this section or any condition of
the exclusionary waiver shall be sufficient cause for termination of such
waiver and shall subject the person holding such waiver to penalties
prescribed in § 95-6 of this chapter.
§ 95-4. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to the transportation of any article shipped
in conformity with the regulations prescribed by the Interstate Commerce
Commission, to the military or naval forces of the United States, duly
authorized militia of any state thereof and any authorized government
agency.
§ 95-5. Enforcement and confiscation.
The Elsmere Public Safety Department shall have the power to enforce this
chapter and confiscate any explosive(s) or firework(s) in violation of this
chapter from any person or property within the Town of Elsmere.
§ 95-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be fined not less than $100 for the first offense and no
more than $250 for each subsequent offense.
Chapter 98
FINES, PAYMENT OF
§ 98-1. Option to pay fines directly to Town.
Any fine associated with noncompliance with any section of the Code of the
Town of Elsmere or any ordinance adopted by the Mayor and Council may,
at the option of the person receiving a notice of violation, be paid directly to
the Town of Elsmere, thereby avoiding the need to appear in a State Court.
§ 98-2. (Reserved)6
§ 98-3. Amount of fine to be paid.
A. The amount due to be paid directly to the Town shall always be the
minimum amount due for a particular violation.
B. Whenever the Code of the Town of Elsmere or an ordinance gives no
minimum fine, but states that the fine shall not exceed a given amount,
the minimum amount payable to the Town shall be $100. [Amended
7-9-2015 by Ord. No. 597]
C. Whenever the Code of the Town of Elsmere or an ordinance gives no
minimum fine, but states that the fine shall not exceed an amount of
6. Editor's Note: Former § 98-2, Statement contained in notices of violation, was repealed
12-8-2011 by Ord. No. 543.
§ 95-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-3
1:103
$100 or less, the minimum amount payable to the Town shall be the
amount which the Code or ordinance states that the fine shall not
exceed. [Amended 7-9-2015 by Ord. No. 597]
D. Whenever the Code of the Town of Elsmere or an ordinance gives no fine,
no minimum or maximum fine, the amount payable to the Town shall be
$100. [Amended 7-9-2015 by Ord. No. 597]
§ 98-4. Record of payments to be kept.
The Town shall keep a complete record of all payments made to the Town in
accordance with this chapter.
§ 98-5. Instant summonses. [Added 8-12-2010 by Ord. No. 522]
A. In addition their use to enforce violations of Chapter 171 of the Code
of the Town of Elsmere, Code Enforcement Officers are authorized to
use instant summonses to enforce and assess the minimum fines due for
violations of the following sections of the Code of the Town of Elsmere.
(1) Chapter 127 of the Code of the Town of Elsmere, § 127-2 (dumping).
(2) Chapter 192 of the Code of the Town of Elsmere, § 192-6 (roadway
obstructions).
(3) Chapter 190 of the Code of the Town of Elsmere, § 190-7 (illegal
stormwater discharge).
(4) Chapter 192 of the Code of the Town of Elsmere, § 192-1 (removal
of snow and ice).
(5) Chapter 182 of the Code of the Town of Elsmere, § 182-2 (rental
permits required).
(6) Chapter 143 of the Code of the Town of Elsmere, § 143-3B(5) (noise,
animals: barking dogs).
(7) Chapter 225 of the Code of the Town of Elsmere, § 225-10B(2)
(regulating the number of recreational vehicles).
(8) Chapter 225 of the Code of the Town of Elsmere, § 225-8F (storage
of recreational vehicles in the front yard).
(9) Chapter 215 of the Code of the Town of Elsmere, § 215-2B (oversize
vehicles in residential zones).
(10) Chapter 225 of the Code of the Town of Elsmere, § 225-8T
(regulating the Town of Elsmere color pallet).
(11) Chapter 131 of the Code of the Town of Elsmere § 131-20,
Delinquencies; penalties. [Added 7-9-2015 by Ord. No. 597]
B. Any person who violates any of the chapters and sections listed in
§ 98-5A(1) through (10) shall be subject to and liable for a civil penalty
in the amount of the minimum penalty or fine adopted for each chapter
and section.
C. This civil penalty shall be paid within 30 days of the date of the citation
(the payment deadline), even if the violation is cured by such date. If it is
not paid by the payment deadline, then the civil penalty imposed under
this section shall give rise to a lien pursuant to Title 25, Chapter 29, of
the Delaware Code.
D. Each twenty-four-hour period that the condition giving rise to the initial
citation continues will be subject to a separate citation and an additional
civil penalty in the amount equal to the initial penalty.
§ 98-3 ELSMERE CODE § 98-6
1:104
§ 98-6. Citations to be mailed. [Added 8-12-2010 by Ord. No. 522]
Any citation issued for failure to comply with this chapter shall be mailed to
the owner of the property that is the subject of the citation.
§ 98-7. Appeals. [Added 8-12-2010 by Ord. No. 522; amended
3-8-2018 by Ord. No. 633]
The owner of a property aggrieved by any civil penalty imposed pursuant to
this section may appeal to the Board of Adjustment pursuant to § 171-6F of
this Code.
§ 98-8. Severability. [Added 8-12-2010 by Ord. No. 522]
This chapter shall apply and remain valid despite any determination that it
is inconsistent with any other section of the Code of the Town of Elsmere.
Chapter 99
FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
§ 98-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-8
1:105

ARTICLE I
Shooting Ranges
[Adopted 12-3-1953 by Ord. No. 49]
§ 99-1. Firing of guns.
Firing of guns shall be permitted in building or buildings provided by a
legally constituted organization upon application and approval of same by
the Town Council.
§ 99-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-1
1:107

ARTICLE II
Bows and Arrows
[Adopted 3-6-1958 by Ord. No. 64]
§ 99-2. Regulation of discharge; exceptions.
No person shall, within the Town limits of the Town of Elsmere, discharge
any bow and arrow unless such arrows are provided with rubber suction
cups on the tips thereof. This article shall not be construed to prohibit
possession of archery equipment for use at an authorized, supervised
archery range. Such authorization shall be obtained from the Town Council
of Elsmere.
§ 99-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-18-2003 by Ord. No.
420]
Upon conviction of violation of this article before the Mayor and the Town
of Elsmere, any person shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $100.
§ 99-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-3
1:109

ARTICLE III
Stun Guns and Taser Guns
[Adopted 12-11-1986 by Ord. No. 208]
§ 99-4. Manufacture, possession prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, make, deliver, transport,
trade, give, sell, purchase or possess a stun gun or taser gun.
§ 99-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
STUN GUN — Any battery-powered, pulsed electrical device of high voltage
and low or no amperage which, when pressed against a person, can disrupt
the central nervous system and cause temporary loss of voluntary muscle
control of such person.
TASER GUN — Any device contained in a package which permits it to
be hand-held, containing an electrical supply unit, and into which an
expandable plastic cassette may be inserted and which operates by shooting
or projecting a ball, net or dart carrying fine wires from the package to the
target and which, upon hitting a person, can send out current capable of
disrupting the person's nervous system in such a manner as to render the
person incapable of functioning normally.
§ 99-6. Exemptions.
Exempt from this article shall be any law enforcement officer while
performing his or her lawful duties within the Town of Elsmere and those
selling to any law enforcement officer while performing his or her lawful
duties within the Town of Elsmere.
§ 99-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-30-1996 by Ord. No.
326]
A conviction of violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not
less than $500 or imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both.
§ 99-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-7
1:111

ARTICLE IV
Discharge of Firearms
[Adopted 4-13-1993 by Ord. No. 297]
§ 99-8. Discharging firearms.
No person shall fire or discharge within the Town limits of Elsmere any
rifle, gun, pistol, revolver, cannon or other appliance, whether projecting or
exploding a bullet, cartridge or blank cartridge.
§ 99-9. Exemptions.
The following are exempt from the provisions of this article:
A. Any peace officer in the regular discharge of his or her duties.
B. Any certified indoor range and/or rifle club within the Town of Elsmere.
§ 99-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-18-2003 by Ord. No.
420]
Any person who violates this article shall be fined not less than the sum of
$100 nor more than the sum of $300, or be imprisoned not less than 10 days
nor more than 30 days, or both. In any prosecution for a violation of this
article, justification, as defined in 11 Del. C. §§ 462 through 471, shall be a
defense.
§ 99-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-10
1:113

ARTICLE V
Concealed BB Guns, Air Guns, and Toy Guns in Public
[Adopted 6-14-2007 by Ord. No. 479]
§ 99-11. Possession of concealed BB gun, air gun, gas-operated
gun, spring gun or realistic toy gun prohibited.
No person within the Town of Elsmere shall conceal about their person,
except within his or her own domicile, any BB gun, air gun, gas-operated
gun, spring gun, or any realistic toy which a reasonable person would
believe is a real gun in a public area.
§ 99-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall
be fined not less than $25 or more than $250 for the first offense, and
not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each subsequent offense. Each
violation shall be a separate offense.
§ 99-13. Forfeiture of weapon.
Every person convicted of this violation shall forfeit to the Elsmere Bureau
of Police the weapons or instruments so involved in the violation of this
article.
§ 99-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-13
1:115

ARTICLE VI
Regulation in Municipal Buildings and Police Stations.
[Adopted 10-8-2015 by Ord. No. 604]
§ 99-14. Prohibition.
Except as set forth in § 99-18 below, possession of firearms, ammunition,
components of firearms, or explosives in municipal buildings and police
stations is prohibited in all municipal buildings and police stations.
§ 99-15. Municipal building defined.
For purposes of this article, "municipal buildings" are defined as any
building where the Town of Elsmere meets in its official capacity, or any
building containing the offices of elected officials and of public employees
actively engaged in performing governmental business, but excludes any
parking facility. The definition of "municipal building" also includes any non-
Town-of-Elsmere-owned or leased building where the Town of Elsmere is
meeting in or occupying such a building, but only during the time that the
Town of Elsmere is meeting in or occupying such a building.
§ 99-16. Required signs.
In all municipal buildings and police stations, a conspicuous sign shall
be posted at each entrance stating that the possession of firearms,
ammunition, components of firearms, or explosives are prohibited. Such
sign may but is not required to also state that persons in violation may be
denied entrance to the building or be ordered to leave the building.
§ 99-17. Immediate departure.
Any person who immediately foregoes entry or immediately exits any
municipal building or police station due to the possession of a firearm,
ammunition, components of firearms, or explosives shall not be guilty of
violating this article.
§ 99-18. Exemptions.
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prevent the following in municipal
buildings or police stations:
A. Possession of firearms, components of firearms, and ammunition or
explosives by law enforcement officers;
B. Law enforcement agencies receiving shipments or delivery of firearms,
components of firearms, ammunition, or explosives;
C. Law enforcement agencies conducting firearms safety and training
programs;
D. Law enforcement agencies conducting firearm or ammunition public
safety programs, donation, amnesty, or any other similar programs in
police stations or municipal buildings;
E. Compliance by persons subject to protection from abuse court orders;
§ 99-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-18
1:117
F. Carrying firearms and ammunition by persons who hold a valid license
pursuant to either § 1441 or 1441A of Title 11 of the Delaware Code so
long as the firearm remains concealed except for inadvertent display or
for self-defense or defense of others;
G. Carrying firearms and ammunition by officers or employees of the
United States duly authorized to carry a concealed firearm; or
H. Carrying firearms and ammunition by agents, messengers and other
employees of common carriers, banks, or business firms, whose duties
require them to protect moneys, valuables and other property and are
engaged in the lawful execution of such duties.
§ 99-19. Violations and penalties.
As necessary to protect public safety, any intentional violation of this article
of the code by any person shall be subject to a fine of at least _____ and not
to exceed _____, or by imprisonment for not more than __________, or by both
fine and imprisonment.
§ 99-20. Severability.
The provisions of this article shall be severable. If any provisions of this
article are found by any court of competent jurisdiction to be
unconstitutional or void, the remaining provisions of this article shall
remain valid, unless the court finds that the valid provisions of this article
are so essentially and inseparably connected with, and so dependent upon,
the unconstitutional or void provision that it cannot be presumed that Town
of Elsmere would have enacted the remaining valid provisions without
the unconstitutional or void provision; or unless the court finds that the
remaining valid provisions, standing alone, are incomplete and incapable of
being executed in accordance with Town of Elsmere's intent. To the extent
that this article is deemed to exceed the statutory authorization provided
by HB 192, the Town of Elsmere's intent is to implement the provisions of
HB 192 to the fullest extent permitted, and the article should be interpreted
so that any invalid provision is limited only to the maximum authorization
permitted by HB 192.
§ 99-21. No repeal of existing firearms-related ordinances.
Adoption of this article shall in no way repeal or alter any law, ordinance
or regulation prohibiting, restricting or licensing the ownership, transfer,
possession or transportation of firearms or ammunition enacted before July
4, 1985. To the extent that this article conflicts with any similar ordinance
prohibiting, restricting or licensing the ownership, transfer, possession or
transportation of firearms or ammunition enacted before July 4, 1985, the
more stringent of the two ordinances shall govern.
§ 99-18 ELSMERE CODE § 99-21
1:118
Chapter 102
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Notification of lessees in floodplain — See Ch.
103.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 190.
Zoning — See Ch. 225.
§ 99-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-21
1:119

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 102-1. Findings.
A. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has identified
special flood hazard areas within the boundaries of the Town of Elsmere.
Special flood hazard areas are subject to periodic inundation which may
result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption
of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax
base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare. Development that is inadequately elevated, improperly
floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damage also
contributes to the flood loss.
B. The Town of Elsmere, by resolution, agreed to meet the requirements
of the National Flood Insurance Program and was accepted for
participation in the program on December 31, 1976. Subsequent to that
date or the initial effective date of the Town of Elsmere Flood Insurance
Rate Map, all development and new construction, as defined herein,
are to be compliant with the Town of Elsmere's floodplain management
regulations in effect at the time of the construction, and all development,
new construction, and substantial improvements subsequent to the
effective date of these regulations shall be compliant with these
regulations.
§ 102-2. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of these regulations to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare, and to:
A. Protect human life, health and welfare;
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future;
C. Minimize flooding of water supply and sanitary sewage disposal
systems;
D. Maintain natural drainage;
E. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units and its residents, by discouraging unwise design and construction
of development in areas subject to flooding;
F. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
G. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
H. Minimize damage to public facilities and other utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges;
I. Reinforce that those who build in and occupy special flood hazard areas
should assume responsibility for their actions;
J. Minimize the impact of development on adjacent properties within and
near flood-prone areas;
K. Provide that the flood storage and conveyance functions of the
floodplain are maintained;
§ 102-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-2
1:121
L. Minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial
functions of the floodplain;
M. Prevent floodplain uses that are either hazardous or environmentally
incompatible; and
N. Meet community participation requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program as set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44
CFR 59.22.
§ 102-3. Areas to which these regulations apply.
These regulations shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the
jurisdiction of the Town of Elsmere, as identified in § 102-4.
§ 102-4. Basis for establishing special flood hazard areas.
A. For the purposes of these regulations, the following are adopted by
reference as a part of these regulations and serve as the basis for
establishing special flood hazard areas:
(1) The FEMA Flood Insurance Study for New Castle, Delaware, and
Incorporated Areas dated February 4, 2015, and all subsequent
amendments and/or the most recent revision thereof.
(2) The FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map for New Castle, Delaware,
and Incorporated Areas dated February 4, 2015, and all subsequent
amendments and/or the most recent revision thereof.
(3) Other hydrologic and hydraulic engineering studies and/or maps
prepared pursuant to these regulations or for other purposes, and
which establish base flood elevations, delineate one-hundred-year
floodplains, floodways or other areas of special flood hazard.
(4) The Town of Elsmere may identify and regulate new local flood
hazard or ponding areas. These areas should be delineated and
adopted on a Local Flood Hazard Map using best available
topographic data and locally derived information such as flood of
record, historic high-water marks or approximate study
methodologies.
(5) Where field-surveyed topography indicates that ground elevations
are below the closest applicable base flood elevation, even in areas
not delineated as a special flood hazard area on a flood hazard map,
the area shall be considered as a special flood hazard area.
B. Maps and studies that establish special flood hazard areas are on file
at the Town of Elsmere Code Enforcement Office, located at 11 Poplar
Avenue, Elsmere, Delaware 19805.
§ 102-5. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
These regulations are not intended to repeal or abrogate any existing
ordinances, including subdivision regulations, zoning ordinances or
building codes. In the event of a conflict between these regulations and any
other ordinance, the more restrictive shall govern. These regulations shall
not impair any deed restriction, covenant or easement, but the land subject
to such interests shall also be governed by these regulations.
§ 102-2 ELSMERE CODE § 102-6
1:122
§ 102-6. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of these regulations, all provisions
shall be:
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body;
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state
statutes; and
D. Where a provision of these regulations may be in conflict with a state or
federal law, such state or federal law shall take precedence, where more
restrictive.
§ 102-7. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by these regulations is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
These regulations do not imply that land outside of the special flood hazard
areas or uses that are permitted within such areas will be free from flooding
or flood damage. These regulations shall not create liability on the part
of the Town of Elsmere, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damage that results from
reliance on these regulations or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
§ 102-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-7
1:123

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 102-8. Terms defined.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in these
regulations shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have
in common usage and to give these regulations the most reasonable
application.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure on the same lot with, and of a
nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal structure.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated Zone AO on a community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map with a one-percent annual chance or greater of
flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined
channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and
where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by
ponding or sheet flow.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year; the base flood also is referred to as the onehundred-
year flood (or the one-percent-annual-chance flood).
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The water surface elevation of the base flood
in relation to the datum specified on the community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map. In areas of shallow flooding, the base flood elevation is the
natural grade elevation plus the depth number specified in feet on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, or at least two feet if the depth number is not
specified.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, placement
of manufactured homes, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or
materials.[Amended 3-11-2015 by Ord. No. 592]
DRY FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATE — The National Flood Insurance Program,
Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-33), used to document building
elevations and other information about buildings. When required to be
certified, the form shall be completed by a licensed professional land
surveyor.
§ 102-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-8
1:125
ENCLOSURE BELOW THE LOWEST FLOOR — An unfinished or floodresistant
enclosure usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or
storage, in an area other than a basement.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) — The federal
agency with the overall responsibility for administering the National Flood
Insurance Program.
FEMA TECHNICAL BULLETIN — A series of guidance documents published
by FEMA to provide guidance concerning building performance standards
of the National Flood Insurance Program. See sections where specific TBs
are identified.
FLOOD-DAMAGE-RESISTANT MATERIALS — Any construction material
capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters
without sustaining any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair.
See FEMA Technical Bulletin 2 – Flood Damage-Resistant Materials
Requirements and FEMA Technical Bulletin 8 – Corrosion Protection for
Metal Connectors in Coastal Areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated special flood
hazard areas to indicate the magnitude and nature of flood hazards, and to
designate applicable flood zones.
ZONE A — Special flood hazard areas inundated by the one-percentannual-
chance flood; base flood elevations are not determined.
A.
ZONE AE — Special flood hazard areas subject to inundation by the
one-percent-annual-chance flood; base flood elevations are determined;
floodways may or may not be determined.
B.
ZONE AO — Areas of shallow flooding, with or without a designated
average flood depth.
C.
ZONE X (SHADED) — Areas subject to inundation by the five-hundredyear
flood (two-tenths-percent annual chance); areas subject to the onepercent-
annual-chance flood with average depths of less than one foot
or with contributing drainage area less than one square mile; and areas
protected by levees from the base flood.
D.
ZONE X (UNSHADED) — Areas determined to be outside the onepercent-
annual-chance flood and outside the five-hundred-year
floodplain.
E.
ZONE VE — Special flood hazard areas subject to inundation by the
one-percent-annual-chance flood and subject to high-velocity wave
action (also referred to as "coastal high-hazard areas").
F.
LIMIT OF MODERATE WAVE ACTION (LMWA) — The inland limit of the
area affected by waves greater than 1.5 feet during the base flood. Base
flood conditions between the Zone VE and the LMWA will be similar to,
but less severe than, those in the Zone VE.
G.
§ 102-8 ELSMERE CODE § 102-8
1:126
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — The official report in which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency has provided flood profiles, floodway
information, and the water surface elevations.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water
from any source (see "flood or flooding").
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE — The National Flood Insurance
Program, Floodproofing Certificate for Non-Residential Structures (FEMA
Form 86-0-34), used by registered professional engineers and architects to
certify dry floodproofing designs.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to pass the base flood discharge
such that the cumulative increase in the water surface elevation of the base
flood discharge is no more than a designated height.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
elevation for the purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends
to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to
flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood
and floodway conditions, such as wave action, obstructed bridge openings,
debris and ice jams, and the hydrologic effect of urbanization in a
watershed.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water; the term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are
necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship
building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or
related manufacturing facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
Individually listed in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the United States Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register; or
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district.
B.
§ 102-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-8
1:127
HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC ENGINEERING ANALYSIS — An analysis
performed by a professional engineer, licensed in the State of Delaware,
in accordance with standard engineering practices as accepted by FEMA,
used to determine the base flood, other frequency floods, flood elevations,
floodway information and boundaries, and flood profiles.
LETTER OF MAP CHANGE — A Letter of Map Change is an official FEMA
determination, by letter, to amend or revise an effective Flood Insurance
Rate Map, Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and Flood Insurance Study.
Letters of Map Change include:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement) of a structure. This definition excludes an enclosure below the
lowest floor which is an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure usable solely
for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, provided that such enclosure is built in accordance with the
applicable design requirements specified in these regulations for enclosures
below the lowest floor.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Buildings and structures for which the start of
construction commenced on or after December 31, 1976, including any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA) — An amendment based on
technical data showing that a property was inadvertently included in
a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current
effective Flood Insurance Rate Map and establishes that a specific
property is not located in a special flood hazard area.
A.
LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR) — A revision based on technical
data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, floodplain
and floodway delineations, and plan metric features. One common type
of LOMR, a Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F), is a
determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by
fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer exposed
to flooding associated with the base flood; in order to qualify for this
determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in
accordance with these regulations.
B.
CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR) — A formal
review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project
complies with the minimum National Flood Insurance Program
requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special
flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not amend or revise effective Flood
Insurance Rate Maps, Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps, or Flood
Insurance Studies; upon submission to and approval of certified as-built
documentation, a Letter of Map Revision may be issued.
C.
§ 102-8 ELSMERE CODE § 102-8
1:128
PERSON — An individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership,
association, or any other entity, including state and local governments and
agencies.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is built on a single chassis,
400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection,
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck,
and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — The land in the floodplain subject to
a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special
flood hazard areas are designated by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency in Flood Insurance Studies and on Flood Insurance Rate Maps as
Zones A, AE, AO, and Zone VE. The term includes areas shown on other
flood hazard maps that are specifically listed or otherwise described in
§ 102-4.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date of issuance of permits for new
construction and substantial improvements, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual
start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation
of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers,
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory structures, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.
STRUCTURE (OR BUILDING) — For floodplain management purposes, a
walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is
principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
§ 102-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-8
1:129
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified
prior to the application for a development permit by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe
living conditions.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in these regulations
is presumed to be in violation until such time that documentation is
provided.
§ 102-8 ELSMERE CODE § 102-8
1:130
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 102-9. Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
A. The Town Manager is hereby appointed to administer and implement
these regulations and is referred to herein as the "Floodplain
Administrator." The Floodplain Administrator is authorized to:
(1) Fulfill the duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations;
(2) Delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations to
qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and other
employees; or
(3) Enter into a written agreement or written contract with another
jurisdiction or agency, or private sector entity to administer specific
provisions of these regulations.
B. Administration of any part of these regulations by another entity shall
not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to the
participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as
set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 CFR 59.22.
§ 102-10. Duties and Responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include
but are not limited to:
A. Review applications for permits to determine whether proposed
activities will be located in special flood hazard areas.
B. Interpret floodplain boundaries and provide flood elevation and flood
hazard information.
C. Review applications to determine whether proposed activities will be
reasonably safe from flooding.
D. Review applications to determine whether all necessary permits have
been obtained from those federal, state or local agencies from which
prior or concurrent approval is required.
E. Verify that applicants proposing to alter or relocate a watercourse have
notified adjacent communities and the Delaware Department of Natural
Resources and Environmental Control (Division of Watershed
Stewardship), and have submitted copies of such notifications to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
F. Issue permits to develop in special flood hazard areas when the
provisions of these regulations have been met, or disapprove the same
in the event of noncompliance.
G. Inspect buildings and lands to determine compliance with these
regulations or to determine if noncompliance has occurred or violations
have been committed.
H. Review submitted elevation certificates for completeness.
I. Submit to FEMA data and information necessary to maintain flood
hazard maps, including hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses
prepared by or for the Town of Elsmere, corrections to labeling or plan
metric details, etc.
J. Maintain and permanently keep all records for public inspection that
are necessary for the administration of these regulations, including
§ 102-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-10
1:131
Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Letters of Map Amendment and Revision,
records of issuance and denial of permits, determinations of whether
development is in or out of special flood hazard areas for the purpose
of issuing permits, elevation certificates, other required certifications,
variances, and records of enforcement actions taken for violations of
these regulations.
K. Enforce the provisions of these regulations.
L. Assist with and coordinate flood hazard map maintenance activities.
M. Conduct determinations as to whether existing buildings and structures
damaged by any cause and located in special flood hazard areas have
been substantially damaged.
N. Make reasonable efforts to notify owners of substantially damaged
buildings and structures of the need to obtain a permit prior to repair,
rehabilitation, or reconstruction, and to prohibit the noncompliant
repair of substantially damaged buildings except for temporary
emergency protective measures necessary to secure a property or
stabilize a structure to prevent additional damage.
O. Undertake, as determined appropriate by the Floodplain Administrator
due to the circumstances, other actions which may include but are not
limited to: issuing press releases, public service announcements, and
other public information materials related to permit requests and repair
of damaged structures; coordinating with other federal, state, and local
agencies to assist with substantial damage determinations; providing
owners of damaged structures materials and other information related
to the proper repair of damaged structures in special flood hazard areas;
and assisting owners with National Flood Insurance Program claims for
increased cost of compliance payments.
P. Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency when the corporate
boundaries of the Town of Elsmere have been modified.
§ 102-11. Permits required.
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to begin construction or other
development which is wholly within or partially within any identified special
flood hazard area, as established in § 102-4, including but not limited to,
subdivision of land, filling, grading, or other site improvements and utility
installations; construction, alteration, replacement, reconstruction,
relocation, or expansion of any building or structure; placement or
replacement of a manufactured home; recreational vehicles; installation
or replacement of storage tanks; or alteration of any watercourse, until a
permit is obtained from the Town of Elsmere. No such permit shall be issued
until the requirements of these regulations have been met.
§ 102-12. Application required.
Application for a permit shall be made by the owner of the property or
his/her authorized agent, herein referred to as the "applicant," prior to the
actual start of construction. The application shall be on a form furnished for
that purpose.
A. Application contents. At a minimum, applications shall include:
§ 102-10 ELSMERE CODE § 102-12
1:132
(1) Site plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions,
existing and proposed topography of the area in question, the limits
of any portion of the site that was previously filled, and the location
of existing and proposed structures, excavation, filling, storage of
materials, drainage facilities, and other proposed activities.
(2) Elevation of the existing natural ground where structures are
proposed, referenced to the datum on the Flood Insurance Rate Map,
and an elevation certificate that shows the ground elevation and
proposed building elevations (identified in Section C of the elevation
certificate as "construction drawings").
(3) Delineation of special flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries, flood
zones, and base flood elevations. Where surveyed natural ground
elevations are lower than the base flood elevations, base flood
elevations shall be used to delineate the boundary of special flood
hazard areas. If proposed, changes in the delineation of special
flood hazard areas shall be submitted to and approved by FEMA
in accordance with § 102-12B. Where special flood hazard areas
are not delineated or base flood elevations are not shown on the
flood hazard maps, the Floodplain Administrator has the authority to
require the applicant to use information provided by the Floodplain
Administrator, information that is available from other sources, or to
determine such information using accepted engineering practices.
(4) For subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at
least 50 lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, and
where base flood elevations are not shown on Flood Insurance Rate
Maps, hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses and studies as
required by § 102-18D.
(5) Such other material and information as may be requested by the
Floodplain Administrator necessary to determine conformance with
these regulations.
(6) For work on an existing structure, including any improvement,
addition, repairs, alterations, rehabilitation, or reconstruction, the
floodplain manager shall determine the minimum information
required for the application that may include:
(a) Documentation of the market value of the structure before the
improvement is started or before the damage occurred.
(b) Documentation of the actual cash value of all proposed
improvement work, or the actual cash value of all work necessary
to repair and restore damage to the before-damaged condition,
regardless of the amount of work that will be performed.
(7) Certifications and/or technical analyses prepared or conducted by an
appropriate design professional licensed in the State of Delaware,
as appropriate to the type of development activity proposed and
required by these regulations:
(a) Floodproofing certificate for dry-floodproofed nonresidential
structures, as required in § 102-27.
(b) Certification that flood openings that do not meet the minimum
requirements of § 102-26B(3)(b) are designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces.
§ 102-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-12
1:133
(c) Technical analyses to document that the flood-carrying capacity
of any watercourse alteration or relocation will not be diminished
and documentation of maintenance assurances as required in
§ 102-29C.
(d) Hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses demonstrating
that the cumulative effect of proposed development, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development,
will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
by more than one foot in special flood hazard areas where the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has provided base
flood elevations but has not delineated a floodway, as required by
§ 102-29B.
(e) Hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses of any
development proposed to be located in an identified floodway, as
required by § 102-29A.
(f) Hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses to develop base
flood elevations for subdivisions and large-lot developments, as
required by § 102-18D or otherwise required by the Floodplain
Administrator.
B. Right to submit new technical data. The applicant has the right to seek
a Letter of Map Change and to submit new technical data to FEMA
regarding base maps, topography, special flood hazard area boundaries,
floodway boundaries, and base flood elevations. Such submissions shall
be prepared in a format acceptable by FEMA, and the Floodplain
Administrator shall be notified of such submittal. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
C. Requirement to submit new technical data. The Floodplain Administrator
shall notify FEMA of physical changes affecting flood hazard areas and
flooding conditions by submitting technical or scientific data as soon as
practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information
becomes available. The Floodplain Administrator has the authority to
require applicants to submit technical data to FEMA for Letters of Map
Change.
§ 102-13. Review, approval or disapproval.
A. Review. The Floodplain Administrator shall:
(1) Review applications for development in special flood hazard areas to
determine the completeness of information submitted. The applicant
shall be notified of incompleteness or additional information
required to support the application.
(2) Review applications for compliance with these regulations after all
information required in § 102-12 or identified and required by the
Floodplain Administrator has been received.
(3) Review all permit applications to assure that all necessary permits
have been received from those federal, state or local governmental
agencies from which prior approval is required. The applicant shall
be responsible for obtaining such permits, including but not limited
to:
§ 102-12 ELSMERE CODE § 102-13
1:134
(a) Permits issued by the United States Army Corps of Engineers
under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act7 and Section
404 of the Clean Water Act,8 and the Delaware Environmental
Protection Agency under Section 401 of the Clean Water Act.
(b) Permits required by the State of Delaware.
B. Approval or disapproval. The Floodplain Administrator shall approve
applications that comply with the applicable requirements of these
regulations. The Floodplain Administrator shall disapprove applications
for proposed development that do not comply with the applicable
provisions of these regulations and shall notify the applicant of such
disapproval, in writing, stating the reasons for disapproval.
C. Expiration of permit. A permit is valid, provided the actual start of
construction occurs within 180 days of the date of permit issuance. If the
actual start of construction is not within 180 days of the date of permit
issuance, requests for extensions shall be submitted in writing. Upon
reviewing the request and the permit for continued compliance with
these regulations, the Floodplain Administrator may grant, in writing,
one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each.
§ 102-14. Inspections.
The Floodplain Administrator shall make periodic inspections of
development permitted in special flood hazard areas, at appropriate times
throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance. Such
inspections may include:
A. Stake-out inspection, to determine location on the site relative to the
special flood hazard area and floodway.
B. Foundation inspection, upon placement of the lowest floor and prior to
further vertical construction, to collect information or certification of the
elevation of the lowest floor.
C. Enclosure inspection, including crawl spaces, to determine compliance
with applicable provisions.
D. Utility inspection, upon installation of specified equipment and
appliances, to determine appropriate location with respect to the base
flood elevation.
E. Storage of materials.
§ 102-15. Submissions required prior to issuance of certificate of
occupancy.
The following certifications are required to be submitted by the permittee
for development that is permitted in special flood hazard areas prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy:
A. For new or substantially improved residential structures or
nonresidential structures that have been elevated, an elevation
certificate that shows the ground elevation and finished elevations
7. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 403.
8. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
§ 102-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-15
1:135
(identified in Section C of the elevation certificate as "finished
construction").
B. For nonresidential structures that have been dry-floodproofed, a
floodproofing certificate based on "finished construction" (identified in
Section II of the floodproofing certificate).
C. For all development activities subject to the requirements of § 102-12B,
a Letter of Map Revision shall be provided.
§ 102-16. Flood Insurance Rate Map use and interpretation.
The Floodplain Administrator shall make interpretations, where needed, as
to the exact location of special flood hazard areas, floodplain boundaries,
and floodway boundaries. The following shall apply to the use and
interpretation of special flood hazard maps and data:
A. In FEMA-identified special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation
and floodway data have not been identified and in areas where FEMA
has not identified special flood hazard areas, any other flood hazard
data available from a federal, state, or other source shall be reviewed
and reasonably used. When a Preliminary Flood Insurance Rate Map
has been provided by FEMA to identify base flood elevation where such
elevations were not previously shown, the base flood elevations on the
Preliminary Flood Insurance Rate Map shall be used.
B. Special flood hazard area delineations, base flood elevations, and
floodway boundaries on FEMA maps and in FEMA studies shall take
precedence over delineations, base flood elevations, and floodway
boundaries by any other source that reflect a reduced special flood
hazard area, reduced floodway width and/or lower base flood elevations.
C. Other sources of data shall be reasonably used, with the approval of the
Floodplain Administrator, if they show increased base flood elevations
and/or larger floodway areas than are shown on FEMA flood maps and
studies.
D. Where field-surveyed topography indicates that ground elevations are
below the base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special
flood hazard on a flood hazard map, the area shall be considered as a
special flood hazard area.
§ 102-15 ELSMERE CODE § 102-16
1:136
ARTICLE IV
Requirements in All Special Flood Hazard Areas
§ 102-17. Application of requirements.
The general requirements of this section apply to all development proposed
within special flood hazard areas identified in § 102-4.
§ 102-18. Subdivisions and developments.
A. All subdivision and development proposals shall be consistent with the
need to minimize flood damage and are subject to all applicable
standards in these regulations.
B. All subdivision and development proposals shall have utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
C. All subdivision and development proposals shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.
D. All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least
50 lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in FEMA-delineated
special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data are not
available, shall be supported by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
analyses that determine base flood elevations and floodway delineations.
The analyses shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer in
a format required by FEMA for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision
or Letter of Map Revision. Submittal requirements and processing fees
shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
§ 102-19. Protection of water supply and sanitary sewage systems.
A. New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems.
B. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into systems and
discharges from systems into floodwaters.
C. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
or contamination from them during conditions of flooding.
§ 102-20. Buildings and structures.
All new construction of buildings and structures, including placement of
manufactured homes and substantial improvements to existing buildings
and structures, that are to be located, in whole or in part, in special flood
hazard areas shall meet the following requirements.
A. Be designed (or modified) and constructed to safely resist flood loads.
The construction shall provide a complete load path capable of
transferring all loads from their point of origin through the load-resisting
elements to the foundation. Buildings and structures shall be designed,
connected and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or permanent lateral
movement due to structural loads and stresses from flooding equal to the
base flood elevation, including hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads and
the effects of buoyancy.
§ 102-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-20
1:137
B. Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
C. Use flood-damage-resistant materials below the elevation of the lowest
floor. See FEMA Technical Bulletin 2 — Flood Damage-Resistant
Materials Requirements and FEMA Technical Bulletin 8 — Corrosion
Protection for Metal Connectors in Coastal Areas.
D. Have electrical systems, equipment and components, and heating,
ventilating, air-conditioning, and plumbing appliances, plumbing
fixtures, duct systems, and other service equipment located at or above
the base flood elevation plus 12 inches. Electrical wiring systems are
permitted to be located below the elevation of the lowest floor, provided
they conform to the provisions of the electrical part of this code for wet
locations. If replaced as part of a substantial improvement, electrical
systems, equipment and components, and heating, ventilation, airconditioning,
and plumbing appliances, plumbing fixtures, duct systems,
and other service equipment shall meet the requirements of this section.
See FEMA Technical Bulletin 4 — Elevator Installation.
E. As an alternative to § 102-20D, electrical systems, equipment and
components, and heating, ventilating, air-conditioning, and plumbing
appliances, plumbing fixtures, duct systems, and other service
equipment are permitted to be located below the elevation of the lowest
floor, provided that they are designed and installed to prevent water
from entering or accumulating within the components and to resist
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses, including the effects
of buoyancy, during the occurrence of the base flood.
F. Meet the specific requirements of Article V.
G. In a special flood hazard area with more than one designation (Zones
A, AE, and AO, floodway), meet the requirements of the most restrictive
designation.
§ 102-21. Fill.
A. Disposal of fill, including but not limited to rubble, construction debris,
woody debris, and trash, shall not be permitted in special flood hazard
areas.
B. Where permitted by Article V (Zones A, AE, and AO), fill placed for the
purpose of raising the ground level and to support a building or structure
shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Extend laterally from the building footprint to provide for adequate
access, as a function of use; the Floodplain Administrator may seek
advice from the State Fire Marshal's office and/or the local fire
services agency.
(2) Placed and compacted to provide for stability under conditions of
rising and falling floodwaters and resistance to erosion, scour, and
settling.
(3) Consist of soil or rock materials only.
(4) Sloped no steeper than one vertical on two horizontal, unless
approved by the Floodplain Administrator.
(5) Designed with provisions for adequate drainage and no adverse
effect on adjacent properties.
§ 102-20 ELSMERE CODE § 102-21
1:138
C. Fill placed for a purpose other than to support a building or structure
shall meet the requirements of § 102-21B(2) through (5).
§ 102-22. Historic structures.
Repair, alteration, or rehabilitation of historic structures shall be subject to
the requirements of these regulations unless a determination is made that
compliance with these regulations will preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and a variance is granted in accordance
with Article VI and such variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.
§ 102-23. Recreational vehicles.
A. Recreational vehicles in special flood hazard areas shall be fully licensed
and ready for highway use, and shall be placed on a site for less than 180
consecutive days.
B. Recreational vehicles that are not fully licensed and ready for highway
use, or that are to be placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive
days, shall meet the requirements of § 102-26C for manufactured homes.
§ 102-24. Gas or liquid storage tanks.
A. Underground tanks in special flood hazard areas shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of
the base flood.
B. Aboveground tanks in special flood hazard areas shall be elevated and
anchored to or above the base flood elevation plus 12 inches or shall be
anchored at grade and designed and constructed to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of
the base flood.
C. In special flood hazard areas, tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents
shall be:
(1) At or above the base flood elevation or fitted with covers designed
to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the
tanks during conditions of the base flood.
(2) Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic
and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during
conditions of the base flood.
§ 102-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-24
1:139

ARTICLE V
Specific Requirements in Special Flood Hazard Areas
§ 102-25. General requirements.
In addition to the general requirements of Article IV, the requirements of
this section apply to all development proposed in special flood hazard areas.
§ 102-26. Residential structures and residential portions of mixeduse
structures.
A. Elevation requirements.
(1) The lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated to or above
the base flood elevation plus 12 inches.
(2) In areas of shallow flooding (Zone AO), the lowest floor (including
basement) shall be elevated at least as high above the highest
adjacent grade as the depth number specified in feet on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map plus 12 inches, or at least two feet plus 12
inches if a depth number is not specified; adequate drainage paths
shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from the
structure.
(3) Enclosures below the lowest floor shall meet the requirements of
§ 102-26B.
B. Enclosures below the lowest floor.
(1) Enclosures below the lowest floor shall be used solely for parking of
vehicles, building access, crawl spaces, or limited storage.
(2) Enclosures below the lowest floor shall be constructed using flooddamage-
resistant materials. See FEMA Technical Bulletin 2 — Flood
Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements.
(3) Enclosures below the lowest floor (including crawl spaces) shall be
provided with flood openings which shall meet the following criteria
(see FEMA Technical Bulletin 1 — Openings in Foundation Walls and
Walls of Enclosures):
(a) There shall be a minimum of two openings on different sides of
each enclosed area; if a building has more than one enclosed
area below the base flood elevation, each area shall have
openings on exterior walls.
(b) The total net area of all openings shall be at least one square
inch for each square foot of enclosed area, or the openings shall
be designed and certified by a registered engineer or architect
to provide for equalization of hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(c) The bottom of each opening shall be one foot or less above the
adjacent ground level.
(d) Any louvers, screens or other opening covers shall allow the
automatic flow of floodwaters into and out of the enclosed area.
(e) Where installed in doors and windows, openings that meet
requirements of § 102-26B(3)(a) through (d), are acceptable;
however, doors and windows without installed openings do not
meet the requirements of this section.
§ 102-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-26
1:141
(4) Crawl spaces shall have the finished interior ground level equal to or
higher than the outside finished ground level on at least one entire
side of the foundation wall.
C. Manufactured homes.
(1) New or replacement manufactured homes, including substantial
improvement of existing manufactured homes, shall:
(a) Be elevated on a permanent, reinforced foundation that raises
the lowest floor to or above the base flood elevation plus 12
inches and is otherwise in accordance with § 102-26A.
(b) Be installed in accordance with the anchor and tie-down
requirements of the building code or the manufacturer's written
installation instructions and specifications.
(c) Have enclosures below the elevated manufactured home, if any,
meet the requirements of § 102-26B.
(2) For the purpose of this requirement, the lowest floor of a
manufactured home is the bottom of the lowest horizontal
supporting member of the lowest floor.
§ 102-27. Nonresidential structures and nonresidential portions of
mixed-use structures.
A. Elevation requirements.
(1) The lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated to or above
the base flood elevation plus 12 inches or the structure shall be dryfloodproofed
in accordance with § 102-27B.
(2) In areas of shallow flooding (Zone AO), if not dry-floodproofed, the
lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least as high
above the highest adjacent grade as the depth number specified in
feet on the Flood Insurance Rate Map plus 12 inches, or at least
two feet plus 12 inches if a depth number is not specified; adequate
drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and
away from the structure.
(3) Enclosures below the lowest floor, if not dry floodproofed, shall meet
the requirements of Section 5.2(B).
B. Dry-floodproofing requirements. Dry-floodproofed structures, together
with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
(1) Be designed to be dry-floodproofed such that the structure is
watertight with walls and floors substantially impermeable to the
passage of water to the level of the base flood elevation plus 12
inches. In areas of shallow flooding (Zone AO), the structure shall be
dry floodproofed at least as high above the highest adjacent grade as
the depth number specified in feet on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
plus 12 inches, or at least two feet plus 12 inches if a depth number
is not specified.
(2) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(3) Be certified by a licensed professional engineer or licensed
professional architect with a floodproofing certificate, that the
design and methods of construction meet the requirements of this
§ 102-26 ELSMERE CODE § 102-27
1:142
section. Refer to FEMA Technical Bulletin 3 — Non-Residential
Floodproofing — Requirements and Certification for guidance.
§ 102-28. Accessory structures.
A. Accessory structures shall meet the requirements of these regulations.
Accessory structures that have a footprint of no more than 200 square
feet may be allowed without requiring elevation or floodproofing,
provided such structures meet all of the following requirements:
(1) Usable only for parking or limited storage;
(2) Constructed with flood-damage-resistant materials below the base
flood elevation;
(3) Constructed and placed to offer the minimum resistance to the flow
of floodwaters;
(4) Firmly anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement;
(5) Electrical service and mechanical equipment elevated to or above
the level of the base flood elevation plus 12 inches; and
(6) Equipped with flood openings that meet the requirements of Section
5.2(B).
B. For guidance, see FEMA Technical Bulletin 7 — Wet Floodproofing
Requirements.
§ 102-29. Protection of flood-carrying capacity.
A. Development in floodways.
(1) Within any floodway area designated on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development shall be permitted unless it has
been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
analysis that the proposed encroachment would not result in any
increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence
of the base flood discharge. Such technical data shall be submitted
to the Floodplain Administrator and to FEMA. The analyses shall be
prepared by a licensed professional engineer in a format required
by FEMA for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision or Letter of Map
Revision. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the
responsibility of the applicant.
(2) The proposed development activity may be permitted if the analyses
demonstrate that the activity:
(a) Will not result in any increase in the base flood elevation; or
(b) Will result in an increase in the base flood elevation, provided a
Conditional Letter of Map Revision has been issued by FEMA and
the applicant completes all of the following:
[1] Submits technical data required in § 102-12A(7)(d);
[2] Evaluates alternatives which would not result in increased
base flood elevations and an explanation why these
alternatives are not feasible;
[3] Certifies that no structures are located in areas which would
be impacted by the increased base flood elevation;
§ 102-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-29
1:143
[4] Documents that individual legal notices have been delivered
to all impacted property owners to explain the impact of the
proposed action on their properties;
[5] Requests and receives concurrence of the Floodplain
Administrator of the Town of Elsmere and the Chief
Executive Officer of any other community impacted by the
proposed actions; and
[6] Notifies the Delaware Department of Natural Resources and
Environmental Control (Division of Watershed Stewardship).
B. Development in areas with base flood elevations but no floodways.
(1) For development activities in a special flood hazard area with base
flood elevations but no designated floodways, the applicant shall
develop hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses and technical
data reflecting the proposed activity and shall submit such analyses
and data to the Floodplain Administrator and to FEMA. The analyses
shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer in a format
required by FEMA for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision or Letter
of Map Revision. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall
be the responsibility of the applicant.
(2) The proposed development activity may be permitted if the analyses
demonstrate that the cumulative effect of the proposed development
activity, when combined with all other existing and potential special
flood hazard area encroachments, will not increase the base flood
elevation more than 1.0 foot at any point.
C. Deliberate alterations of a watercourse.
(1) For the purpose of these regulations, a watercourse is deliberately
altered when a person causes a change to occur within its banks.
Deliberate changes to a watercourse include, but are not limited
to widening, deepening or relocating of the channel; installation of
culverts; construction of bridges, and excavation or filling of the
channel or watercourse banks.
(2) For any proposed deliberate alteration of a watercourse, the
applicant shall develop hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
analyses and technical data reflecting such changes and submit such
technical data to the Floodplain Administrator and to FEMA. The
analyses shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer in a
format required by FEMA for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision or
Letter of Map Revision. Submittal requirements and processing fees
shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
(3) The proposed alteration of a watercourse may be permitted upon
submission, by the applicant, of the following:
(a) Documentation of compliance with § 102-29A if the alteration is
in a floodway or § 102-29B if the alteration is in a watercourse
with base flood elevations but no floodway.
(b) A description of the extent to which the watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development.
(c) A certification by a licensed professional engineer that the
bankful flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be
diminished.
§ 102-29 ELSMERE CODE § 102-29
1:144
(d) Evidence that adjacent communities, the United States Army
Corps of Engineers, and the Delaware Department of Natural
Resources and Environmental Control (Division of Watershed
Stewardship) have been notified of the proposal and evidence
that such notifications have been submitted to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
(e) Evidence that the applicant shall be responsible for providing
the necessary maintenance for the altered or relocated portion
of the watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity will not
be diminished. The Floodplain Administrator may require the
permit holder to enter into an agreement with the Town of
Elsmere specifying the maintenance responsibilities; if an
agreement is required, the permit shall be conditioned to require
that the agreement be recorded on the deed of the property
which shall be binding on future owners.
§ 102-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-29
1:145

ARTICLE VI
Variances
§ 102-30. Variance authorization and requirements.
The Town of Elsmere Board of Adjustment shall have the power to
authorize, in specific cases, such variances from the requirements of these
regulations, not inconsistent with federal regulations, as will not be
contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions of the lot
or parcel, a literal enforcement of the provisions of these regulations would
result in unnecessary hardship.
A. Application for a variance.
(1) Any owner, or agent thereof, of property for which a variance is
sought shall submit an application for a variance to the Floodplain
Administrator.
(2) At a minimum, such application shall contain the following
information: name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;
legal description of the property; parcel map; description of the
existing use; description of the proposed use; location of the
floodplain; description of the variance sought; and reason for the
variance request. Each variance application shall specifically
address each of the considerations in § 102-30B and the limitations
and conditions of § 102-30C.
B. Considerations for variances. In considering variance applications, the
Board of Adjustment shall consider and make findings of fact on all
evaluations, all relevant factors, requirements specified in other sections
of these regulations, and the following factors:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed development and its contents (if
applicable) to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the
individual owner.
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
development to the community.
(5) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to, or are subject to less, flooding or erosion
damage.
(6) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable, or if the facility is a functionally dependent use.
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development.
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for
that area.
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
(10) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site.
§ 102-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-30
1:147
(11) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and
streets and bridges.
C. Limitations for variances.
(1) An affirmative decision on a variance request shall only be issued
upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause. A good and sufficient
cause is one that deals solely with the physical characteristics
of the property and cannot be based on the character of the
planned construction or substantial improvement, the personal
characteristics of the owner or inhabitants, or local provisions
that regulate standards other than health and public safety
standards.
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the
property.
(c) Increased cost or inconvenience of meeting the requirements of
these regulations does not constitute an exceptional hardship to
the applicant.
(d) A determination that the granting of a variance for development
within any designated floodway, or special flood hazard area with
base flood elevations but no floodway, will not result in increased
flood heights beyond that which is allowed in these regulations.
(e) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
additional threats to public safety; extraordinary public expense,
nuisances, fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with
existing local laws.
(f) A determination that the structure or other development is
protected by methods to minimize flood damages.
(g) A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(2) Upon consideration of the individual circumstances, the limitations
and conditions, and the purposes of these regulations, the Board
of Adjustment may attach such conditions to variances as it deems
necessary to further the purposes of these regulations.
(3) The Board of Adjustment shall notify, in writing, any applicant to
whom a variance is granted for a building or structure with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation that the variance is to
the floodplain management requirements of these regulations only,
and that the cost of federal flood insurance will be commensurate
with the increased risk.
§ 102-30 ELSMERE CODE § 102-30
1:148
ARTICLE VII
Enforcement
§ 102-31. Compliance required.
A. No structure or land development shall hereafter be located, erected,
constructed, reconstructed, repaired, extended, converted, enlarged or
altered without full compliance with these regulations and all other
applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of
these regulations.
B. Failure to obtain a permit shall be a violation of these regulations and
shall be punishable in accordance with § 102-33.
C. Permits issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the
Floodplain Administrator authorize only the specific activities set forth
in such approved plans and applications or amendments thereto. Use,
arrangement, or construction of such specific activities that is contrary
to that authorized shall be deemed a violation of these regulations.
§ 102-32. Notice of violation.
A. A notice of violation that a prohibited conduct has occurred at a location
shall be served by placing into the United States mail a notice of the
violation and mailing same to the last known address of the owner of said
property.
B. The notice must contain the following:
(1) A statement of the date or dates upon which the prohibited conduct
occurred at the property.
(2) The nature of the prohibited conduct and a directive that such
conduct be abated within five days of the mailing of said notice.
§ 102-33. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall pay a fine of not
less than $100 nor more than $300.
§ 102-34. Applicability.
For the purposes of jurisdictional applicability, this chapter shall apply
in the Town of Elsmere. This chapter shall apply to all applications for
development, including building permit applications and subdivision
proposals, submitted on or after February 4, 2015.
§ 102-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-34
1:149
Chapter 103
FLOODPLAIN, NOTIFICATION OF LESSEES IN
§ 103-1. Lease to include flood level information.
Every lease for property which is to be used as a residence and any part
of which is located below the base flood level within the Floodplain District
shall be in writing. The lease shall contain conspicuous language informing
the lessee that the residential property or any part thereof is located below
the base flood level within the Floodplain District, as defined in Ordinance
No. 124.9 Language shall be deemed to be "conspicuous" if it is in larger or
other contrasting type or color than the remainder of the lease.
§ 103-2. Rights of lessee.
If any lease fails to include the notification required by § 103-1 of this
chapter, the lessee shall be permitted to remove himself from the leased
premises without incurring any penalty for terminating the lease prior to
its expiration. In addition, if the lessee sustains any loss or injury to person
or property due to flooding and the notification required by § 103-1 of this
chapter was not supplied, the lessor shall be absolutely liable for any such
loss or injury.
§ 103-3. Vacation of premises. [Amended 5-30-1996 by Ord. No.
326]
If any lease fails to include the notification required by § 103-1 of this
chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer of the Town of Elsmere is
empowered to order said premises vacated.
§ 103-4. Violations and penalties. [Added 9-18-2003 by Ord. No.
420]
Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter shall be
fined a maximum of $100.
Chapter 107
GARAGE AND SIDEWALK SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 159. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 192.
9. Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Zoning.
§ 102-34 ELSMERE CODE § 107-1
1:150
§ 107-1. Notice of intent to sell; number of sales per year restricted.
[Amended 4-4-1992 by Ord. No. 284; 9-9-1999 by Ord. No. 376]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, transient merchant,
hawker or peddler to vend, sell, dispose or offer to vend, sell, dispose
or display any goods, wares and merchandise on any public walk, private
property, street, alley or anywhere within the Town of Elsmere more than
four times a year, and without having first notified the Town Manager of the
Town of Elsmere.
§ 107-2. Requirements. [Amended 1-15-1981 by Ord. No. 151;
4-14-1992 by Ord. No. 284; 9-9-1999 by Ord. No. 376]
The notice of intent to vend, sell, dispose or display merchandise, goods
and wares shall be made to the Town Manager. The notice shall contain
the name of the applicant, if an individual, the names of partners, if a
copartnership, or the names of the principal officers, if a corporation, and
shall include the location of the place or places where such merchandise,
goods and wares are to be so displayed and sold.
§ 107-3. (Reserved)10
§ 107-4. Blocking of streets and passageways.
No street or alley shall be blocked by any merchandise offered for sale
hereunder. A four-foot passageway for pedestrians shall be left open, and
merchandise shall be securely and adequately placed so that it will not
endanger passersby or fall or extrude into any street or alley. Such sales
shall not be operated in any manner which would cause a nuisance or create
a fire hazard.
§ 107-5. Inspection by Manager.
The Town Manager shall make or cause to be made sufficient inspections to
ensure the compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 107-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-14-1992 by Ord. No.
284; 9-10-2015 by Ord. No. 600]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall
be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500 for each offense, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which
a violation occurs or continues.
10.Editor's Note: Former § 107-3, License fee; exemptions, as amended, was repealed
9-9-1999 by Ord. No. 376.
§ 107-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 107-6
1:151
§ 107-7. (Reserved)11
Chapter 110
GRAFFITI
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 87.
§ 110-1. Intent.
The Mayor and Council intends, through the adoption of this chapter, to
provide additional enforcement tools to protect public and private property
from acts of graffiti vandalism and defacement. The Council does not intend
for this chapter to conflict with any existing anti-graffiti state laws.
§ 110-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GRAFFITI — Any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting or other
defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn,
painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or
private property by any graffiti implement, to the extent that the graffiti
was not authorized in advance by the owner or occupant of the property,
or, despite advance authorization, is otherwise deemed a public nuisance by
the Hearing Officer as established § 110-7D(1) of this chapter.
GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT — An aerosol paint container, a broad-tipped
marker, gum label, paint stick or graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush or
any other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any natural
or man-made surface.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18.
§ 110-3. Prohibited acts.
A. Defacement. It shall be unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to any
natural or man-made surface, on any Town-owned property, or without
the permission of the owner or occupant, or on any non-Town-owned
property, or upon private property when in the opinion of the Code
Enforcement Officer, is inconsistent with the character of the
neighborhood or is otherwise deemed a public nuisance by the Hearing
Officer as established § 110-7D(1) of this chapter.
B. Possession of graffiti implements.
(1) By minors at or near school facilities.
11.Editor's Note: Former § 107-7, Restrictions on issuance of licenses, was repealed 9-9-1999
by Ord. No. 376.
§ 107-6 ELSMERE CODE § 110-3
1:152
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years
to possess any graffiti implement while on any school property,
grounds, facilities, buildings, or structures, or within 1,000 feet
of those specific locations or upon public property, or upon
private property without the prior written consent of the owner
or occupant of such private property.
(b) The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the possession
of broad-tipped markers by a minor attending or traveling to
or from a school at which the minor is enrolled if the minor is
participating in a class at the school that formally requires the
possession of broad-tipped markers. Additionally, a minor who is
an employee of a person who or which is a vendor of a graffiti
device may, in the course of his/her duties, possess such device
for the lawful purpose of sale or transfer of the device while the
minor is on the employer's place of business. The burden of proof
in any prosecution for violation of this section shall be upon the
minor or student to establish the need to possess a broad-tipped
marker or graffiti device.
(2) In designated public places. It shall be unlawful for any person to
possess any graffiti implement while in or upon any public facility,
park, playground, swimming pool, recreational facility, or other
public building or structure owned or operated by the Town or while
in or within 500 feet of an underpass, bridge abutment, storm drain,
or similar types of infrastructure unless otherwise authorized by the
Town.
§ 110-4. Accessibility to graffiti implements.
A. Furnishing graffiti implements to minors prohibited. It shall be unlawful
for any person, other than a parent or legal guardian, to sell, exchange,
give, loan, or otherwise furnish, or cause or permit to be exchanged,
given, loaned, or otherwise furnished, any aerosol paint container,
broad-tipped marker, or paint stick to any person under the age of 18
years without the written consent of the parents or guardian of the
person.
B. Display and storage.
(1) Every person who owns, conducts, operates, or manages a retail
commercial establishment selling aerosol paint containers, paint
sticks, or broad-tipped markers shall store the containers, sticks or
markers in an area continuously observable, through direct visual
observation or surveillance equipment, by employees of the retail
establishment during the regular course of business.
(2) In the event that a commercial retail establishment is unable to store
the aerosol paint containers, paint sticks, or broad-tipped markers
in an area as provided above, the establishment shall store the
containers, sticks, and markers in an area not accessible to the
public in the regular course of business without employee assistance.
C. Signage required.
(1) Every person who operates a retail commercial establishment selling
graffiti implements shall place a sign in clear public view at or near
§ 110-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-4
1:153
the display of such products stating: "Graffiti is against the law. Any
person who defaces real or personal property with paint or any other
liquid or device is guilty of a crime punishable by imprisonment of up
to 60 days and/or a fine up to $1,000."
(2) Every person who operates a retail commercial establishment selling
graffiti implements shall place a sign in the direct view of such
persons responsible for accepting customer payment for graffiti
implements stating: "Selling spray paint, paint sticks, or broadtipped
markers to persons less than 18 years of age is against the
law and punishable by a fine of $250to $1,000."
§ 110-5. Violations and penalties.
A. Fines and imprisonment. Any person violating this chapter shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $250 for the first offense; not less
than $500 for the second offense; and not less than $1,000 for each
subsequent offense, or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 60
days, or by a combination of both fine and imprisonment at the discretion
of the court.
B. Restitution. In addition to any punishment specified in this section, the
court shall order any violator to make restitution to the victim or the
Town for damages, loss or cost of abatement caused directly or indirectly
by the violator's offense in the amount or manner determined by the
court.
C. Community service. In lieu of, or as part of, the penalties specified in
this section, with the exception of Subsection B (Restitution), a minor or
adult may be required to perform community service as described by the
court based on the following minimum requirements:
(1) The minor or adult shall perform at least 200 hours of community
service, at least half of which shall be served removing graffiti from
public property. [Amended 4-9-2009 by Ord. No. 504]
(2) At least one parent or guardian of the minor shall be in attendance a
minimum of 50% of the period of assigned community service.
(3) The entire period of community service shall be performed under the
supervision of a community service provider approved by the Chief
of Police. Reasonable effort shall be made to assign the minor or
adult to a type of community service that is reasonably expected to
have the most rehabilitative effect on the minor or adult, including
community service that involves graffiti removal.
§ 110-6. Graffiti as nuisance.
A. The existence of graffiti on public or private property in violation of this
chapter is expressly declared to be a public nuisance and, therefore,
is subject to the removal and abatement provisions specified in this
chapter.
B. It is the duty of both the owner of the property to which the graffiti has
been applied and any person who may be in possession or who has the
right to possess such property to at all times keep the property clear of
graffiti.
§ 110-4 ELSMERE CODE § 110-7
1:154
§ 110-7. Removal of graffiti.
A. Removal by the perpetrator. Any person applying graffiti on public or
private property shall have the duty to remove the graffiti within 24
hours after notice by the Town or private owner of the property involved.
Such removal shall be done in a manner prescribed by the Chief of
Police, the Director of the Department of Public Works, or the Town
Manager. Any person applying graffiti shall be responsible for the
removal or for the payment for the removal. Failure of any person to
remove graffiti or pay for the removal shall constitute an additional
violation of this chapter.
B. Property owner responsibility. If the perpetrator according to the
subsection above does not remove graffiti, graffiti shall be removed
pursuant to the following provisions:
(1) It is unlawful for any person who is the owner or who has primary
responsibility for control of property or for repair or maintenance of
property in the Town to permit property that is defaced with graffiti
to remain defaced for a period of five days after service either in
person or by first class mail to the owner or occupant of a notice of
the defacement.
(2) The notice shall contain the following information:
(a) The street address and legal description of the property
sufficient for identification of the property.
(b) A statement that the property is a potential graffiti nuisance
property with a concise description of the conditions leading to
the finding.
(c) A statement that the graffiti must be removed within five days
after personal receipt or the mailing date of the notice and that
if the graffiti is not abated within that time the Town will declare
the property to be a public nuisance, subject to the abatement
procedures in Town Code and Delaware Law.
(d) An information sheet identifying any graffiti removal assistance
programs which may be available through the Town and/or
private graffiti removal contractors.
C. Right of Town to abate.
(1) Use of public funds. Whenever the Town Manager becomes aware
or is notified and determines that graffiti is located on publicly or
privately owned property viewable from a public or quasi-public
place, the Town Manager shall be authorized to use public funds
for the removal of the graffiti, or for the painting or repairing of
the graffiti, but shall not authorize or undertake to provide for the
painting or repair of any more extensive an area than that where
the graffiti is located, unless the Town Manager, or his/her designee,
determines in writing that a more extensive area is required to be
repainted or repaired in order to avoid an aesthetic disfigurement
to the neighborhood or community, or unless the property owner
or responsible party agrees to pay for the costs of repainting or
repairing the more extensive area.
(2) Right of entry on private property.
§ 110-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-7
1:155
(a) Prior to entering upon private property or property owned by
a public entity other than the Town for the purpose of graffiti
removal the Town shall attempt to secure the consent of the
property owner or responsible party and a release of the Town
from liability for property damage or personal injury.
(b) If the property owner or responsible party fails to remove the
offending graffiti within the time specified by this chapter, or
if the Town has requested consent to remove or paint over the
offending graffiti and the property owner or responsible party
has refused consent for entry on terms acceptable to the Town
and consistent with the terms of this section, the Town shall
commence abatement and cost recovery proceedings for the
graffiti removal according to the provisions specified below.
D. Abatement and cost recovery proceedings.
(1) Notice of due process hearing.
(a) The Mayor shall appoint a member of the Council to serve as a
Hearing Officer. The Hearing Officer shall provide the property
owner of record and the party responsible for the maintenance
of the property, if a person different from the owner, not less
than 48 hours' notice of the Town's intent to hold a due process
hearing at which the property owner or responsible party shall
be entitled to present evidence and argue that the property does
not constitute a public nuisance.
(b) Notice shall be served by personal notice or telephonic
conversation to the owner or current occupant of the property. If
the owner of record cannot be contacted after a diligent search,
the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a
conspicuous place upon the property for a period of seven days.
(2) Determination of Hearing Officer. The determination of the Hearing
Officer after the due process hearing shall be final. If, after the
due process hearing, regardless of the attendance of the owner or
the responsible party or their respective agents, the Hearing Officer
determines that the property contains graffiti viewable from a public
or quasi-public place, the Hearing Officer shall give written notice
in an abatement order that, unless the graffiti is removed within 72
hours, the Town shall enter upon the property, cause the removal,
painting over (in such color as shall meet with the approval of the
Hearing Officer), or such other abatement thereof as the Hearing
Officer determines appropriate, and shall provide the owner and the
responsible party thereafter with an accounting of the costs of the
abatement effort on a full cost recovery basis.
(3) Abatement efforts. Not sooner than the time specified in the order of
the Hearing Officer, the Town Manager, or the designee of the Town
Manager, shall implement the eradication order and shall provide
an accounting to the owner and the responsible party of the costs
thereof.
(4) Cost hearing.
(a) The owner or responsible party may request a cost hearing
before the Hearing Officer on the abatement accounting, and
§ 110-7 ELSMERE CODE § 110-7
1:156
appropriate due process must be extended to the owner or
responsible party. If, following the cost hearing or, if no hearing
is requested, after the implementation of the abatement order,
the Hearing Officer determines that all or a portion of the costs
is appropriately chargeable to the abatement effort, the total
amount set forth in the abatement accounting, or an amount
thereof determined as appropriate by the Hearing Officer, shall
be due and payable by the owner or responsible party within 30
days.
(b) Any amount of abatement charges assessed by the Hearing
Officer that are less than the total amount set forth in the
abatement accounting shall be explained by written letter from
the Hearing Officer to the Mayor and Council.
§ 110-8. Lien.
As to such property where the responsible party is the property owner, if all
or any portion of the assessed abatement charges remaining unpaid after 30
days, the portion thereof that remains unpaid shall constitute a lien on the
property that was the subject of the abatement effort. The Town Manager
shall authorize the Town Attorney to proceed with any appropriate legal
action(s) to accomplish the filing of a lien against the property.
§ 110-9. Design of potential graffiti-attracting surfaces.
Whenever an applicant for design review approval, a conditional use permit,
special use permit, unclassified use permit, development agreement, or
other form of development or building permit is received, and the proposed
building or structures are visible from any public or quasi-public place, the
Code Enforcement Office, as well as the Planning Commission, shall discuss
with the applicant the prevention of graffiti, and encourage the applicant to
use anti-graffiti techniques, including, but not limited to, the following:
A. Use of a protective coating to provide for the effective and expeditious
removal of graffiti;
B. Use of additional lighting;
C. Use of non-solid fencing;
D. Use of landscaping designed to cover large expansive walls such as ivy
or similar clinging vegetation; or
E. Use of architectural design to break up long, continuous walls or solid
areas.
§ 110-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-9
1:157
Chapter 116
HANDICAPPED PARKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking of certain vehicles — See Ch. 152.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 192.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 211.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 219.
Zoning — See Ch. 225.
§ 110-9 ELSMERE CODE § 110-9
1:158
ARTICLE I
Designation of Handicapped Parking Spaces
[Adopted 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 287; amended in its entirety
11-9-2006 by Ord. No. 472]
§ 116-1. Request for parking space; qualifying conditions.
Any resident of Town of Elsmere may apply to the Department of Public
Safety for a disabled person's parking space if he/she or another member of
the household has a disability which limits or impairs his/her ability to walk
and a licensed physician certifies that the applicant or household member
has one or more of the following permanent disabilities with no prognosis
for improvement:
A. The inability to walk a distance of 200 feet without stopping to rest;
B. The inability to walk safely without the use of or assistance from a brace,
cane, crutch, another person, prosthetic device, wheelchair or other
assistive device;
C. Is restricted by lung disease to such an extent that the applicant or
household member's forced (respiratory) expiratory volume for one
second, when measured by spirometry, is less than one liter or the
artificial oxygen tension is less than 60 mm/hg on room air at rest;
D. Is required to use portable oxygen;
E. Has a cardiac condition to the extent that the applicant or a household
member's functional limitations are classified in severity as Class III or
Class IV according to standards set by the American Heart Association;
or
F. Is severely limited in his or her ability to walk due to an arthritic,
neurological or orthopedic condition.
§ 116-2. Proof of disability required; final determination.
A. A disabled person's parking space may be issued or reissued under this
article only if the applicant submits proof satisfactory to the Department
of Public Safety that the applicant or a household member has a
disability that is permanent with no prognosis for improvement as
described in § 116-1 of this article.
B. Satisfactory proof prior to issuance and reissuance shall include the
signature of a licensed physician on a Department of Public Safety
application on which the physician indicates the applicant's or household
member's disability. Once the application is complete and submitted to
the Department of Public Safety, the Chief of Police will make the final
determination of eligibility for a disabled parking space.
§ 116-3. Vehicle identification.
A disabled parking space shall be provided only to a resident whose vehicle
has a current Delaware license plate (Hard Tag) with the internationally
recognized wheelchair symbol in the same size as the numbers and/or
letters on the plate.
§ 116-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-4
1:159
§ 116-4. Number of spaces.
Only one parking space shall be provided per residence for a vehicle
meeting the standards in § 116-3 of this article.
§ 116-5. Notification to Special Services Department.
A copy of each request shall be distributed to the Special Services
Department, so that it may be determined if it is possible to place a sign
pole at the requested site.
§ 116-6. Location of parking space. [Amended 4-11-2019 by Ord.
No. 645]
The designated parking space shall be on the street directly in front of
the residence, when applicable, and shall only be provided to those who
have no driveway on their property. Notwithstanding the prior sentence,
a resident may apply to the Chief of Police for a designated handicapped
parking space, even if the resident has a driveway on their property, if a
hardship interferes with access from the driveway to an accessible entry
point on the dwelling. If the Chief of Police denies the request, the resident
may appeal the denial to the Town Council.
§ 116-7. Signage and identification of parking space.
A. A sign shall be placed at the parking site stating "HANDICAPPED." This
sign shall display the registration number that has been assigned to the
applicant's vehicle through the Delaware Division of Motor Vehicles.
B. A smaller sign shall be placed under the "HANDICAPPED" sign stating or
indicating "TOW-AWAY ZONE." The area will be designated a tow-away
zone. A blue curb and/or street marking will be painted to designate the
space.
C. All costs involved in providing the parking space shall be borne by the
Town of Elsmere.
§ 116-8. Termination of handicapped designation.
A designated handicapped parking area shall terminate and revert back to
public parking upon the licensee's change of residence or death.
§ 116-9. Renewal of disabled parking space.
A. Each calendar year the Department of Public Safety shall send a renewal
application to each person who has been granted a designated parking
space. This renewal application shall request the recipient to return the
completed application to the Department of Public Safety within 60 days
of the original mailing date.
B. Any recipient who fails to return the renewal application to the
Department of Public Safety within 60 days of the original mailing date
shall have his or her space repealed.
§ 116-4 ELSMERE CODE § 116-10
1:160
§ 116-10. Parking in designated disabled person's parking spaces;
violations and penalties.
A. Residents who have been granted a disabled person's parking space
by the Town of Elsmere must park their designated vehicle in the
designated space and no other within 200 feet.
B. Residents who park their designated vehicle outside their designated
disabled person's parking space, but within 200 feet of that space, shall
be fined not less than $100 nor more than $300 for a first offense.
C. Residents who park their designated vehicle outside their designated
disabled person's parking space, but within 200 feet of that space, for
a second offense shall have that vehicle towed away and the space
shall be revoked. The resident shall be responsible for all towing and
impoundment costs. After one year has passed, such residents may
reapply to the Department of Public Safety for a disabled person's
parking space. Reapplication for a parking space shall follow the same
procedure as the original application.
D. Unauthorized vehicles parked in a designated disabled person's parking
space shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $300, plus all
applicable costs, and shall additionally be responsible for the cost
associated with towing and impoundment.
§ 116-11. Repeal of disabled person's parking space.
A. The Chief of Police shall have the authority to repeal an approved
disabled person's parking space.
B. The following procedure shall be followed whenever the Chief of Police
determines that a disabled person's parking space should be repealed:
(1) After determining that there is sufficient reason to repeal a disabled
person's parking space, the Chief of Police shall notify the person to
whom the space was granted that he intends to repeal the space.
The Chief of Police may remove the disabled person's space without
prior notice if it is determined that the person no longer resides in
the Town of Elsmere.
(2) Notification shall be in writing and shall explain the reason(s) the
Chief is taking this action.
§ 116-12. Designation of parking space at nonresidential property.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, a disabled person's
parking space may be issued to a church or other nonresidentially zoned
property which accommodates the public to provide a single parking space,
provided that the applicant establishes that a member of the public that
regularly attends such place has a need for such a parking space in front
of that property and such property and such person using that space would
otherwise meet the requirements of this chapter.
§ 116-13. Presentation of false information.
Any person who intentionally presents false information to the Town of
Elsmere or the Department of Public Safety in an attempt to obtain a
disabled person's parking space under this article shall, for the first offense,
§ 116-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-13
1:161
receive a mandatory fine of $100. For each subsequent like offense, the
person shall receive a mandatory fine of $200.
§ 116-13 ELSMERE CODE § 116-13
1:162
ARTICLE II
Nonresidential Handicapped Parking Space Specifications
[Adopted 2-12-2004 by Ord. No. 425]
§ 116-14. Size, location, and identification of spaces.
All individuals and artificial entities, other than residential, served by onlot
parking shall provide parking spaces for motor vehicles which transport
disabled persons, which shall be properly designated in accordance with
this section's standards and the American with Disabilities Act (ADA), or as
may be amended, whichever is more restrictive.
A. Handicap parking spaces shall be a minimum of eight feet wide by
18 feet long with an adjacent parallel access aisle five feet wide. The
adjacent parallel access aisle may be shared by two accessible parking
spaces. One in every eight accessible spaces shall have an access aisle
a minimum of eight feet wide (rather than five feet) and shall be signed
"van accessible."
B. Handicap parking spaces shall be located as close as possible to an
entrance which allows such persons to enter and leave the parking
area and/or structure without assistance. Where feasible, this means
locations where there is no need to crossvehicular access lanes or aisles.
Ramps shall be provided at curbs.
C. Handicap parking spaces shall be posted and marked with both a
ground-mounted sign and pavement marking which includes the
international symbol for barrier-free environments and a statement
informing the public that the parking space is reserved for use by
disabled persons.
§ 116-15. Required number of handicap parking spaces.
REQUIRED NUMBER OF OFF-STREET HANDICAP PARKING
SPACES
Number of Parking Spaces
Provided
Number of Handicap Spaces
Required
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1000 2%
§ 116-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-15
1:163
REQUIRED NUMBER OF OFF-STREET HANDICAP PARKING
SPACES
Number of Parking Spaces
Provided
Number of Handicap Spaces
Required
1,001 or more 20 spaces + 1% of spaces over
1,000
A. Residential units designed for occupancy by disabled persons shall
provide one handicap parking space for each dwelling unit designed for
such occupancy.
B. Off-street parking spaces required for the disabled by this article shall
count toward fulfilling this article's total off-street parking requirements.
C. Other Code guidelines for handicap accessibility to public facilities shall
be in accordance with regulations issued by federal agencies, including
the United States Department of Justice, under the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990. More specifically, these regulations include 28
CFR Part 36, "Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Disability by Public
Accommodations and in Commercial Facilities, Final Rule."
§ 116-16. Enforcement.
A. The provision of this article shall be enforced by any law enforcement
officer or any Code Enforcement Officer of the Town of Elsmere.
B. Any officer observing a violation of this article shall first issue written
notice of violation to the property owner advising the owner of the
requirements of this article and directing the property owner to comply
with the requirements of this article within 30 calendar days of the
notice of violation.
C. If after 30 calendar days the property owner has failed to comply with
the notice of violation, the officer issuing the violation may issue a
summons or take such other legal action as may be appropriate.
§ 116-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of violating any provisions of this article shall pay a
fine of not less than $100 nor more than $300.
§ 116-15 ELSMERE CODE § 116-17
1:164
Chapter 123
LAWN CARE COMPANIES
§ 123-1. License required.
All lawn care companies which utilize chemicals in their treatment process
shall be licensed by the State of Delaware and follow all state regulations
and safety precautions.
§ 123-2. List of chemicals to be provided customers.
All lawn care companies which utilize chemicals in their treatment process
shall provide to their customers, as well as those residents whose property
is adjacent to the customer, a list of all chemicals to be discharged on the
customer's property. Included with this list should be any general lawn care
information pertinent to the treatment process, such as safety and health
information.
§ 123-3. List to include trade and generic name.
The list of chemicals provided to the customer include both the trade name
and the generic name of each pesticide to be used.
§ 123-4. Violations and penalties. [Added 6-12-1990 by Ord. No.
257]
Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or representatives thereof who
fails to comply with §§ 123-1 through 123-3 of this chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $500, or imprisonment for not more than 30 days,
or both.
Chapter 127
DUMPING OF YARD WASTE AND REFUSE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open burning — See Ch. 79.
Lawn care companies — See Ch. 123.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 171.
Solid waste — See Ch. 187.
Snow and ice removal — See Ch. 192, Art. I.
§ 127-1. Definitions.
In this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise, the following shall
have the following meanings:
§ 116-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-1
1:165
YARD WASTE — Leaves, needles, grass clippings, garden debris, and brush,
including clean woody vegetative material. This term includes stumps,
roots, or shrubs with intact root balls.
REFUSE — All waste materials, solid, liquid, or semisolid, produced by
or from, used by, or resulting from industrial, agricultural, household,
manufacturing, business, or community life, such as but not limited to
minerals, asphalt, rocks, concrete products, wood products, glass products,
metal products, used furniture, household appliances, products or items,
clothing, building material, motor vehicles, products and parts, tires, paper
products, burnt materials, chemicals, paints, cleaning solutions and
containers, plastics, solvents, petroleum products and materials and their
containers defined as hazardous.
GARBAGE — Every waste accumulation of animal, fruit, or vegetable
matter, liquid or otherwise, resulting from the preparing, processing,
storing, consuming, cooking, dealing in or with animal, fruit, or vegetable
matter.
§ 127-2. Prohibited conduct.
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, firm, or corporation
to dispose of, dump, bury or otherwise cause any garbage, yard waste or
refuse to be placed upon any gutters, streets, catch basin, storm sewers,
right-of-way or upon any public or private lands in the Town unless that
land is duly designated and licensed as a site for the dumping, disposing,
or burying of garbage and refuse.
B. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, firm or corporation
to accept for dumping, burying, or disposing, or allow the dumping,
burying, or disposing of, garbage or refuse upon land owned by the
person, firm, or corporation unless that land is duly designated and
licensed as a site for the dumping, disposing, or burying of garbage and
refuse.
C. It shall be a violation of this chapter to cause or permit garbage, yard
waste, or refuse to be placed in such a place or manner that the garbage,
yard waste, or refuse can be blown away by the wind, washed away by
water, or conveyed to another location by some other natural process.
D. It shall be a violation of this chapter to cause or permit garbage, yard
waste, or refuse to fall from any vehicle.
E. It shall be a violation of this chapter to cause or permit to be placed
into any trash receptacle provided by the Town any of the following:
leaves, needles, grass clippings, garden debris, and brush, including
clean woody vegetative material including any stumps, roots, or shrubs
with intact root balls, minerals, asphalt, rocks, concrete products, wood
products, glass products other than glass bottles, metal products other
than aluminum beverage containers, used furniture, household
appliances, products or items, clothing, building material, motor
vehicles, products and parts, tires, chemicals, paints, cleaning solutions
and containers, solvents, petroleum products and materials and their
containers defined as hazardous.
§ 127-1 ELSMERE CODE § 127-2
1:166
F. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, firm, or corporation
to dump, shovel, blow or otherwise cause any snow to be deposited upon
any of the gutters, streets, catch basin, storm sewers, rights-of-way or
upon any public lands in the Town.
§ 127-3. Exceptions.
A. This chapter shall not apply to any employee of the Town of Elsmere
when acting in his or her official capacity or to any municipal employee
when providing mutual aid to the Town of Elsmere or any person or
contractor acting on behalf of the Town of Elsmere.
B. Additionally, it shall not be a violation of this chapter for a landowner
or occupant to properly dispose of garbage, yard waste, or refuse on
the landowner's or occupant's owned, leased or rented land in an
appropriate container and in an appropriate manner as set forth in
Chapter 187, § 187-2, of the Code of the Town of Elsmere and in
compliance with the most recent version of the International Property
Maintenance Code as may have been amended by the Code of the Town
of Elsmere.12
§ 127-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-10-2015 by Ord. No.
600]
Any person who violates this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $200 plus any and all cost incurred by the Town of
Elsmere should the offender fail to immediately remove any item placed in
violation of this chapter.
§ 127-5. Enforcement.
Any police officer and any Code Enforcement Officer of the Town of
Elsmere, as well as any Code Enforcement Officer of any other jurisdiction
who is providing mutual aid to the Town in accordance with Title 20,
Chapter 32, "Intrastate Mutual Aid Compact," shall have the authority to
enforce this chapter and shall have authority to issue citations or complaints
for violations of this chapter.
§ 127-6. Repeal of conflicting ordinances.
This chapter is intended to strengthen the Town's existing code. Any part
of any ordinance, code or regulation which is in direct conflict with this
chapter is hereby repealed.
§ 127-7. Severability.
If any section, clause or division of this chapter be declared by the court to
be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole or
any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be invalid.
12.Editor's Note: See Ch. 171, Property Maintenance, Art. II.
§ 127-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-7
1:167
Chapter 131
LICENSED BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 60. Issuance of licenses and permits for taxdelinquent
property — See Ch. 206.
§ 127-7 ELSMERE CODE § 127-7
1:168
ARTICLE I
Licenses and Regulation
[Adopted 2-10-1966 by Ord. No. 83]
§ 131-1. Licensing requirement.
Every owner of any business, profession, pursuit or calling operated,
carried on or engaged in within the corporate limits of the Town of Elsmere
shall pay a license fee as required and in accordance with the terms and
provisions of this article.
§ 131-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OWNER, PERSON or COMPANY — Herein used interchangeably
throughout except where the context indicates a different meaning, pertains
to, means and includes any individual, estate, trust receiver, trustee in
bankruptcy, business trust, corporation, firm, copartnership, joint
adventure, association or any other group or combination acting as a unit,
and the plural as well as the singular number, unless the intention to give a
more limited meaning is clearly disclosed by the context.
LICENSEE — Any person liable for any license fee payable hereunder.
BUSINESS — Any and all activities or acts on the part of any person
engaged in any trade, occupation, business, profession, pursuit or calling,
with the object of gain, benefit or advantage, either direct or indirect,
and it shall include, among other things, the production, manufacture or
fabrication as well as the sale and/or delivery of any and all goods, wares,
commodities, merchandise and personal property of any nature, kind or
description whatsoever, at retail or at wholesale, as well as the operation of
any business and/or the leasing of office space, the activities and conduct
of banks, trust companies, building and loan associations, any amusement
enterprise, theaters, picture shows, radio broadcasting stations, television
broadcasting stations, carnivals, circuses, amusement parks, menageries,
dogshows, horseshows, fairs, races, rodeos, games, dance-halls, pool or
billiard halls; or any business charging admission for any exhibition for
amusement; provided that any religious, fraternal, educational or other
nonprofit organization shall be exempt from the payment of a license fee
for conducting any operation exclusively by them and where the proceeds
therefrom are utilized for their sole benefit. The term "business" when
used in this article shall also include the practice of any profession or
any business in which the services of a professional, personal, technical
or a scientific nature are rendered and paid for on a fee basis or by any
other consideration, and said term shall also include the operation of any
and all nonprofessional service enterprises, including, among other things,
laundries, undertaking establishments, barber shops, beauty parlors,
hotels, rooming and boarding houses, bath and massage salons,
restaurants, taverns, retail oil and filling stations, tire repair and service
§ 131-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-2
1:169
stations, storage garages, repair establishments of all kinds, tailors,
cleaning or pressing of clothes or other articles, publication or distribution
of newspapers, magazines or any other kinds of periodicals, billboards,
the selling of real estate or the business of acting as agent, broker or
factor in the sale of real estate, stocks, bonds, securities or businesses,
and also to persons, firms or corporations engaged in any transportation
service of any kind, except street railways, buses and taxis, and also to
persons, firms and corporations engaged in the business of contracting for
a consideration for the construction, repair or improvement of any building,
dwelling, structure or edifice, either as original contractor, subcontractor or
independent contractor, including the construction, repair or improvement
of streets, highways, alleys and bridges and general excavation work or
any other similar work or the performance of which a person, firm or
corporation bargains and agrees to perform work for a stipulated sum of
money or at cost plus a percentage or any other consideration. The rental of
contractor's equipment or automotive equipment, with or without drivers,
and of contractor's machinery and equipment, with or without operators,
shall be regarded and considered as a business, within the meaning of
this article, as is the transmission of messages or conversations originating
within the corporate limits of the Town of Elsmere by telephone, telegraph
or radio to other points within the corporate limits of the Town. For the
purpose of this article, any person engaging in the business of soliciting
or selling and/or rendering services as well as selling tangible personal
property at either retail or wholesale, or both, in the Town of Elsmere, as
a contractor, or subcontractor, or performance of any work, either under
contract or otherwise, shall be deemed to be engaged in "business" in the
Town of Elsmere.
RETAILER — Shall mean, apply to and include the selling of any and/or all
goods, wares, merchandise and personal property of every kind and nature
to the ultimate consumer within the corporate limits of the Town of Elsmere,
or the taking of an order therein for delivery therein of any and all goods,
wares, merchandise and personal property of every kind and nature.
WHOLESALER or WHOLESALING — All sales made otherwise than by a
retailer, as defined above, and particularly, but without limitation, the term
shall apply to and include any and all sales of any and/or all goods, wares,
merchandise and personal property of any and every kind and nature, made
by a merchandise broker, jobber, factory representative, manufacturer's
sales agent or commission merchant, or to sales made by a person, firm
or corporation who conducts a business under or by any other method not
herein specifically mentioned or defined.
§ 131-3. Collection of license fee. [Amended 2-24-1986 by Ord. No.
203; amended 9-18-2003 by Ord. No. 420; 8-12-2010 by Ord. No.
519]
Every owner, person or company, as defined herein, shall pay annually
a license fee for carrying on any business, profession, pursuit or calling
operated, carried on or engaged in within the corporate limits of the Town
of Elsmere, at the amount or rate as is provided herein; provided, however,
§ 131-2 ELSMERE CODE § 131-3
1:170
that no license shall be required of any person for serving as a member
on Board of Directors of a corporation, and provided, further, that if any
owner, person or company required to be licensed under this article shall
not be covered and included within any category as provided hereinafter,
such owner, person or company shall be liable for and pay a license fee of
$150 per year as a miscellaneous business.
§ 131-4. Fees. [Amended 1-15-1981 by Ord. No. 151; 2-24-1986 by
Ord. No. 203; 10-22-1998 by Ord. No. 364; 8-12-2004 by Ord. No.
436; 8-12-2010 by Ord. No. 519]
A. As the license fee imposed by this article, all persons, firms or
corporations operating, carrying on or engaged in any business,
profession, pursuit or calling within the corporate limits of the Town
of Elsmere shall pay according to the following categories and
classifications:
(1) Retailers of food, candy, cigars, cigarettes, ice cream, soft drinks,
baked goods and other edible commodities: the sum of $150 per
year for each store or place of business from which such retail sales
are made, operated within the Town of Elsmere; provided, however,
that all such retailers who have no store or place of business within
the Town of Elsmere from which such retail sales are made but who
make retail sales by means of delivery vehicles and trucks shall pay
the sum of $150 per year for each delivery vehicle or truck.
(2) Retailers of goods, wares and merchandise other than edible
commodities: the sum of $150 per year for each store or place of
business from which such retail sales are made, operated within
the Town of Elsmere; provided, however, that all such retailers who
have no store or place of business within the Town of Elsmere
from which such retail sales are made, but who make retail sales
by means of delivery vehicles and trucks, shall pay the sum of
$150 per year for each delivery vehicle or truck. A retailer licensed
under the provisions of this subsection may service and repair any
goods, wares and merchandise sold by him without being required
to obtain a license.
(3) Wholesalers of food, candy, cigars, cigarettes, ice cream, soft
drinks, baked goods and other edible commodities: the sum of $150
per year for each store or place of business.
(4) Wholesalers of food, candy, cigars, cigarettes, ice cream, soft
drinks, baked goods, cheese, mayonnaise, other salad dressings
and all other food and food products, who have no store or place
of business within the Town of Elsmere from which such wholesale
sales are made, but who make wholesale sales by means of delivery
vehicles and trucks: the sum of $150 per year for each delivery
vehicle or truck.
(5) For all other wholesalers: the sum of $150 per year for each store
or place of business within the Town of Elsmere from which such
wholesale sales are made; provided, however, that all such
wholesalers who have no store or place of business within the Town
of Elsmere, but who make wholesale sales by means of delivery
§ 131-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-4
1:171
vehicles and trucks, shall pay the sum of $150 per year for each
delivery vehicle or truck.
(6) Nonprofessional service businesses, such as bath and massage
salons, barbershops, beauty parlors, cleaners, dyers and pressers
of clothes, pathological laboratories, dental laboratories, chemical
laboratories, insurance adjusters, advertising agencies, general
repairmen, travel ticket agencies, automobile service clubs and
associations, watch and clock repairmen, collection agencies (other
than note departments of banks and trust companies and finance
companies), credit bureaus, credit rating and reporting agencies,
cutlery sharpeners, physiotherapists, direct mail advertising
service, employment agencies, pest control and exterminators,
furniture upholsterers and cleaners, laundries, lightning rod
designers and systems, lithographers, opticians, photostat service,
photographers, photo-engravers, locksmiths, magazine
subscriptions, radio and television repairmen, reducing salons,
printers, linotype service, saw sharpeners, sewing machine service
and repairs, shoe repair service, surveyors, tailors, taxidermists,
telephone answering service, typesetters, typographers, weavers,
undertaking establishments, menders and zipper repairers: the
sum of $150 per year for each store or place of business, or vehicle
from which the licensee conducts the business, operated within the
corporate limits of the Town of Elsmere.
(7) Retail gas and oil filling stations, tire repair and service stations,
automobile storage garages and parking lots and automobile repair
establishments of all kinds, including automobile washing
establishments: the sum of $150 per year for each place of
business, operated within the corporate limits of the Town of
Elsmere; provided, however, that this classification shall not apply
to parking lots operated by persons holding licenses under the
terms and provisions of this article who make their parking lots
available to employees, customers or other users without charge.
(8) Sales places and agencies for the sale of new and used automobiles:
the sum of $150 per year for each place of business, operated
within the corporate limits of the Town of Elsmere.
(9) Trading stamp redemption stores: the sum of $150 per year for
each place of business, operated within the corporate limits of the
Town of Elsmere.
(10) Theaters and motion-picture houses: the sum of $150 per year
for each theater or motion-picture house, operating within the
corporate limits of the Town of Elsmere.
(11) Radio broadcasting and television telecasting stations: the sum of
$150 per year for each station, which, within the Town of Elsmere,
either carries on the business of producing or generating
electromagnetic waves for the purpose of transmitting broadcasts
or telecasts; or engages in the business of intrastate broadcasting
or telecasting; or engages in the business of soliciting radio or
television advertising within the Town of Elsmere. The license fee
required by this subsection shall be considered as applying only
§ 131-4 ELSMERE CODE § 131-4
1:172
to the above-specified intrastate aspects of broadcasting and
telecasting and shall not be construed as requiring a license fee
for that portion of the business which may be interstate or foreign
commerce, or to business done for the government of the United
States.
(12) Dance halls and studios: the sum of $150 per year for each dance
hall or studio, operated within the corporate limits of the Town of
Elsmere.
(13) Circuses: the sum of $150 per day for each day of operation within
the corporate limits of the Town of Elsmere.
(14) Carnivals: the sum of $150 per day for each day of operation within
the corporate limits of the Town of Elsmere.
(15) For all other amusements not above specified: the sum of $150 per
year.
(16) Taverns and package stores wherein alcoholic spirits, wine and
beer are sold by the drink or by the bottle either for on- or offpremises
consumption: the sum of $150 per year for each store,
tavern or place of business located within the corporate limits of
the Town of Elsmere.
(17) Professional services, such as accountants (whether certified or
public), architects, optometrists, lawyers, dentists, physicians and
surgeons, osteopathic physicians and surgeons, chiropodists and
chiropodists surgeons, chiropractic physicians, consulting
chemists, civil engineers, consulting engineers, electrical
engineers, structural engineers, mechanical engineers,
veterinarians, and x-ray laboratories: the sum of $150 per year for
each individual so engaged in such professional services, within
the corporate limits of the Town of Elsmere; provided, however,
that no license shall be required of any individual encompassed
within this subsection who is in the employ of any corporation,
licensed under any other provision of this article, and who does
not practice his profession except in his capacity as an employee
of such corporation, and provided, further, that no attorney in the
employ of any such corporation shall be required to obtain a license
under this subsection so as to fulfill assignments made of him by
any Delaware Court.
(18) Publishing a newspaper or newspapers, published and sold to the
public at least six days a week: the sum of $150 per year.
(19) Distributors of newspapers, magazines and any and all other kinds
of periodicals: the sum of $150 per year, provided that this section
shall not be applicable to newsboys.
(20) Operating hotels, motels and rooming houses: the sum of $100 per
year per room. As used herein the word "room" is defined to mean
a room available for personal occupancy and for a stipulated fee.
(21) Dwelling units: the sum of $175 per year to be paid by the owner,
operator or lessor of three to 50 dwelling units; the sum of $100
per year to be paid by the owner, operator or lessor of 51 to 150
dwelling units; the sum of $205 per year to be paid by the owner,
operator or lessor of 101 or more dwelling units. For the purpose
§ 131-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-4
1:173
of this section a "dwelling unit" shall mean any room or group of
rooms located within a building or buildings and forming a single
habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used
for living space, cooking and eating. In determining the number of
dwelling units under this provision, a dwelling unit occupied by the
licensee shall not be included.
(22) Office buildings engaged in business of leasing office space: the
sum of $150 per year, provided that this shall not apply to any space
leased by any office building in which there are less than 2,500
square feet.
(23) Importers and distributors of beer, wines and spirituous liquors: the
sum of $150 per year.
(24) Manufacturers, bottlers and distributors of all soft drinks: the sum
of $150 per year.
(25) Promoters of boxing and wrestling matches and all other sporting
events in which the players or participants are professionals: the
sum of $150 per year.
(26) Brokers and dealers in bonds, stocks, commodities, mortgages or
other securities of any kind, type and/or nature: the sum of $150
per year.
(27) Real estate brokers, salesman and appraisers: every person
engaged in the appraisal or sale of real estate in any manner
whatsoever, whether a licensed broker under the Delaware Code,
or an employee or sales representative of a licensed broker, shall be
liable for a license at a fee of $150 per year, and in no event shall
any license be issued to any corporation engaged in the real estate
business.
(28) Brokers, dealers and/or agents engaged in the sale of theater
tickets and tickets for sporting events, such as baseball games,
football games, boxing matches and the like sporting events: the
sum of $150 per year for each person so engaged, and in no event
shall any license be issued to any corporation under this section.
(29) Coin-operated machines.
(a) Coin-operated amusement, gaming and music machines:
operator's license covers owning and placing for operation and
distributing to location operators (unlimited number of
machines), the sum of $150 per year.
(b) Coin-operated merchandise and service machines (automatic
retailers), not including coin-operated laundry machines which
shall be licensed as laundries: operator's license covers owning
and placing for operation and distributing to location operators,
the sum of $150 per year.
(c) Exemptions: provided that no license hereunder shall be
required for the maintenance or operation of postage stamp
machines; or machines dispensing sanitary or hygienic articles,
or drinking cups, towels or medicines, which machines are
entirely owned and supplied by the owner or operator of the
premises where installed and maintained solely for the
convenience of employees, visitors or customers, and not for
§ 131-4 ELSMERE CODE § 131-4
1:174
profit to him or to any other person; and provided further that
any of the taxes as provided in this subsection shall not be
applicable to or paid by any person, firm or corporation licensed
under any other section of this article and who uses vending
or coin machines in the sale and distribution of products
manufactured, produced or otherwise distributed by such
licensee or licensees.
(d) Permits: each coin-operated vending, amusement, gaming and
machine located on the premises of a business licensed in the
Town of Elsmere shall be subject to a permit fee of $150 per
year. Compliance therein shall be designated by the presence of
a sticker comprised of the Seal of the Town of Elsmere and year
of permit.
(e) Exemptions: provided that no permit shall be required for
postage stamp machines; or machines dispensing sanitary or
hygienic articles, or drinking cups, towels or medicines, which
machines are entirely owned and supplied by the owner or
operator of the premises where installed and maintained solely
for the convenience of employees, visitors or customers, and
not for profit to him or to any other person; or machines whose
proceeds are for the benefit of nonprofit organizations.
(f) Collection and enforcement: following the effective date of this
article, the Code Enforcement Officer is instructed to notify
each licensed business in the Town of Elsmere of the provisions
of this article. Upon due notice, the Code Enforcement Officer
is further instructed to set a reasonable date for compliance
which shall not be more than 60 days. Beginning on January 1,
1982, permit fees for coin-operated machines governed by this
article will be due at the same time as business license fees.
Stickers will be issued simultaneously with licenses. All moneys
derived from enforcement of this article are to be turned over
to the Town Manager or his or her designee.
(30) Cold storage and refrigeration of food and food products, including
renting of cold storage space for preservation of food and food
products to the public: the sum of $150 per year.
(31) Manufacturers, producers and/or fabricators of any and all goods,
wares, commodities, merchandise and personal property of any
nature, kind or description whatsoever, it being the intent and
purport of this article that the license fee provided in this
subsection shall be due from and payable if there is any act or
activities carried on by such licensee within the corporate limits
of the Town of Elsmere by or on the part of or for the benefit of
any producer, manufacturer and/or fabricator in furtherance of the
business of any person so engaged, including the maintenance of
executive, administrative or sales offices: the sum of $150 per year,
provided that but one license shall be required of any manufacturer,
producer and/or fabricator for all executive, administrative or sales
offices, and provided further that no license shall be required of
any manufacturer, producer and/or fabricator for the sale of the
§ 131-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-4
1:175
products of such licensee. Operators of dairies and bakeries shall
be regarded as manufacturers or producers and taxed as such
under the provisions of this subsection.
(32) Building and loan associations: the sum of $150 per year for each
place of business located within the corporate limits of the Town of
Elsmere.
(33) Banks, trust companies, investment companies and finance
companies: the sum of $150 per year for each place of business
located within the corporate limits of the Town of Elsmere.
(34) Furniture movers, package delivery services and other moving or
delivery service: the sum of $150 per year, provided that, for each
truck for delivery conveyance in excess of two utilized by licensees
as provided by this classification, said licensees shall pay an
additional license fee of $15 per year.
(35) Sign and billboard designers, erectors, maintenance and repair
services:
(a) Outside billboard advertising business consisting of the
erection, construction, maintenance or leasing of outside
billboards, bulletin boards and poster boards: the sum of $150
per year; or
(b) Commercial sign business other than outside billboard
advertising: the sum of $150 per year.
(36) Contractors and subcontractors: the sum of $150 per year for each
contractor and the sum of $125 per year for each subcontractor,
provided that a separate license fee is required for contractors and
for each field of subcontractors.
(a) As used herein, the term "contractor" is any person or firm
who undertakes, or offers to undertake, or purports to have
the capacity to undertake or submits a bid or does himself or
by or through others, for a consideration to construct, alter,
repair, add to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck or demolish
any building or other structure, including swimming pools and
landscape work, to excavate, to commence any project,
development or improvement or do any part thereof, including
the erection of scaffolding, or any other structures or works in
connection therewith or the incorporation of labor or material
therein or thereon and including the furnishing of prefabricated
structural components.
(b) As used herein, the term "subcontractor" is any person or firm
whose operations as such are the performance of such
construction work for a consideration, requiring special skills
and involves the use of specialized building trades and crafts
and usually constituting less than the erection, construction
or fabrication of a complete structure. "Subcontractor" shall
embrace those engaged in the following crafts: awning, shutter,
canopy, lightweight metal frame shelter and tent installation;
bricklaying; boiler installation; cabinet and millwork; cement,
concrete and stone masonry; demolition; elevators; fence
erectors; flooring; electricians and electrical contractors:
§ 131-4 ELSMERE CODE § 131-4
1:176
glazing, gunite and sandblasting; plumbing and heating;
insulating; manufacturers and suppliers of prefabricators of
structural components; painting; plastering refrigeration;
riggers, ventilating and air conditioning; roofing;
waterproofing; sheet metal specialists; steel reinforcing and
iron; structural steel erection; termite treating; tile and marble
and terrazzo and all other like building specialists.
(37) Towel and linen supply service: the sum of $150 per year for
each store or place of business or vehicle from which such service
is rendered, operated within the corporate limits of the Town of
Elsmere.
(38) (Reserved)
(39) Tool makers, tool salesman, tool service, repair and maintenance:
the sum of $150 per year.
(40) Theatrical agencies and booking agents or agencies for orchestras
or entertainment of any kind: the sum of $150 per year.
(41) Nursing homes, operated for profit and not owned and maintained
by any charitable, religious or other nonprofit organization: the sum
of $150 per year.
(42) Vehicle renting business (drive-it-yourself cars, trucks and other
vehicles), including renting of trucks, tractors, automotive vehicles,
water-going vehicles, airplanes and any other vehicle: the sum of
$150 per year.
(43) Persons, firms or corporations engaged in the renting or leasing of
contractor's equipment, with or without drivers, and of contractor's
machinery and equipment, with or without operators: the sum of
$150 per year.
(44) Restaurants, cafes, soda fountains and hotel dining rooms and
other places where food is prepared and sold for consumption on
the premises: the sum of $150 per year.
(45) Junk dealers, salvage dealers, and pawn shops: the sum of $150 per
year.
(46) Storage warehouses: the sum of $150 per year.
(47) Gas, electric light and power companies: the sum of $205 per
year (does not cover sales of appliances or equipment for which a
separate license shall be required).
(48) Telephone companies: the sum of $205 per year.
(49) Telegraph companies: the sum of $205 per year.
B. Provided that, if any person, firm or corporation shall have gross receipts
of $5,000 or less for the calendar year preceding the license year, such
person, firm or corporation shall pay a license fee of $110 in lieu of the
applicable license fee established by this section under the preceding
categories and classifications in Subsection A(1) through (49).
§ 131-5. Effective date; duty of administration and enforcement.
[Amended 8-12-2010 by Ord. No. 519]
Any or all of the businesses which are herein enumerated and carrying on as
such on and after April 1, 1966, shall pay the license fee herein prescribed.
The above license fees are to be paid at the office of the Town Manager
§ 131-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-5
1:177
or his or her designee or such other office as the Council may hereafter
designate. The duty of administration and enforcement of this article and
the collection of license fees as are required by the provisions of this article
shall be the duty of the Town Manager or his or her designee or such other
person or persons as the Council may hereafter designate. This article shall
be enforced and the license fee collected in the same manner as all taxes are
collected. The license fees imposed by this article shall be in addition to all
other taxes imposed by any other provision of any and all other ordinances,
resolutions or regulations in force within the Town of Elsmere.
§ 131-6. Unlawful businesses.
No license issued under the provisions of this article shall be construed as
authorizing the conduct or continuance of any illegal or unlawful business.
§ 131-7. License requirements. [Amended 8-12-2010 by Ord. No.
519]
No owner, person, firm or company shall engage in any business, profession,
pursuit or calling or perform any act in connection therewith or preparatory
thereto until a license is first obtained in accordance with the provisions of
this article. No license shall be issued hereunder when under the provisions
of any other law or ordinance a permit is required to be obtained or to
be applied for as a prerequisite to entering into or performing any such
business, profession, pursuit or calling, until such license is first so applied
for and obtained. Additionally no license shall be issued until the applicant
has provided proof that he or she has obtained any license required by
either the State of Delaware or New Castle County and that he or she has
valid business insurance. Any license issued in violation of this section shall
be wholly void and ineffective. No person, firm or corporation selling goods,
services, wares or merchandise of any kind or character to the Town of
Elsmere, including the performance of any contract awarded by any board,
department or agency of the Town of Elsmere shall be paid by the Treasurer
on any such purchase or the consideration due for the performance of any
contract unless licensed as required by the terms of this article or unless
such goods, wares, services or merchandise are essential to the Town and
cannot be obtained or purchased within the Town of Elsmere, and no officer
of the Town shall approve any invoice or direct the payment of any money
due under any contract unless it shall appear on the invoice or on the
order for payment that a license has been issued as required and all license
fees have been paid, except in cases wherein the goods, wares, services or
merchandise are essential to the Town and cannot be obtained or purchased
within the Town of Elsmere.
§ 131-8. Applications for and contents of licenses. [Amended
3-10-2005 by Ord. No. 443; 8-12-2010 by Ord. No. 519; 3-10-2016 by
Ord. No. 612]
Any owner, person, firm or company desiring to engage in any business,
profession, pursuit or calling operated, carried on or engaged in within the
§ 131-5 ELSMERE CODE § 131-8
1:178
corporate limits of the Town of Elsmere shall apply to the Town Manager
or his or her designee or such other person as the Council may hereafter
designate for a license on a form to be furnished by the Town Manager
or his or her designee or such other person as the Council may hereafter
designate. Each application shall include an area where the applicant must
list any wholesaler as defined by § 131-4 A(3), (4) and (5) of this article,
with whom they conduct business. The application shall be prepared by
the applicant in writing and shall state all required information under oath.
The license shall be prepared and issued by the Town Manager or his or
her designee or such other person as the Council may hereafter designate,
and the license fee shall be based upon the information set forth in the
application. The application shall set forth each and every classification of
the applicant, based upon the nature of the various business activities in
which the applicant is engaged. Each license so issued shall state upon
the face thereof the following: the person to whom the license is issued;
the kind of business or businesses, profession, pursuit or calling licensed
thereby; the location of such business or businesses, profession, pursuit or
calling; and the date of expiration of such license. The following language
shall be set forth on the back of each license issued hereunder, viz.:
“This license constitutes a receipt for the payment of a license fee imposed
by authority of the Town of Elsmere for the privilege of engaging in a
business, profession, pursuit or calling operated, carried on or engaged in
within the corporate limits of the Town of Elsmere, and shall have no other
legal effect. Said receipt does not authorize the licensee or any agent or
employee thereof to conduct the business, profession, pursuit or calling or
to perform any act incident thereto, or to conduct or perform any other
business, profession, pursuit or calling within the corporate limits of the
Town of Elsmere, unless licensed hereunder and without strictly complying
with all provisions of the ordinance of said Town and of the statutes of
the State of Delaware, including but not limited to those ordinances and
statutes requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or
officer. THIS RECEIPT DOES NOT CONSTITUTE A PERMIT TO CARRY ON
ANY BUSINESS, PROFESSION, PURSUIT OR CALLING FOR WHICH THE
STATUTES OF THE STATE OF DELAWARE REQUIRE A PERMIT.”
“Any receipt upon the payment by check of any license fee shall be wholly
void and ineffective for all purposes unless the amount due is actually
received.”
§ 131-9. Suit for recovery of unpaid sums.
Any sum required to be paid as a license fee hereunder shall be deemed and
constitute a debt due and owing to the Town of Elsmere and recoverable
as such in any court of competent jurisdiction by court proceedings in the
same manner as any other debt. Any person who engages in any business,
profession, pursuit or calling without first obtaining a license so to do shall,
in addition to the penalties hereinafter provided, be liable in an action by
and in the name of the Town of Elsmere for the recovery of any unpaid
license fees due hereunder.
§ 131-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-10
1:179
§ 131-10. Posting and keeping of licenses.
Except as otherwise specifically provided hereunder, all licenses must be
kept and posted as herein provided:
A. Every licensee operating at and from a fixed place of business shall
keep the license issued posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises
where such business is conducted and where the license may be
observed by the enforcement officers.
B. Every licensee operating from a vehicle or vehicles shall keep the license
posted in a conspicuous place upon the vehicle where the license may
be observed by the enforcement officers. Every vehicle utilized by a
licensee shall have a duplicate license issued by the Town Manager or
his or her designee or such other person as the Council may hereafter
designate upon the payment of $10 therefor. [Amended 2-24-1986 by
Ord. No. 203; 9-18-2003 by Ord. No. 420; 8-12-2010 by Ord. No.
519]
C. Every licensee engaged in business but not operating from a fixed place
of business or from a vehicle shall keep the license issued upon the
person engaging in such business, and the same shall be exhibited upon
request of any law enforcement officer.
D. Licenses issued pursuant to this article are assignable and transferable
in connection with a bona fide sale or transfer of the licensed business,
provided that a written report of such transfer is submitted to the Town
Manager or his or her designee or such other person as the Council
may hereafter designate within 60 days of the effective date of such
transfer. In cases other than such a bona fide sale or transfer of the
licensed business, it shall be a misdemeanor for any person to whom any
license has been issued, pursuant to this article, to assign, sell, transfer
or give away said license to another or permit its use by another, and
upon conviction any person violating the provisions of this section shall
be punished with a fine of not less than $75 nor more than $300 or by
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. [Amended 8-12-2010 by Ord.
No. 519]
§ 131-11. Affidavit to be filed in connection with application.
[Amended 8-12-2010 by Ord. No. 519]
All license fees shall be paid in advance in lawful money of the United
States, except as otherwise provided. In any and all cases such fees shall
be ascertained and computed upon the records of the licensee as set forth
in the application, which information shall be stated in an affidavit to be
filed with the application for the license. The Town Manager or his or her
designee or such other person as the Council may hereafter designate is
hereby authorized to require any applicant to submit for examination any
book, record, or tax form or receipt filed with the Internal Revenue Service
or with the Tax Commissioner of the State of Delaware, which shows the
nature of the applicant's business in order to determine the veracity and
truth of any affidavit submitted with any application for a license.
§ 131-10 ELSMERE CODE § 131-12
1:180
§ 131-12. Branch establishments. [Amended 2-24-1986 by Ord. No.
203; 8-12-2010 by Ord. No. 519]
When any licensee conducts a business at branch establishments or
locations, each such branch establishment or location shall comply with
the provisions of § 131-10 hereof. A duplicate license shall be issued by
the Town Manager or his or her designee or such other person as the
Council may hereafter designate upon payment of a sum in the amount
of the original license fee established under the preceding categories and
§ 131-4A(1) through (49) for each branch establishment when it is shown
to his or her satisfaction that a licensee conducts a business at branch
establishments or locations.
§ 131-13. Duplicate and amended licenses. [Amended 2-24-1986 by
Ord. No. 203; 9-18-2003 by Ord. No. 420; 8-12-2010 by Ord. No.
519]
Duplicate licenses may be issued by the Town Manager or his or her
designee or such other person as the Council may hereafter designate to
replace any license previously issued which has been lost or destroyed,
upon the applicant therefor filing an affidavit attesting to such fact, and
at the time of filing such affidavit pay to the Town Manager or his or
her designee or such other person as the Council may hereafter designate
a fee of $10 therefor. No license issued pursuant to this article shall be
transferable; provided, however, that where a license is issued authorizing
an owner, person, firm or company to conduct a business at a particular
place, such licensee may upon application therefor and paying a fee of $10
have the license previously issued amended so as to authorize the conduct
of such business from such other place or location.
§ 131-14. Enforcement. [Amended 8-12-2010 by Ord. No. 519]
It shall be the duty of the Town Manager or his or her designee or such
other person as the Council may hereafter designate and he is hereby
directed to enforce each, all and every provision of this article. The Public
Safety Department shall render such assistance in the enforcement of this
article as from time to time may be required by the Town Manager or his or
her designee or such other person as the Council may hereafter designate.
The Town Manager or his or her designee or such other person as the
Council may hereafter designate in the exercise of the duties imposed upon
him and acting through his deputies shall examine all places of business
in the Town not less than once in each year to ascertain whether or not
the provisions of this article have been complied with. The Town Manager
or his or her designee or such other person as the Council may hereafter
designate and his deputies shall have the power to examine all necessary
books, records, tax forms or receipts of any person, owner, firm or company
operating, carrying on or engaging in any business, profession, pursuit or
calling within the corporate limits of the Town of Elsmere for the purpose
of ascertaining and determining if there has been compliance by licensees
with the provisions of this article, and for the further purpose of
§ 131-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-14
1:181
ascertaining the amount of license fees required to be paid hereunder. The
Town Manager or his or her designee or such other person as the Council
may designate and all of his deputies shall have the power and authority
to enter, free of charge, at any time any place of business required to be
licensed by the provisions of this article, and to demand an exhibition of
such license. Any person having any such license theretofore issued in his
possession or under his control, who fails to exhibit the same on demand,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction any person violating
the provisions of this section shall be punished with a fine of not less than
$75 nor more than $300 or by imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
§ 131-15. Issuance to debtor licensees. [Amended 8-12-2010 by
Ord. No. 519]
No license for any ensuing, current or unexpired license period shall be
issued to any owner, person, firm or company who, at the time of making
application for any license, is indebted to the Town of Elsmere for any
unpaid license fees required to be paid under the provisions of any
ordinance of the Town of Elsmere; provided, however, that the Town
Manager or his or her designee or such other person as the Council may
hereafter designate may, upon showing acceptable to him, enter into an
agreement with any person indebted to the Town of Elsmere for the
nonpayment of license fees due under any ordinance for any past license
period, provided that such person agrees with the Town Manager or his or
her designee or such other person as the Council may hereafter designate
to pay delinquent license fees in equal installments extending over a period
not to exceed one year. In such agreement such delinquent licensee shall
acknowledge his debt for such delinquent license fees and agree in case
default be made in the payment of any installment that the whole amount
shall become immediately due and payable and that in case suit be brought
to enforce the collection of delinquent license fees that the debtor will pay
all costs of suit. In case such agreement is executed, a license may be issued
for any current or ensuing license period to such delinquent licensee upon
such person paying the fee prescribed for the current or ensuing license
period, together with penalties, if any.
§ 131-16. Period of licenses and date when due and payable.
[Amended 4-10-2008 by Ord. No. 492; 7-12-2012 by Ord. No. 555]
Beginning November 1, 2012 all licenses required hereunder shall be for
the period of November 1 of one year to October 31 of the next ensuing
year. All licenses shall be due and payable from the first date on which the
same shall he applicable and effective.
§ 131-17. Acceptance of lesser amounts.
No person charged with the enforcement of any of the provisions of this
article shall knowingly accept or receive any sum for any license required
hereunder which is less than the amount actually required to be paid under
the provisions of this article.
§ 131-14 ELSMERE CODE § 131-18
1:182
§ 131-18. Remedies, cumulative.
The conviction and punishment of any person for engaging in any business
without first obtaining a license to conduct such business shall not relieve
such person from paying the license fee due and unpaid at the time of
such conviction, nor shall the payment of any license fee prevent a criminal
prosecution for the violation of any of the provisions of this article. The use
of any of the remedies prescribed hereunder shall not bar the use of any
other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article.
§ 131-19. Written statements required; penalties. [Amended
9-18-2003 by Ord. No. 420; 8-12-2010 by Ord. No. 519]
A. Every applicant for a license must file with the Town Manager or his or her
designee or such person as the Council may hereafter designate a written
statement made by the applicants or by an agent or other authorized person
having knowledge of the facts, showing all information upon which the
license fee is to be computed as the same appears from the records of the
business during the preceding calendar year and such other and further
information as may be required to be furnished by the Town Manager or
his or her designee or such other person as the Council may hereafter
designate in order that the amount of the license fee due hereunder may
be computed. The written statement shall be made upon forms furnished
by the Town Manager or his or her designee or such other person as the
Council may hereafter designate, and the written statement shall include a
certificate in haec verba:
"I declare under penalty of making a false certificate that this return is
made by me, that I am authorized to make such return and that to the
best of my knowledge it is a true, correct and complete return, made in
good faith for the years stated pursuant to the provisions of the License
Ordinance of the Town of Elsmere."
B. No statement filed hereunder by an applicant shall be conclusive as to the
Town of Elsmere as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of
such statement preclude the Town from collecting, by appropriate action,
such sum as may be found to be truly due and payable hereunder. The
statement and each of the items therein contained shall be subject to audit
and verification by the Town Manager or his or her designee or such other
person as the Council may hereafter designate or by one of his deputies,
all of whom are hereby authorized to examine, audit all necessary books,
records, tax forms or receipts of any licensee or applicant for license as may
be necessary, in his judgment, to ascertain the correct amount of the license
fee due. All licensees, applicants for licenses, and owners, persons and
companies operating, carrying on or engaging in any business, profession,
pursuit or calling within the corporate limits of the Town of Elsmere are
hereby required to permit such examination for the purposes aforesaid. The
information or date obtained from such examination or audit or from any
statement required hereunder shall be used for the purpose of enforcing
the provisions of this article. The written statement hereinabove required
shall be filed at the time the license is applied for, and the Town Manager
§ 131-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-19
1:183
or his or her designee or such other person as the Council may hereafter
designate may withhold the issuance of any license until the required
statement is furnished. Any person making or filing a false certificate or
return under the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction any person violating the provisions of this section shall
be punished with a fine of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000 or by
imprisonment not to exceed three months, or both fine and imprisonment in
the discretion of the court.
§ 131-20. Delinquencies; penalties.
A. Delinquency dates. All license fees required by this article shall be
deemed delinquent if not paid on or before the close of business on the
first day of November of each year. [Amended 7-12-2012 by Ord. No.
555]
B. Penalties. Whenever the license fee required by this article is not paid on
or before the delinquency date, in addition to the license fee a penalty
equal to 50% of the amount of the license fee shall be imposed and due
immediately. Additionally, any license fee and or penalty required by this
article which remains unpaid at the close of business on the first day
of December of each year shall be treated as if the person required to
obtain the license had failed to obtain the licenses and therefore shall
be subject the penalties contained in § 131-20C and D of this article.
[Amended 2-24-1986 by Ord. No. 203; 8-12-2010 by Ord. No. 519;
7-12-2012 by Ord. No. 555]
C. Failure to obtain license. [Amended 8-12-2010 by Ord. No. 519]
(1) Any person or company required to be licensed under this chapter
who conducts business within the Town prior to obtaining the
required license shall be fined not less than $300 nor more than
$600 and shall immediately cease and desist from doing business
within the Town until they have obtained the proper license.
(2) Each day a business, person or company continues to carry on or
engage in any business, profession or calling without a valid business
license shall constitute and be a separate offense and punishable as
such.
D. Criminal penalties. No person, as defined by this article, shall operate,
carry on or engage in any business, profession or calling, as defined by
or coming within the provisions of this article, without first obtaining
a license, as required by this article. No person having been licensed
and being delinquent in the payment of the license fee shall continue
to operate, carry on or engage in the business, profession or calling
for which he or she may have been licensed without first removing
such delinquency. Each day’s operation, carrying on or engaging in any
business, profession or calling in violation of this article shall constitute
and be a separate offense and punishable as such. The individuals
composing any firm, partnership or association and each of them, and
the president, managing officer and the directors and each or any of
them of any corporation violating this article shall, for each and every
offense, be deemed guilty of violating this article and shall be punishable
as provided herein. Every person, as defined by this article, violating
§ 131-19 ELSMERE CODE § 131-20
1:184
any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and, upon conviction thereof before a court of competent jurisdiction,
besides being liable for the payment of said license fee, together with all
penalties, shall forfeit and pay a fine of not less than $300 nor more than
$500 for each such offense. [Amended 9-18-2003 by Ord. No. 420;
3-10-2016 by Ord. No. 612]
§ 131-21. First license.
The first license to be obtained under the provisions of this article shall be
applied for and the license paid not later than May 1, 1966. Every applicant
shall, at the time of making application for a license, pay the license fee
due and payable according to the classification or classifications of the
applicant's business or businesses.
§ 131-22. Failure to file required statement or corrected statement.
[Amended 8-12-2010 by Ord. No. 519]
If any person fails to file any statement required hereby within the time
prescribed hereunder or if after demand therefor made by the Town
Manager or his or her designee or such other person as the Council may
hereafter designate fails to file a corrected statement, the Town Manager
or his or her designee or such other person as the Council may hereafter
designate may determine the amount of license fee due from such person
from such information as may be available to the Town Manager or his
or her designee and if necessary may estimate the license fee required
hereunder upon the basis of the amount of license fees paid by other
persons in like businesses, professions, pursuits or callings or by
considering other facts which may be available to the Town Manager or
his or her designee or such other person as the Council may hereafter
designate. In case such a determination is made, the Town Manager or
his or her designee or such other person as the Council may hereafter
designate shall give notice of the amount so assessed by serving the same
personally upon the licensee, or when this is not possible, by depositing
the same in the United States mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed
to the person so assessed at his last known address. Such person may,
within 10 days after the serving of such notice or of the mailing thereof,
make application in writing to the Town Manager or his or her designee
or such other person as the Council may hereafter designate for a hearing
on the amount of the fee. If application is not so made within the time
prescribed, the assessment shall become final. If such an application is
filed, the Town Manager or his or her designee or such other person as
the Council may hereafter designate must cause the matter to be set down
for a hearing within 15 days before a board of review, consisting of the
Mayor, Secretary of Council and the Treasurer. Such board shall consider
all evidence produced and shall make written findings thereon, a copy of
such findings to be served upon the applicant, in the manner prescribed
above for the service of notice of assessment. Such finding shall become
final at the expiration of five days from the date of service within which time
exceptions may be filed by the applicant. If filed, the board so appointed
§ 131-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-22
1:185
shall consider same and make such modification or modifications as may be
necessary in light of such exceptions. The decision of the board thereafter
shall become final.
§ 131-23. Additional powers of Town Manager. [Amended 8-12-2010
by Ord. No. 519]
The Town Manager or his or her designee or such other person as the
Council may hereafter designate shall, in addition to all other powers
conferred upon him under this article, have the power to extend the time
for filing any such statements for a period not to exceed 30 days when
requested so to do and for good cause shown, provided that the request
is made before the license fee becomes delinquent. In such case he may
waive any penalty that would have otherwise accrued. With the approval
of the City Treasurer, the Town Manager or his or her designee or such
other person as the Council may hereafter designate shall have power to
compromise any claim for license fee, penalty and interest amounting to
less than $30 and with the approval of the Council power to compromise
any claim for license fee amounting to $30 or more.
§ 131-24. Rules and regulations. [Amended 8-12-2010 by Ord. No.
519]
The Town Manager or his or her designee or such other person as the
Council may hereafter designate is hereby authorized to make such rules
and regulations as may be necessary to aid or assist in the administration
and enforcement of the provisions of this article. No such rules and
regulations shall be effective unless and until the Town Manager or his or
her designee or such other person as the Council may hereafter designate
files with the Mayor and Council sufficient copies of the proposed rules
and regulations for distribution to and among the members. The Mayor and
Council may approve by resolution such proposed rules and regulations,
and the same shall then become effective. Unless the Mayor and Council
shall disapprove, by appropriate resolution, any proposed rule or regulation
promulgated by the Town Manager or his or her designee or such other
person as the Council may hereafter designate within 15 days of the date of
the filing of the proposed rules and regulations with the Mayor and Council,
such rules and regulations so filed shall thereupon become effective.
§ 131-25. Applicability.
Notwithstanding any provisions appearing herein to the contrary, the term
"business" when used in this article shall not apply to any domestic or
foreign corporation whose only activities in and within the corporate limits
of the Town of Elsmere are the maintenance of a statutory office, so as
to comply with any statute of the State of Delaware or of any Act of
the Congress of the United States, nor shall this article be applicable to
Railroad Companies, subject to Part 1 of the Interstate Commerce Act.
§ 131-22 ELSMERE CODE § 131-26
1:186
§ 131-26. Effective date.
The provisions of this article shall become effective April 1, 1966. All sums
heretofore paid as license fees under the provision of any ordinance in effect
prior to that date and where the period of the license has not expired shall
be applied as a credit against any license fee payable under the provisions
of this article.
§ 131-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-26
1:187

ARTICLE II
Disorderly Establishments and Entertainment Clubs
[Adopted 9-10-2009 by Ord. No. 506]
§ 131-27. Disorderly establishments.
A. Every licensed business shall conduct its business and maintain its
business premises and the area surrounding its business which is
routinely used by the patrons of the business in compliance with and
not in violation of all applicable provisions of this Code and of state law
regarding offenses involving the public safety, particularly for purposes
of this section, all applicable provisions of Chapters 67, 87, 99 and
135 of this Code, 11 Del. C. and 16 Del. C., and including applicable
provisions of 21 Del. C., in, on or about the business premises and any
adjacent or accessory parking lot so that any such business does not
constitute a disorderly establishment. Whenever the owner or operator,
or agent for the owner or operator, conducts a business licensed under
this chapter and there have been two or more separate events occurring
within a twelve-month period on the business premises, the business
shall be considered a disorderly establishment, and the provisions of this
section may be invoked.
B. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
DISORDERLY ESTABLISHMENT — Any business, whether or not it
lawfully stores or sells alcoholic beverages for consumption on or off
the premises, where acts are performed or activities are conducted,
whether inside or outside the business premises by representatives or
employees of the owners, the owners themselves or patrons of the
business, which are contrary to the rules of good order and behavior,
violative of the public peace, indecent, or which tend to corrupt the
morals of the community, promote breaches of the peace, or create
a public inconvenience annoyance or alarm or nuisance to the
neighborhood in which it is located, and the business licensee or his
authorized agents knew or should have known or were advised of the
activities and failed to control those activities, either inside or, if outside,
on the business premises.
EVENT — One which either:
Involves at least one offense enumerated in Subsection D of this
section; or
(1)
Has been the subject of a computer assisted dispatch or of a written
police report (with or without an arrest or conviction); and
Occurred on or outside of the business premises but within the
perimeter of the lot on which the business is located or in or on
any adjacent or accessory parking lot that is owned or leased
for use by that business and occurs during the hours of use of
the business and lot by the business or its patrons; or
(a)
(2)
§ 131-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-27
1:189
IN ON OR ABOUT THE PREMISES — Any area located within 500 feet
of the property line of the licensed business.
C. For the purpose of identifying and eliminating nuisance establishments,
the Town Manager or his or her designee or such other person as
the Council may hereafter designate may confer with the Council, the
Town Solicitor or designee, the Public Safety Department, and the Chief
of Police to gather information on nuisance establishments and share
recommendations as to the elimination of nuisance establishments.
[Amended 8-12-2010 by Ord. No. 519]
D. Alleged offenses. The provisions of this section shall be applicable if any
of the following violations are alleged to have occurred, any violation
of the Code of the Town of Elsmere, Titles 4, 11, 16 or 21 of the Code
of the State of Delaware. The provisions of this section shall further be
applicable if offenses occur in, on or about the business premises or
accessory parking lot which for the purpose of this section shall mean
any area located within 500 feet of the property line of the licensed
business.
E. License suspension or revocation. Upon the occurrence of two events
involving any of the alleged offenses, or upon the recommendation of
any of the persons described in Subsection C above, the Town Manager
or his or her designee or such other person as the Council may hereafter
designate may reasonably conclude that the business constitutes a
disorderly establishment, and the business license for such business so
operated may be suspended for up to 30 days. Such business license
may thereafter be suspended again for a maximum of 60 days or may be
revoked only if: [Amended 8-12-2010 by Ord. No. 519]
(1) There have been three or more events occurring within a twelvemonth
period; and
(2) The business licensee or his authorized agents were fully aware of
the activities and failed to control those activities.
F. Limitations. The provisions of this section shall not be applicable if
the owner or operator can demonstrate to the satisfaction of both the
Chief of Police and the Town Manager or his or her designee or such
other person as the Council may hereafter designate that the events
concerning which the provisions of this section would otherwise apply
did not have their origin in or on the owner's or operator's business
premises or were clearly beyond the reasonable control of such owner or
operator, or the authorized agent for the same. [Amended 8-12-2010
by Ord. No. 519]
G. Voluntary action by licensee. The owner, operator, or agent of any
business licensed under this chapter voluntarily may take steps to
reduce or eliminate the criminal activity taking place on or about the
The phrase "in on or about the business premises" shall mean
any area located within 500 feet of the property line of the
licensed business or within the reasonable area where activities
located to the business are likely to occur.
(b)
(c) Was initiated inside the business premises.
§ 131-27 ELSMERE CODE § 131-27
1:190
premises, such as cutting back nighttime operating hours, hiring private
security, increasing lighting, and other like measures. The Town
Manager or his or her designee or such other person as the Council may
hereafter designate in his discretion may accept these measures in lieu
of suspending a license until, if and when more qualifying events occur.
[Amended 8-12-2010 by Ord. No. 519]
H. Appeals. Any business licensee aggrieved by a suspension or revocation,
pursuant to this section, of the Town Manager or his or her designee or
such other person as the Council may hereafter designate may appeal to
the Superior Court of the State of Delaware, within 15 days of receipt
of written notice of the suspension or revocation being appealed. Any
appeal to the Superior Court shall act as a stay of that suspension or
revocation until a decision has been rendered by the Court in that appeal
proceeding, or until there has been a final decision in any appeal of such
decision of the Court. [Amended 8-12-2010 by Ord. No. 519]
I. Business license ineligibility. Subject to exception, the owner or coowner(
s) or agent for the owner or co-owner(s) of a business that was
licensed by the Town, which license was revoked as a result of legal
action taken by law enforcement authorities of the Town or of New
Castle County or by those of the state or by those of federal authorities,
or by any combination of such law enforcement authorities, to enforce
city, state or federal code requirements or criminal laws as to activities
at such business or its location, including nuisance abatement actions
for illegal drug, prostitution, or similar prohibited activities, shall not be
eligible for up to one year from the date of such license revocation to
obtain a business license to reopen the same business, or to open any
other business at the same or any other location in the Town.
§ 131-28. Entertainment clubs.
A. Findings of fact. The following conditions exist with regard to
entertainment clubs open to the public.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different
meaning is intended:
CLUB PREMISES — Any place where an entertainment club is operated
or maintained, including all hallways, bathrooms, parking areas and
other adjacent portions of the premises which are accessible to the
public during operating hours.
ENTERTAINMENT CLUB — Any commercial premises which are open
to the public, the primary function of which is to offer patrons an
opportunity to engage in social activities such as dancing, roller-skating,
ice skating or the enjoyment of live or prerecorded music, or the
enjoyment of entertainment provided by dancers or other performers.
As an incidental function, an entertainment club may sell and serve
food and beverages to its patrons. The term "entertainment club" does
not include the following: theaters where the patrons sit in parallel
rows of fixed seats; full-service restaurants or other premises serving
food and/or alcoholic beverages where the only entertainment consists
§ 131-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-28
1:191
of background music which is incidental to the primary function of
serving food and/or alcohol; outdoor performances; a banquet, party or
celebration conducted or invited guests which is not open to the public;
dances or events sponsored and operated by a governmental entity, an
educational institution, or nonprofit religious, charitable, benevolent,
fraternal, or social organization.
PERSON — One or more natural persons, corporations, partnerships,
associations, or other entities capable of having an action at law brought
against such entity.
C. Entertainment club license required. It is unlawful for any person to
own, lease, operate, manage or maintain an entertainment club in the
Town of Elsmere without first obtaining an entertainment club license
from the Town. For multiuse facilities which include an entertainment
club, a separate and additional license must be issued for the
entertainment club operation.
D. License application procedures. In addition to the application
procedures referred to in Subsection E of this section, an applicant for
an entertainment club license shall provide the following:
(1) A written statement setting forth all measures proposed to insure
that adequate traffic control, crowd protection and security, both
inside and outside the premises, will be maintained during operating
hours, within one hour of opening and within one hour of closing
operations.
(2) A statement of the proposed schedule of operating hours and days.
(3) A statement of whether the applicant, or the applicant's officers,
directors, partners or any other person involved in the operation or
management of the entertainment club has been convicted within
the preceding five years of any crimes involving firearms, gambling,
racketeering, controlled substances, sexual offenses, prostitution,
assault, or contributing to the delinquency of a minor.
E. Procedures for issuance or denial of license. After receiving a complete
application for an entertainment club license, as specified in Subsection
D above, the Town shall follow the following procedures: [Amended
8-12-2010 by Ord. No. 519]
(1) The Town Manager or his or her designee or such other person
as the Council may hereafter designate shall forward copies of the
application to appropriate Town officials for their comments
regarding compliance with the Town Code. The Town Manager or his
or her designee or such other person as the Council may hereafter
designate shall consider all materials and comments submitted and
shall issue or deny the license within 10 working days after the
date on which a completed application was filed unless the applicant
agrees to an extension of the time period in writing.
(2) An entertainment club license shall be denied by the Town Manager
or his or her designee or such other person as the Council may
hereafter designate for any one or more of the following grounds:
(a) If the business premises do not comply with all applicable Town
ordinances and state laws;
§ 131-28 ELSMERE CODE § 131-28
1:192
(b) If the application is incomplete or if it contains any material
misrepresentation;
(c) If the application does not show adequate measures for the
protection of the public health, safety and welfare in terms of
traffic control, crowd protection and security, both inside and
outside the premises, during operating hours, within one hour of
opening and within one hour of closing operations.
(3) If the Town Manager or his or her designee or such other person as
the Council may hereafter designate denies a license, written notice
of the denial stating the reasons why shall be sent to the applicant
within two working days after the denial. The applicant shall have a
period of 10 working days after the date of license denial to appeal
in the manner provided by ordinance for administrative review.
F. Operating rules and regulations. The following operating rules and
regulations shall apply to all entertainment clubs in the Town:
(1) The standards of conduct applicable to all businesses in the Town
shall apply to entertainment clubs.
(2) It shall be the obligation of the licensee to employ an adequate
number of qualified security personnel who will be present on club
premises during all operating hours to maintain peace and order and
to ensure compliance with all applicable laws of the state and of the
Town.
(3) It shall be the obligation of the licensee to remove from the club
premises any person whose conduct poses a physical danger to the
safety of others present.
(4) It shall be the obligation of the licensee to prevent loitering, the
creation of public nuisances or disturbances of the peace by any
patrons of the entertainment club on club premises or in the
immediate vicinity. "Loitering" shall not include the act of waiting in
line to gain admission to the club.
(5) It shall be the obligation of the licensee to clean up all litter resulting
from club operations. The cleanup shall occur within five hours after
the end of each day's operation and shall extend for a two-block
radius around the club.
G. Access by police officers. All police officers of the Town shall have free
access to all entertainment clubs for the purpose of inspection and to
enforce compliance with the provisions of this article at all times that
the premises are open to the patrons.
H. Suspension or revocation of licenses.
(1) The Town Manager or his or her designee or such other person
as the Council may hereafter designate may, when reasonably
necessary, suspend an entertainment club license whenever the
licensee, or any manager, officer, director, agent, or employee of
the licensee has caused, permitted or knowingly done any of the
following: [Amended 8-12-2010 by Ord. No. 519]
(a) Failed to keep the building structure or equipment of the
licensed premises in compliance with the applicable health,
building, fire or safety laws, regulations or ordinances in a way
§ 131-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-28
1:193
which relates to or affects public health or safety on the
entertainment club premises.
(b) Failed to comply with the operating rules and regulations of
entertainment clubs specified in Subsection F of this article.
(2) Such suspension shall remain in effect until the conditions causing
the suspension are resolved and reasonable measures are taken to
ensure that the same will not reoccur as determined by the Town
Manager or his or her designee or such other person as the Council
may hereafter designate. [Amended 8-12-2010 by Ord. No. 519]
(3) The Town Manager or his or her designee or such other person
as the Council may hereafter designate may, when reasonably
necessary, revoke an entertainment club license on any one or more
of the following grounds: [Amended 8-12-2010 by Ord. No. 519]
(a) Whenever the Town learns that the licensee made a material
false statement or representation, or failed to disclose any
material information to the Town, in connection with any
application for the entertainment club license or any license
renewal.
(b) Whenever the licensee or any manager, officer, director, agent or
employee of the licensee fails within a reasonable time to resolve
a condition that caused a license suspension.
(c) Whenever the licensee or any manager, officer, director, agent
or employee of the licensee knowingly permits conduct on the
licensed premises that violates any federal, state or Town
criminal or penal statute, law or ordinance.
(d) Whenever operation of the entertainment club becomes the
proximate cause of a significant increase in criminal activity on
the premises or in the immediate vicinity in such a way as to
endanger persons or property.
(4) The suspension or revocation of a license may be appealed to the
Superior Court of the State of Delaware.
§ 131-29. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable. If any provision of this article or
its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity
shall not affect other provisions or applications of this article which can be
given effect without the invalid provisions or application.
§ 131-30. Nuisance; injunction.
Any violation of this article is declared to be a nuisance. In addition to any
other relief provided by this article, the Town Solicitor or designee may
apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction to prohibit the
continuation of any violation of this article. The application for relief may
include seeking a temporary restraining order, temporary injunction and
permanent injunction.
§ 131-28 ELSMERE CODE § 131-31
1:194
§ 131-31. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this article shall
be fined not less than $250 nor more than $1,000 for each offense, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which
a violation occurs or continues.
§ 131-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-31
1:195

ARTICLE III
Registration of Home Occupations
[Adopted 3-10-2016 by Ord. No. 612]
§ 131-32. Purpose.
The regulations relating to the registration of certain home occupations are
designed to protect and maintain the residential character of established
neighborhoods while recognizing that certain professional and limited
business activities have traditionally been performed in the home. This
article recognizes that when properly limited and regulated such activities
can be performed in a residential structure without changing the character
of either the neighborhood or the structure.
§ 131-33. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them as follows:
HOME OCCUPATION — A business, profession, occupation or trade
conducted for gain or support entirely within a residential building or a
structure accessory thereto, which is incidental and secondary to the use
of such building for dwelling purposes and which does not change the
essential residential character of such building.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY — For the purpose of this article, spouse, mother,
father, guardian, child, sister, brother, grandparent, grandchild, plus the
various combinations of half, step, in-law and adopted relationships that can
be derived from those named.
§ 131-34. General requirements; restrictions.
A home occupation, as defined in § 131-33, may be permitted so long as
such business conforms to the following standards:
A. The home occupation use shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to
the use of the premises for residential purposes;
B. No alteration of the principal residential building shall be made which
changes the character and appearance thereof as a dwelling;
C. The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the principal
dwelling unit or within an accessory structure, and in no event shall
such use be apparent from any public way. The area used for the
home occupations shall not exceed 25% of the gross floor area of the
residence;
D. There shall be no outdoor operations, storage or display of products,
materials, goods, supplies or equipment associated with the home
occupation;
E. Home occupations shall not be conducted in such a manner as to
produce noise, dust, vibration, glare, smoke, odor, electrical
interference, fire hazard, traffic or any other nuisance not typically
experienced in the zoning district where the property is located;
§ 131-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-34
1:197
F. Deliveries shall not exceed those normally and reasonably occurring
from a residence and shall not exceed more than an average of one truck
delivery per day which shall only occur between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m., provided that no delivery shall be made via a combination
vehicle (for example, a vehicle commonly known as a eighteen-wheeler);
G. Home occupations that attract customers or clients to the premises shall
not be allowed under this article and must comply with the special
exception use of a home occupation in accordance with Town of Elsmere
Code Chapter 225 and/or home occupations that attract customers or
clients to the premises shall be permitted and exempt from all other
parking regulations provided that the frequency and consistency of
traffic to and from the site in relation to the home occupation does
not interfere with the community's comfort, safety, or enjoyment of the
neighborhood around the subject property as a residential area or create
a visual or traffic annoyance to persons of normal sensibilities such
that a public nuisance is created. High-volume visits and traffic to and
from the site during the hours of 8:00 a.m. until 7:00 p.m. is evidence
that the home occupation is not indistinguishable from other dwellings
and therefore creates a public nuisance in the residential neighborhood;
[Amended 6-9-2016 by Ord. No. 615]
H. No one may be employed in the home occupation other than members
of the immediate family of the owner or primary person renting the
property;
I. Home occupations do not include garage sales and yard sales;
J. If the property is being used solely as a mailing address for a
professional license the owner(s) possesses, and no business is being
conducted on the premises and no visitors, phone calls, or advertising is
conducted on the premises, no fee will be required. [Added 6-9-2016
by Ord. No. 615]
§ 131-35. Registration requirements.
No home occupations shall operate within the corporate limits of the Town
of Elsmere without first registering the home occupation with the Town and
obtaining a home occupation permit by completing the registration form
furnished by the Town Manager or his or her designee or such other person
as the Council may hereafter designate and paying an annual registration
fee in the sum of $50.
A. Application shall be made by the legal occupant of the residence. In such
case in which application is not made by the legal property owner, the
property owner shall submit an affidavit acknowledging the application
for a home occupation;
B. Permits for a home occupation shall be granted to a designated person
who resides at the residential address and are nontransferable from
person to person or address to address. The address must be the
applicant's primary residence;
C. The Town Manager may revoke any home occupation permit for
noncompliance with any of the provisions of this chapter or if the
property has been deemed a public nuisance. If the permit is revoked,
such home occupation use shall be terminated immediately;
§ 131-34 ELSMERE CODE § 131-35
1:198
D. Home occupations shall comply with all local, state or federal
regulations pertinent to the activity pursued, and the requirements of
or permission granted by this article shall not be construed as an
exemption from such regulations. Proof of compliance must be
submitted at the time of application;
E. All annual home occupation registrations required by this article shall
be for the period of November 1 of one year to October 31 of the next
ensuing year;
F. Whenever a home occupation permit has been issued, the person(s)
conducting business at the location shall not need to obtain a business
license in order to conduct business at the permitted location.
§ 131-36. Delinquencies; violations and penalties.
A. Delinquency dates. All registration fees required by this article shall be
deemed delinquent if not paid on or before the close of business on the
first day of November of each year.
B. Penalties. Whenever the permit fee required by this article is not paid on
or before the delinquency date, in addition to the permit fee a penalty
equal to 50% of the amount of the permit fee shall be imposed and due
immediately. Additionally, any permit fee and/or penalty required by this
article which remains unpaid at the close of business on the first day
of December of each year shall be treated as if the person required to
obtain the permit had failed to obtain the licenses and therefore shall be
subject to the penalties contained in § 131-36C and D of this article.
C. Failure to obtain license.
(1) Anyone required to register under this article who conducts business
prior to obtaining the required home occupation permit shall be
fined not less than $300 nor more than $500 and shall immediately
cease and desist from conducting business until he/she has obtained
the proper permit.
(2) Each day a person continues to conduct or engage in any business,
profession, occupation or trade as a home occupation without a valid
home occupation permit shall constitute and be a separate offense
and punishable as such.
D. Criminal penalties. No person shall conduct or engage in any business,
profession, occupation or trade as a home occupation as defined by or
coming within the provisions of this article, without first obtaining a
permit, as required by this article. No person having been permitted
and being delinquent in the payment of the permit fee shall continue
to conduct or engage in the business, profession, occupation or trade
for which he or she may have been licensed without first removing
such delinquency. Each day's operation, conducting or engaging in any
business, profession, occupation or trade in violation of this article shall
constitute and be a separate offense and punishable as such. The
individuals composing any firm, partnership or association and each of
them, and the president, managing officer and the directors and each
or any of them of any corporation violating this article shall, for each
and every offense, be deemed guilty of violating this article and shall
be punishable as provided herein. Every person violating any provision
§ 131-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-36
1:199
of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon
conviction thereof before a court of competent jurisdiction, besides
being liable for the payment of said license fee, together with all
penalties, shall forfeit and pay a fine of not less than $300 nor more than
$500 for each such offense.
§ 131-37. Effective date.
The provisions of this article shall become effective March 31, 2016. All
existing home occupations are required to register within 60 days of the
effective date of this article. The fee for the first home occupation
registration period of March 31, 2016, through October 31, 2016, shall be
$25.
§ 131-36 ELSMERE CODE § 131-37
1:200
Chapter 135
LOITERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 87.
§ 135-1. Loitering.
A person or persons are guilty of loitering when:
A. They stand, sit idling or loiter upon any pavement, sidewalk or
crosswalk, or stand or sit in a group or congregate with others, on any
street or way open to the public in this county so as to obstruct or hinder
the free and convenient passage of persons walking, riding or driving
over or along such pavement, walk, street or way, and shall fail to make
way, remove or pass, after reasonable request from any person;
B. They loiter or remain in or about a school building or grounds, not
having reason or relationship involving custody of or responsibility for a
pupil or any other specific or legitimate reason for being there, unless
they have written permission from the principal;
C. They loiter or remain or wander about in a public place for the purpose
of begging; or
D. They loiter or remain in a public place for the purpose of engaging
or soliciting another person to engage in sexual intercourse or deviant
sexual intercourse.
§ 135-2. Opportunity to explain and dispel alarm.
Unless flight by the person or persons in question or any other
circumstances makes it impracticable, a peace officer, prior to any arrest for
an offense under this section, shall afford the person or persons in question
an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be warranted,
by requesting them to identify themselves and explain their presence and
conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the
peace officer did not comply with the preceding sentence, or if it appears
that the explanation given to the person or persons in question was true,
and, if believed by the peace officer at the time, would have dispelled the
alarm.
§ 135-3. Enforcement by peace officer.
If, after affording the person or persons in question an opportunity to
identify themselves and to explain their presence or conduct, the peace
officer has reason to believe the alarm which prompted him to approach the
individuals in question has not been dispelled, he shall tell them to disperse
or to move on. He shall also tell them how they have violated this chapter
and shall warn them that if they continue to act in violation of this chapter
they will be arrested and will be liable to the fines and/or other penalties
§ 131-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-3
1:201
described in § 135-5 below. This warning shall continue in effect for 45 days
following the day on which it is given and shall be entered into a record, and
within that time no additional warning shall be required in order to make
an arrest under § 135-4 below.
§ 135-4. Arrest for offense.
Where a person or group of persons are ordered to move on or disperse
for an offense under any preceding section, and thereafter where any police
officer, in the exercise of reasonable judgment, shall determine that the
person or group of persons are found loitering or congregating in violation
of any preceding section, no further warning shall be required prior to an
arrest.
§ 135-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-18-2003 by Ord. No.
420]
A person who is found in violation of this chapter shall for the first offense
be punished by fine of not less than $100 nor more than $300. For each
subsequent like offense, he shall be fined not less than $250 nor more
than $1,000 or imprisoned for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both.
All other ordinances, particularity Ordinance No. 120, in conflict with the
above are hereby repealed or amended as stated above. Such action shall
not, however, abate a right of action already occurred under any repealed
ordinance.
Chapter 143
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 71.
§ 143-1. Definitions.
All terminology used in this chapter, not defined herein, shall be in
conformance with applicable publications of the American National
Standard Institute (ANSI) or its successor body. As used in this chapter, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
A-WEIGHTED SOUND-PRESSURE LEVEL — The sound-pressure level as
measured on a sound-level meter using the A-weighting network. The level
so read shall be designated dB(A) or dBA.
AMBIENT NOISE LEVEL — The all-encompassing background noise
associated with a given environment without the sound contribution of the
specific source in question.
§ 135-3 ELSMERE CODE § 143-1
1:202
DECIBEL — A standard unit for measuring the sound-pressure level. It is
equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure
of the sound measured to a reference which is 20 micropascals denoted as
dB.
DISTRICT, RESIDENTIAL — As defined in Chapter 225, Zoning.
DISTRICT, COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL — As defined in Chapter 225,
Zoning.
DISTRICT, GENERAL INDUSTRIAL — As defined in Chapter 225, Zoning.
DISTRICT, HIGHWAY DEVELOPMENT — As defined in Chapter 225,
Zoning.
EMERGENCY — Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or
imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate
actions.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE — A motor vehicle used in response to public
calamity or to protect persons or property from imminent danger.
EQUIVALENT SOUND LEVEL (A-WEIGHTED) — The constant sound level
that, in a given situation and time period (x) conveys the sound energy as
the actual time-varying A-weighted sound. Designated Leq(x) dB(A).
MOTOR VEHICLE — As defined in the Motor Vehicle Code of the State
of Delaware, or any vehicles which are propelled or drawn by mechanical
equipment, such as but not limited to passenger cars, trucks, truck-trailers,
semitrailers, campers, motorcycles, minibikes, go-carts, snowmobiles,
mopeds, amphibious craft on land, dune buggies or racing vehicles.
MUFFLER — Any apparatus whose primary purpose is to transmit liquids
or gases while causing a reduction in sound emission at one end.
NOISE — Any sound which is unwanted or which causes or tends to cause
an adverse physiological effect on human beings.
NOISE DISTURBANCE — Any sound which:
NOISE, PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Any noise for which the information content
of that noise is communicated to the listener, such as but not limited
to understandable spoken speech or comprehensible musical rhythms,
including bass tones with a repetitive and impulsive sound.
POWERED MODEL VEHICLES — Any powered vehicles, either airborne,
waterborne or landborne, which are designed not to carry persons or
property, such as but not limited to model airplanes, boats and rockets,
which can be propelled by mechanical means.
A. Endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals;
B. Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensibilities;
Jeopardizes the value of property and erodes the integrity of the
environment; or
C.
D. Is in excess of the allowable noise levels established in § 143-5 herein.
§ 143-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-1
1:203
PROPERTY BOUNDARY — An imaginary line at the ground surface, and its
vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person
from that owned by another person, or institution, corporation, business or
governmental entity.
PURE TONE — Any sound which can be distinctly heard as a single pitch
or set of single pitches. For the purpose of this section, a pure tone shall
exist if the 1/3 octave band sound-pressure level and the band with the
tone exceeds the arithmetic average of the sound-pressure level of the two
contiguous 1/3 octave bands by 15 dB for bands with center frequencies less
than 160 Hz, eight dB for bands with center frequencies greater than 400
Hz.
SOUND — A temporal and spatial oscillation in pressure, or other physical
quantity, in a medium with internal forces that causes compression and
rarefaction of that medium, and which propagates at finite speed to distant
points.
SOUND LEVEL — The sound-pressure level (SPL) obtained by the use of a
sound-level meter and frequency weighting network, such as A, B or C, as
specified in American National Standards Institute specifications for soundlevel
meters (ANSI SI.4-1971, or the latest approved revision thereof). The
unit of measurement is the decibel. If the frequency weighting employed is
not indicated, the A-weighting shall apply.
SOUND PRESSURE — The instantaneous difference between the actual
pressure and the average or barometric pressure at a given point in space.
WEEKDAY — Any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday which
is not a legally designated holiday.
§ 143-2. Enforcement and penalties.
A. Enforcement. This chapter shall be enforced by the Chief of Police or
his designees, and/or the Code Enforcement Officer, except as otherwise
noted herein.
B. Penalties.
(1) Any person who violates any portion of this chapter shall receive
a verbal order to cease or abate the noise immediately or within a
reasonable time period, "...except that after 9:00 p.m. and until 7:00
a.m., any person designated to enforce this chapter need not issue a
verbal order to cease or abate the noise before charging any person
with a violation of this chapter."
(2) If the order to cease or abate the noise is complied with, or is
complied with and then violated again within 60 days, the person
or persons responsible for the noise under § 143-3 shall be charged
with a violation of this chapter and be subject to a fine of at least
$100 and not to exceed $500, or by imprisonment for not more than
six months, or by both fine and imprisonment.
(3) The order shall be deemed to be properly served upon the person
or persons responsible for the noise under § 143-3 if a copy thereof
is delivered to the owner or agent personally; or by leaving the
notice at the usual place of abode, in the presence of someone in
§ 143-1 ELSMERE CODE § 143-2
1:204
the family or suitable agent and discretion who shall be informed
of the contents thereof, or by certified mail addressed to the owner
or agent at the last known address with a return receipt requested;
or by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place in or about
the structure affected by such notice. Where the person or persons
responsible for the noise under § 143-3 is any owner of premises
within the limits of the Town of Elsmere that such owner does
not occupy, the order shall be deemed to be properly served if
served upon either such owner or owners or upon owner's or owners'
agent(s).
(4) A written record of all measured violations shall be kept by the Chief
of Police or the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 143-3. Noises prohibited.
A. General prohibitions. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons
to make, permit, continue, or cause to be made, or to create a noise
disturbance within the limits of the Town of Elsmere, except as provided
in this chapter. Any owner of premises within the limits of the Town of
Elsmere that such owner does not occupy will be presumed to permit a
noise disturbance to occur after receiving an order in accordance with
§ 143-2B(3) herein. Enforcement of noise violations under this section
need not require the use of a sound-level meter, unless otherwise
specifically stated.
B. Specific prohibitions.
(1) Horns and signaling devices: No person shall sound a vehicular
horn or other audible device except in an emergency warning.
(2) Radios, television sets, phonographs and similar devices:
(a) Operating or permitting the use or operation of any radio
receiving set, musical instrument(s), television, phonographs,
drum or other device for the production or reproduction of
sound in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance.
(b) Operating or permitting the operation of any such device
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and the following 7:00 a.m. in
such a manner as to be plainly audible across real property
boundaries or through partitions common to two parties within
a building, or plainly audible at 50 feet from such device when
operated within a motor vehicle on a public right-of-way or on a
public space.
(3) Exterior loudspeakers: Using or operating, or permitting the use
or operation of any mechanical device or loudspeaker in a fixed
or movable position exterior to any building, or mounted upon any
aircraft or motor vehicle such that the sound therefrom is plainly
audible at or beyond the property boundary of the source, or on a
public way except as provided for below.
(4) Street sales: Selling anything by shouting or by outcry within any
residence zoned district.
(5) Animals: No person shall keep an animal which, by causing
frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the quiet, comfort
§ 143-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-3
1:205
or repose of the neighborhood to such an extent as to constitute a
nuisance.
(6) Loading operations: Loading, unloading, opening or otherwise
handling boxes, crates, containers, garbage cans, or otherwise
similar objects between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the
following day, in such a manner as to create noise disturbance
within a residence district, except during an emergency.
(7) Construction noise: Operating or causing to be operated any
equipment used in commercial construction, repair, alteration, or
demolition work on buildings, structures, streets, alleys or
appurtenances thereto, in the following manner:
(a) With sound control devices which have been tampered with.
(b) In violation of any regulation of the United States
Environmental Protection Agency.
(c) Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day
on weekdays and between 9:00 p.m. on Saturday evenings and
9:00 a.m. on Sunday mornings; or between 9:00 p.m. the day
before and 9:00 a.m. the day of a legal holiday which creates a
noise disturbance; except as provided below.
(8) Explosives, firearms and similar devices: The use or firing of
explosives, firearms or similar devices which create impulsive
sound as to cause a noise disturbance within a residence district or
on a public right-of-way.
(9) Powered model vehicles: Operating or permitting the operation of
powered model vehicles between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. the following morning. Maximum sound-pressure levels during
the permitted periods of operation shall conform to those set forth
in § 143-5 below and shall be measured at the property line of the
source or at a distance of 50 feet if it is operated in a public place.
(10) Refuse compacting vehicles: The operating, or permitting to be
operated, of any motor vehicle which can compact refuse and which
creates during the compacting cycle a sound-pressure level in
excess of 94 dB(A) when measured at 50 feet from any point of
the vehicle, or between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the
following day in residence zoned districts.
(11) Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or generally creating racket on
public streets: between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. so as
to annoy and disturb the quiet comfort or repose of persons in any
business or residence, or of any persons in the vicinity.
(12) Power equipment: Operating, or permitting to be operated, any
power saw, sander, drill, grinder, garden equipment or tools of a
similar nature, outdoors in residence zoned districts between the
hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day, in such a manner
as to create a noise disturbance.
(13) Stationary emergency signaling devices:
(a) Testing of only the electrical, mechanical functioning of a
stationary emergency signaling device shall occur at the same
time each day that a test is performed, but not before 7:00
a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. Any such testing shall only use the
§ 143-3 ELSMERE CODE § 143-3
1:206
minimum cycle test time. In no case shall such test time exceed
10 seconds.
(b) Testing of the complete emergency signaling system, including
the electromechanical functioning of the signaling device and
the personnel response to the signal shall not occur more than
once each calendar month. Such testing shall not occur before
8:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. The ten-second time limit on the
electromechanical functioning of the signaling device shall not
apply to such system testing.
(c) Stationary emergency signaling devices shall be used only for
testing in compliance with applicable provisions of this chapter
and for emergency purposes where personnel and equipment
are mobilized.
§ 143-4. Exceptions and special waivers.
A. Exceptions. The following uses of an activity shall be exempt from noise
level regulations:
(1) Noise of safety signals and warning devices.
(2) Noises resulting from any authorized vehicle, when responding to an
emergency.
(3) Noises resulting from the provision municipal services.
(4) Any noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration permitted
by law and/or for which a waiver has been granted by the Town.
(5) The unamplified human voice (except as specified above in § 143-3).
(6) Parades and public gatherings for which a special waiver has been
issued.
(7) Bells, chimes, carillons while being used for religious purposes or
in conjunction with religious services, or for national celebrations or
public holidays, and those bells, chimes, carillons that are presently
installed, and in use, for any purpose.
B. Exceptions for time to comply. Upon good cause shown by the owner
or responsible party for any noise source, the Town Manager shall
have the power to grant an exemption from the requirement of this
chapter in order to allow sufficient time for installation of needed control
equipment, facilities, or modifications to achieve compliance, not to
exceed 10 days, provided that such exemption may be renewed as
necessary, but only if satisfactory progress toward compliance is shown.
A request for exemption shall be filed in writing with the Town Manager.
C. Use exemptions. The following uses and activities shall be exempt from
noise level regulations:
(1) Lawn maintenance equipment when it is functioning within
manufacturers specifications and with all mufflers and noisereducing
equipment in use and in properly operating condition
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(2) Nonamplified crowd noises resulting from the activities such as
those planned by day-care centers, schools, governmental or
community groups.
(3) Amplified announcements, electronically amplified announcements
at athletic events.
§ 143-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-4
1:207
D. Special waivers.
(1) The Town Manager shall have the authority, consistent with this
chapter, to grant special waivers.
(2) Any person seeking a special waiver pursuant to this chapter shall
file a written application with the Town Manager. The written
application shall contain information which demonstrates that
bringing the source of sound or activity for which the especial waiver
is brought into compliance with the ordinance would constitute an
unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on the community or for
another purpose.
(3) Determining whether to grant or deny the application, the Town
Manager shall balance the hardship to the applicant, the community
and other persons of not grating the special waiver against the
adverse impact on the health, safety and welfare of person affected,
the adverse impact of property affected and any other adverse
impacts of granting the special waiver.
(4) Special waivers shall be granted by notice to the applicant and
may include all necessary conditions, including time limits on the
permitted activity. The special waiver shall not become effective until
all conditions are agreed to by the applicants. Noncompliance with
any condition of the special waiver shall terminate it and subject
the person holding it to those provisions of this chapter regulating
the source of sounds or activity for which the special waiver was
granted.
(5) The Town Manager may issue guidelines defining the procedures to
be followed in applying for special waivers and the criteria to be
considered in deciding whether to grant a special waiver.
§ 143-5. Allowable noise levels.
A. Unless a person(s) has been granted a special waiver, in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person(s) to
create a noise disturbance. Any one or combination of the following shall
constitute noise disturbances:
(1) A noise which exceeds the ambient noise level by 10 dBA at a point
beyond the boundary of the property on which the source of noise is
located, except as otherwise regulated herein.
(2) Any stationary source of sound which admits a pure tone, cyclically
varying sound or repetitive impulsive sound, shall be considered a
noise disturbance if the sound exceeds the ambient noise level by
five dBA.
(3) A source of sound which emits an impulse (the duration of less than
one second with an abrupt onset and rapid decay) including metalto-
metal impact or exploding impacts, shall not exceed the peak level
set forth below at a point beyond the boundary of the property on
which the source of noise is located.
(a) Residence district between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.: 80 dBA.
(b) All other districts and all other times: 100 dBA.
(4) Any source of sound which emits infrasound (below 16 Hertz) or
ultrasound (above 20 KHz) frequencies, shall not exceed 100 dBA
§ 143-4 ELSMERE CODE § 143-5
1:208
when measured at a point beyond the boundary of the property on
which the source of noise is located.
(5) No persons shall operate or cause to be operated any stationary
source of sound in such a manner as to create a twenty-four-hour
equivalent A-weighted sound level which exceeds the Leq limits set
forth for the receiving land use category below and when measured
at a point beyond the boundary of the property on which the source
of noise is located.
(a) Residence districts: 57 dBA between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m.; 52 dBA between the hours of 9:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.
(b) Business districts: 63 dBA between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m.; 59 dBA between the hours of 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
[Amended 5-30-1996 by Ord. No. 326]
(c) Industrial/manufacturing/highway development districts: 85
dBA.
(d) At no time between the hours of 5:00 p.m. on any weekday and
8:00 a.m. on the following day or at any time between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. on Saturday and 8:00 a.m. on Monday morning shall
the sound made in any zone exceed 52 dBA when measured from
any point upon the property of a residentially zoned property.
[Added 7-9-2003 by Ord. No. 419]
B. When a person designated to enforce this chapter decides to use a noiselevel
meter, the ambient noise level shall be obtained by one of two
methods:
(1) By walking beyond the real property boundaries from the source of
the specific noise and obtaining the ambient noise level when the
specific noise is no longer heard by the operator of the noise meter.
(2) If a complaint is made within an apartment building, duplex or
through partitions, and a similar building exists as part of a total
complex, the noise meter operator may enter a second building of
similar design and obtain an ambient noise level.
§ 143-6. Motor vehicles and other noise levels.
A. Vehicle repairs. It shall be unlawful for any person within any residence
district to repair, rebuild or test any motor vehicle between the hours of
9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. of the following day in such a manner that would
create a noise disturbance.
B. No vehicle operator or person in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit
the operation of any radio, disc player, tape player, music speaker,
loudspeaker, portable stereo or other similar device in or on a vehicle in
such a manner as to be plainly audible on a public right-of-way or on a
public space at 50 feet or more from the vehicle, or at 50 feet or more
from a vehicle on a public right-of-way or on a public space. [Amended
12-10-1998 by Ord. No. 368]
C. Aircraft and railroad noise limits. All aircraft and railroads operating
within the confines of the Town of Elsmere shall comply with all
applicable federal and state noise regulations.
§ 143-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-7
1:209
§ 143-7. Sound-level meters.
For the purpose of the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, when
used, a sound-level meter shall meet or exceed the requirements of the
American National Standard Institute specifications for sound-level meters
(ANSI SI.4-1971), approved April 27, 1971, and issued by the American
National Standard Institute for Types I, II, or S sound-level meters. A soundlevel
calibration instrument of the coupler type shall be used to calibrate
the sound-level meter in decibel units, and such instrument shall produce a
calibration sound-pressure level having a tolerance no greater than plus 0.5
dB with a reference sound-pressure level of 20 micronewtons per square
meter.
Chapter 145
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Lawn care companies — See Ch. 123.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 171.
Solid waste — See Ch. 187.
Snow and ice removal — See Ch. 192, Art. I.
§ 143-7 ELSMERE CODE § 143-7
1:210
ARTICLE I
Nuisance Properties
[Adopted 5-13-2004 by Ord. No. 430]
§ 145-1. Findings.
The Mayor and Council finds and determines that the existence of buildings,
structures, properties and open lots which are repeatedly in violation of
or the subject of repeated neighborhood complaints concerning violations
of the Property Maintenance Code, and the General Code of the Town of
Elsmere, can have a devastating impact upon the use of such property
as well as surrounding properties and upon the surrounding community,
including the promotion of illegal activities, the threat to the public health,
safety and welfare, the interference in the community's quality of life as well
as the value of surrounding properties, and, therefore, constitute public
nuisances that endanger the health, safety and general welfare of the
people of the Town of Elsmere and to the businesses thereof and visitors
thereto.
§ 145-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OWNER — Any person, individual, association, entity or corporation in
whose name the affected real estate is recorded with the New Castle County
Recorder of Deeds shall be presumed to be the owner thereof.
PROHIBITED CONDUCT — Any action or lack of action which creates or
results in the maintaining of or failure to abate a condition which is in
violation of the codes of the Town of Elsmere or the laws of the State
of Delaware or which endangers the safety, health or welfare of the
public.[Amended 4-14-2011 by Ord. No. 529]
PUBLIC NUISANCE — A residence, premises, structure, place or lot,
developed or undeveloped, which creates or results in the maintaining of or
failure to abate a condition which is in violation of the codes of the Town of
Elsmere or the laws of the State of Delaware or which endangers the safety,
health or welfare of the public.[Amended 4-14-2011 by Ord. No. 529]
REPEAT PUBLIC NUISANCE — Any building, residence, premises,
structure, place or lot, developed or undeveloped, where an owner or agent
has been given written notice by the Code Enforcement Office of the Town
of Elsmere or the Police Chief of the Town of Elsmere that public nuisance
has taken place at said location and within one year of that notice there is
more than one additional violation at that location for prohibited conduct for
which the owner or agent is again notified in writing.[Amended 4-14-2011
by Ord. No. 529]
§ 145-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-3
1:211
§ 145-3. Prohibited conduct.
It is a violation of this article for the owner or his or her agent, the lessee,
renter, occupant or person in charge of any building, residence, premises,
structure, place or lot, developed or undeveloped, to allow, cause, own,
lease, permit, facilitate or maintain the creation or occurrence of a public
nuisance or repeat public nuisance.
§ 145-4. Presumptions.
A. It shall be a rebuttable presumption that more than two violations for
prohibited conduct occurring within 12 months of each other have
caused a repeat public nuisance to exist. This presumption shall be
effective for any combination of three violations occurring within 12
months.
B. Presumption of agency. Whenever there is evidence that a person was
the manager, operator, supervisor or, in any other way, in charge of the
premises at the time a public nuisance exists, such evidence shall be
presumptive that he or she was an agent of the property owner.
§ 145-5. Violations and penalties; liability for cost of abatement.
A. In addition to any other penalties provided for in the Code of the Town
of Elsmere for a violation of the Code, a violation of this article shall be
a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $1,000 for the first
offense and $2,000 for each additional offense occurring within one year
and/or imprisonment for up to one year for each offense. [Amended
7-9-2015 by Ord. No. 597]
B. This article shall not be construed to exclude any civil or criminal remedy
provided by law for the enforcement of this Code or of the other laws of
the Town of Elsmere or the County of New Castle, the State of Delaware
or the United States of America.
C. In addition to any other penalty that may be imposed hereunder, the
owner of a premises who fails to abate a public nuisance, said owner
having knowledge of same or having been given due notice as set forth
in this article, shall be liable to reimburse the Town for its costs and
expenses to abate such public nuisance, for inspections and to maintain
the property in a safe condition, including reasonable attorneys' fees.
Said costs and expenses, if unpaid within 30 days of service on the owner
of notice of amounts due, shall become a lien on the real property for
said premises.
D. In addition to any other penalty which may be imposed hereunder, the
Town of Elsmere may, at its discretion, revoke any rental licenses or
building permits for not only the subject property but also any other
property located within the Town of Elsmere owned by the offending
owner until the Town is satisfied that the problem has been mitigated.
[Added 4-14-2011 by Ord. No. 529]
§ 145-6. Service of notice.
§ 145-3 ELSMERE CODE § 145-6
1:212
A. A notice of violation that a prohibited conduct has occurred at a location
shall be served by placing into the U.S. mail a notice of the violation and
mailing same to the last known address of the owner of said property.
B. The notice must contain the following:
(1) A statement of the date or dates upon which the prohibited conduct
occurred at the property.
(2) The nature of the prohibited conduct and a directive that such
conduct be abated within five days of the mailing of said notice.
(3) A copy of this code and a warning that if more than one additional
violation for prohibited conduct as defined in this article occurs
within one year of a previous violation, the owner will be subject to
the penalties of this article, including but not limited to the Town
seeking to place a lien or forfeiture pursuant to this article.
C. Subsections A, B(1) and (2) of this section shall not apply to violations of
§§ 192-1 and 192-2 of this code. [Added 11-12-2015 by Ord. No. 606]
D. A violation notice for a violation of §§ 192-1 and 192-2 of the Code of
the Town of Elsmere shall be posted at the property where the violation
occurred or served upon any occupant of that property. If the owner
of the property where the violation occurred has provided the Code
Enforcement Department with a telephone number where he/she can
be located, the Code Enforcement Department shall attempt to contact
the owner one time and advise him/her that a violation notice has been
issued. [Added 11-12-2015 by Ord. No. 606]
§ 145-7. Enforcement.
A. Upon each offense for prohibited conduct, the Code Enforcement Officer
may issue a summons to the owner, person in charge of said premises
and/or the occupant of the residence.
B. Upon a first offense for prohibited conduct, the Code Enforcement
Department shall send the property owner or his or her agent a notice
pursuant to the requirements of this article. Upon a second or
subsequent offense for prohibited conduct occurring within one year
of the first offense, a second or subsequent notice as described in this
article shall be sent to the property owner or his or her agent.
C. Upon failure of the owner to bring the building, residence, premises,
structure, place or lot into compliance with the Town Code, the Town
Attorney may apply to the appropriate court to appoint a temporary
receiver to manage, operate and bring the building, residence, premises,
structure, place or lot into compliance with the Code of the Town of
Elsmere.
§ 145-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-7
1:213

ARTICLE II
Public Nuisance Receivership
[Adopted 3-9-2017 by Ord. No. 626]
§ 145-8. Findings.
The Mayor and Council finds and determines that a system of housing
receivership is a necessary tool to address public nuisances as defined
in § 145-2 of this chapter, particularly in those instances in which,
notwithstanding reliance upon provisions of Article I of this chapter and
other provisions of this code, the public nuisance persists.
§ 145-9. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them in Article I of this chapter and
as follows:
ABANDONED PROPERTY — The definition of abandoned property in
Elsmere Code § 209-13 shall apply.
TOWN MANAGER — The Town Manager of Elsmere, or his or her designee
as applicable.
§ 145-10. Unsafe structures.
A. Any structure or part of a structure found to be abandoned, unsafe or
unfit for human habitation or other authorized use must be rehabilitated
or, as permitted or required by the Town Manager, demolished. A
structure may be unsafe or unfit for human habitation or other
authorized use because of:
(1) Conditions constituting a fire hazard or conditions of damage, decay,
dilapidation, obsolescence, abandonment, vacancy, insanitation, or
vermin or rodent infestation that constitute a hazard to the health,
welfare, or safety of occupants or the public;
(2) Lack of sanitation, illumination, ventilation, heating, plumbing,
exitways, fire protection, utilities, or other facilities adequate to
protect the health, welfare, or safety of occupants or the public; or
(3) Conditions that are so unsafe, insanitary, overcrowded, improper in
use or occupancy, or otherwise dangerous to life, health, welfare, or
safety as to create a hazard to occupants or the public.
B. Whenever the Town Manager determines all or any part of an occupied
structure to be unsafe or unfit for human habitation or other authorized
use:
(1) The Town Manager may post an order requiring the structure or
affected part to be vacated, and take necessary steps to remove
occupants who fail or refuse to vacate.
(2) Once vacated, the structure or affected part may not be reoccupied
until it is rehabilitated to comply with all applicable codes and
ordinances, and the Town Manager has issued an occupancy permit.
§ 145-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-10
1:215
(3) Pending rehabilitation, the structure must be kept secure against
casual entry and the premises kept free of occupants, litter, high
grass, and weeds.
C. Any structure or part of a structure that has been left unoccupied
without removing appliances or portable equipment or furniture and
without disconnecting utility service must be safeguarded by closing and
securely locking all windows, doors, and other openings.
D. Required safeguarding. Every abandoned property must be cleaned,
closed, and safeguarded as follows:
(1) Before the structure is closed and secured, all litter, trash, and other
debris must be removed from the premises.
(2) All windows, doors, and other openings must be closed, securely
locked, and, if readily accessible, boarded up with substantial
material, including masonry, approved by the Town Manager. The
Town Manager may require windows facing streets to be boarded
with lexan, vinyl, or similar material, protected by security grills, or
both.
(3) As long as the structure remains unrehabilitated, it must be kept
boarded, the premises must be conspicuously posted against
trespass, and the premises must be kept free of occupants, litter,
trash, debris, high grass, and weeds at all times.
(4) Boarding, posting, and cleaning, however, do not relieve the owner
of responsibility to demolish or to repair and maintain the property
in conformity with this article.
(5) The structure may not be reoccupied until the Town Manager has
issued an occupancy permit.
E. Emergency condition. An abandoned property that is not kept boarded
and free from accumulations of debris and high vegetation or that, in
the opinion of the Town Manager, is so dangerously unsound or so
deteriorated that rehabilitation is not feasible, constitutes an emergency
condition that imminently threatens the public health and safety and
requires immediate resolution.
F. Rehabilitation, demolition, and stabilization. Except as otherwise
authorized or required under this article, a structure found to be an
abandoned property, or unsafe or unfit for human habitation or other
authorized use must be rehabilitated and an occupancy permit obtained.
(1) Permitted demolition. On timely appeal of an order to rehabilitate,
the Town Manager may permit an owner to demolish an unsafe
structure instead of rehabilitating it if, in the Town Manager's
opinion, demolition is not detrimental to the immediate
neighborhood.
(2) Required demolition. The Town Manager may order the immediate
demolition of any unsafe structure that, in the Town Manager's
opinion, is either so dangerously unsound or so deteriorated that
rehabilitation is not feasible.
(3) Rescission of demolition order. The Town Manager may rescind or
modify a demolition order if the owner demonstrates the financial
ability and requisite expertise to rehabilitate the structure within a
reasonable time, as determined by the Town Manager, and agrees to
§ 145-10 ELSMERE CODE § 145-10
1:216
comply with a specified timetable. Failure to comply with an agreed
timetable reinstates the demolition order.
(4) Stabilization. The Town Manager may permit or order an interim
stabilization of an unsafe structure pending its rehabilitation.
G. Vacant lot maintenance. When a structure has been demolished under
this § 145-10, the premises must be made to conform to the provisions
of this article.
H. Remedial action by Town Manager. The Town Manager may take action
whenever the owner, agent, or person in control cannot be found or fails
to comply with a notice or order served under this article:
(1) To repair, rehabilitate, stabilize, or demolish an unsafe structure;
(2) To clean, close, board, or otherwise safeguard a vacant structure; or
(3) To remove high grass and weeds or litter, trash, and debris from the
premises of a vacant structure.
I. Actions authorized. The Town Manager may proceed to seek
appointment of a receiver, or complete all or any part of the required
work through officers, agents, employees, or contractors. Before taking
any remedial action, the Town Manager may enter the premises, without
additional notice, to determine the extent of deterioration and the
feasibility of rehabilitation. Remedial action under this article does not
preclude any other enforcement action authorized by this article.
§ 145-11. Emergency and corrective measures.
A. Power of Town Manager in emergencies. In an emergency where life,
health, safety, or property is in immediate danger, the Town Manager
may immediately take any action necessary to protect the endangered
life, health, safety, or property, without complying with the notice
provisions of this article.
B. Photographs of dangerous conditions. In all emergencies, if it is practical
and if enough time is available to do so, the Town Manager must cause
the dangerous or unsafe condition that created the emergency to be
photographed before any demolition or other work or operation is begun
to eliminate the dangerous or unsafe condition.
C. When necessary for the public safety, the Town Manager may
temporarily close adjacent structures and adjacent sidewalks, streets,
and other public ways and prohibit them from being used.
D. Labor and material for emergency work. In an emergency where life,
health, safety, or property is in immediate danger and it is necessary
to perform any work or operation to protect that life, health, safety,
or property, the Town Manager may employ the persons and buy the
materials needed to perform the work or operation as expeditiously as
possible.
E. Liability for costs of emergency work. Liability for expenses incurred
in the course of performing emergency work and the procedure for
collecting resultant debts and liens are as provided in § 145-12 of this
article.
§ 145-12. Liability for expenses and collection of debts and liens.
A. Scope. This section applies to all cases where:
§ 145-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-12
1:217
(1) The Town Manager enforces any provision of this article, including,
but not limited to: the elimination of any safety, health, or fire
hazard; the elimination of any nuisance, blight, or insanitary
condition; the removal of any abandoned or illegally constructed
structure or other object; acting as a receiver or the taking of any
corrective action in emergencies or otherwise; or
(2) In connection with those efforts, the Town Manager or any
department, agency, unit, or body corporate and politic of this state,
furnishes or causes to be furnished any labor, supervision,
equipment, or materials; or performs or causes to be performed any
inspection, work, or operation to eliminate the hazard or condition
or to remove the structure or other object.
B. Liability and lien for expenses. In the cases described in Subsection
A, the entire amount of the Town Manager's expenditures and of the
expenditures incurred by any department, agency, unit, or body
corporate and politic of this state, together with all incidental costs and
all accrued penalties are a lien in favor of the Town on the land and
improvements in respect to which the expenditures were made.
C. When debts and liens become effective. All debts become due and owing
to the Town immediately when the work is completed or the expenditure
made. All liens become effective when notice of the lien has been given
or that a structure has been posted in accordance with this article.
D. Collection of debts and liens. All debts due and liens incurred under this
§ 145-12 may be collected and enforced in the same way that the Town
collects and enforces other debts due to it or liens in its favor.
E. Priority over other liens and encumbrances. All debts and liens incurred
under this § 145-12 have priority over all other liens and encumbrances,
except taxes or other government assessments.
§ 145-13. Condemnation proceedings.
A. In general. If any land or structure becomes unsafe or dangerous to
public health or safety, the Town Manager may condemn the land,
structure, or equipment and issue a condemnation notice of this article.
The issuance of a violation notice is not a prerequisite for the
condemnation of real property.
B. Posting notice. If the Town Manager condemns any land or structure,
the Town Manager must cause a notice to be conspicuously displayed on
the condemned land, structure, or equipment. The notice must:
(1) Be at least 24 inches wide and eight inches high;
(2) Be signed by the Town Manager; and
(3) Advise the public that the particular land, structure, or equipment
has been condemned as being unsafe or dangerous for occupancy or
use, and that the public is warned to keep away.
C. Emergencies. In case of an emergency where life or property may be in
immediate danger, the Town Manager need not post the property and
may proceed in accordance with § 145-11 of this article.
D. Vacating condemned property. A notice posted under Subsection B is
deemed to be sufficient warning to all occupants of the condemned
property to leave immediately. If any occupant fails to vacate the
§ 145-12 ELSMERE CODE § 145-13
1:218
property immediately after the notice is posted, the Town Manager may
take whatever action is proper and expedient to remove that occupant.
E. Receiver of condemned property. After a property is condemned, the
Town Manager may:
(1) Take any action authorized under § 145-13; or
(2) In accordance with § 145-14 of this article, apply to court for the
appointment of a receiver.
F. Status of condemned property. After property has been condemned
and posted in accordance with this § 145-13, that property remains
condemned and may not be occupied or used again until the Town
Manager declares the property safe for occupancy or use and has
removed the condemnation.
G. Order to demolish. If, in the Town Manager's opinion, a structure is
so dangerously unsound or so deteriorated that rehabilitation is not
feasible, the condemnation notice may order the owner to demolish the
structure immediately.
H. Removal of unsafe conditions. Any time after notice has been posted
in accordance with this § 145-13, the Town Manager may demolish,
move, alter, repair, rehabilitate, rebuild, reconstruct, or take any other
appropriate action to eliminate or make safe and secure any dangerous
or unsafe condition.
§ 145-14. Abandoned property receiver.
A. Scope. This § 145-14 applies to an abandoned or condemned property.
B. In general. The Town Manager may petition a Delaware court of
competent jurisdiction for appointment of a receiver to rehabilitate
an abandoned or condemned property, to demolish it, or to sell it to
a qualified buyer. Except as otherwise provided in this § 145-14, the
receiver may be any person.
C. Contents of petition. In seeking the appointment of a receiver, the Town
Managers must include in the petition:
(1) A copy of the original abandoned property or condemned property
notice or order; and
(2) A verified pleading that avers that the property is abandoned or
condemned and required rehabilitation or demolition has not been
completed, and identifies and states the qualifications of the
proposed receiver, if other than the Town Manager.
D. Named respondents. The petition for appointment of receiver must
name as respondents:
(1) The owner of the property.
(2) Any lien holder of record.
E. Notice to judgment creditors and lien holders. After filing the petition
but before seeking finalization of the appointment of a receiver, the
Town Manager must give notice of the pendency and nature of the
proceedings by regular and certified mail to the last-known addresses of
all judgment creditors and lien holders with a recorded interest in the
property, subject to the following exceptions:
(1) This notice is not required for respondents named under § 145-14
that have been served with process under Delaware law.
§ 145-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-14
1:219
(2) The Town Manager is not required to send notices to any creditor or
lien holder whose interest in the property is unrecorded.
F. Appointment of receiver. If no qualified person with an ownership
interest requests appointment to rehabilitate or demolish the property,
or if an appointee is dismissed, the Town Manager must then request
that the court appoint a receiver of the property for the purpose of
rehabilitating and managing the property, demolishing the property, or
selling it to a qualified buyer, subject to the following:
(1) Parties divested of authority. On appointment of a receiver to
rehabilitate, demolish, or sell the property, all parties are divested
of any authority to act with respect to that property.
(2) Penalties. Any party who takes any step to rehabilitate, demolish, or
sell the property is subject to the penalties for contempt.
(3) Receiver not responsible to maintain or protect the property. A
receiver appointed to rehabilitate, demolish, or sell a vacant
building has no duty to, and is not personally liable for failing to,
maintain the property or protect the property from casualty or loss.
G. Powers of receiver appointed to rehabilitate or demolish. The Town
Manager shall seek from the court such authority for the receiver that,
in addition to all necessary and customary powers, includes the right of
possession with authority to:
(1) Contract for necessary labor and supplies for rehabilitation or
demolition;
(2) Borrow money for rehabilitation or demolition from an approved
lending institution or through a government agency or program,
using the receiver's lien against the property as security;
(3) Manage the property after rehabilitation, with all the powers of a
landlord, for a period of up to two years and apply the rent received
to current operating expenses and to repayment of outstanding
rehabilitation expenses; and
(4) Foreclose on the receiver's lien or accept a deed in lieu of
foreclosure.
H. Powers of receiver appointed to sell. The Town Manager shall seek from
the court such authority for the receiver that, in addition to all necessary
and customary powers, includes the right for the receiver to sell the
property to the high bidder at public auction, following all relevant
laws and notice requirements in Delaware, or to sell the property in a
private sale if the property fails to sell at public auction, subject to the
following:
(1) Buyer qualifications. Before any sale, the applicants to bid in a
public sale or the proposed buyer in a private sale must demonstrate
the ability and experience needed to rehabilitate the property within
a reasonable time.
(2) Application fee. The receiver may charge a reasonable fee to
applicants in connection with the application to bid at a public sale
or in connection with the solicitation of offers for a private sale.
(3) Application of sale proceeds. After deducting the expenses of the
sale, the amount of outstanding taxes and other government
assessments, and the amount of the receiver's lien, the receiver
§ 145-14 ELSMERE CODE § 145-14
1:220
must apply any remaining proceeds of the sale, first to the
petitioner's costs and expenses, including reasonable attorney's
fees, and then to the liens against the property in order of priority.
I. Tenure of receiver appointed to rehabilitate. The Town Manager must
seek court approval that the tenure of a receiver appointed to
rehabilitate a vacant building may extend no longer than two years after
rehabilitation, and that after rehabilitation, any party to the receivership
may file a motion to dismiss the receiver on payment of the receiver's
outstanding costs, fees, and expenses.
J. Final accounting. The Town Manager shall request the court require
that at the end of the receiver's tenure the receiver file a final
accounting with the court.
K. Receiver's lien for costs, etc. Any costs or fees incurred by the Town
Manager or the receiver are a lien against the property in accordance
with § 145-12 of this article. The receiver's lien has priority over all
other liens and encumbrances, except taxes or other government
assessments as required by Delaware law. The receiver must allow the
Town Manager's costs and expenses, including reasonable attorney's
fees, to be paid to the extent that the proceeds of the sale permit.
L. Foreclosure of lien. A receiver may foreclose on the lien by a sale of
the property at public auction, following one public notice and notice
to interested parties in the manner of a mortgage foreclosure. After
deducting the expenses of the sale, the receiver must apply the
proceeds of the sale to the liens against the property, in order of priority.
In lieu of foreclosure, and only if the receiver has rehabilitated the
property, an owner may pay the receiver's costs, fees, including
attorney's fees, and expenses or may transfer all ownership in the
property to either the receiver or an agreed-on third party for an amount
agreed to by all parties to the receivership as being the property's fair
market value.
M. Transfer on sale. The Town Manager shall request the court to require,
following court ratification of a sale, that the receiver sign a deed
conveying title to the buyer, free and clear of all liens, judgments, and
other encumbrances. The Town Manager shall also request the court to
require, upon court ratification of the sale, that any secured interest of a
lien holder or judgment creditor automatically attaches to the proceeds
from the sale, to the extent those proceeds are available.
N. Dismissal. The Town Manager shall request the court to require that,
on sale of the property, the receiver must file with the court a final
accounting, and, at the same time, file a motion with the court to dismiss
the action.
§ 145-15. Notices.
A. In general. All notices under this article must be issued in accordance
with this section. However, nothing in this article may be construed to
excuse or relieve any person from complying with all provisions of this
article at all times, regardless of whether any notice or order has been
issued by the Town Manager in any particular case.
§ 145-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-15
1:221
B. Classification. Notices issued under this article are classified as either
condemnation notices, violation notices, or abandoned property notices.
C. Contents of condemnation notices.
(1) Except as specified herein, every condemnation notice must set
forth:
(a) The location of the condemned structure or equipment;
(b) The reason the structure or equipment is condemned;
(c) A reference to applicable provisions of this article;
(d) A warning against entering or using the condemned structure or
equipment; and
(e) Unless to be contained in a follow-up or subsequent notice: a
statement of the requirements that must be complied with to
rectify the unsafe condition; the time within which the unsafe
condition must be rectified; and the Town Manager's authority
under Subsection I to take action at the owner's expense.
(2) A follow-up or other subsequent notice involving the same
condemnation need not repeat the information contained in a prior
notice as long as the subsequent notice identifies the prior notice.
D. Contents of violation notices.
(1) Except as specified herein, every violation notice must set forth:
(a) The location and character of the violation;
(b) A reference to applicable provisions of this article; and
(c) Unless to be contained in a follow-up or subsequent notice: a
statement of the requirements that must be complied with to
rectify the violation; the time within which the violation must be
rectified; and the Town Manager's authority under Subsection I
to take action at the owner's expense.
(2) A follow-up or other subsequent notice involving the same violation
need not repeat the information contained in a prior notice as long
as the subsequent notice identifies the prior notice.
E. Contents of abandoned property notices. All notices that a property is to
be considered abandoned must set forth:
(1) The location of the property;
(2) The basis upon which the property may be determined to be
abandoned; and
(3) The right of any person disputing that the property is abandoned
to appear and be heard in opposition to the determination that the
property is abandoned.
F. When notices to be issued. Except as otherwise specified in this article,
notices must be issued in all cases where legal proceedings might be
necessary to enforce this article.
(1) Condemnation notices. For any land, structure, or equipment being
condemned, the condemnation notice must be issued to the owner
of the land, structure, or equipment.
(2) Violation notices. For violations, the violation notice must be issued
to the person who committed or otherwise is responsible for the
violation.
G. Service of notice: general. Except as otherwise specified in Subsection
H, all notices issued by the Town Manager must be served on the
§ 145-15 ELSMERE CODE § 145-15
1:222
person that the notice is intended for or on any authorized agent or
representative of that person.
(1) If more than one person is responsible for the violation or
responsible for complying with this Code, as in a case of property
owned by more than one person, notice may be served on any one of
those persons or on any authorized agent or representative of any of
them.
(2) A notice is properly served if: served personally on the owner, agent,
person in control, former owner, or other person responsible for
the property; hand delivered to that person's home, business, or
tax record address; or sent by certified or registered mail to that
person's home, business, or tax record address.
(3) Authorized server. Service under Subsection G(1) or (2) must be
made by a member of the Elsmere Police Department, or an official
or employee of the Town of Elsmere or the State of Delaware.
H. Service of notice: posting. Adequate and sufficient notice may be made
by posting a copy of the notice on the property in question if:
(1) The identity or whereabouts of the owner, agent, person in control,
former owner, or other person responsible for the property is
unknown; or
(2) Notice mailed under Subsection G is returned unclaimed or refused
or is designated undeliverable by the post office for any other
reason, and other financial or property records of Elsmere do not
provide a more accurate address.
I. Failure to comply with notice or citation. If any person fails to comply
with a violation notice, condemnation notice, or citation, the Town
Manager:
(1) May take whatever action is necessary and proper, including the
institution of legal proceedings, to compel compliance with the
notice or citation or to enforce the penalty provisions of this article;
and
(2) Subject to the notice requirements of § 145-15, may proceed to
repair, rebuild, demolish, or take any other action necessary to
eliminate, in whole or in part, or make safe any nuisance, blight,
health hazard, or dangerous, unsanitary, or unsafe condition that is
the subject of the violation notice, condemnation notice, or citation.
J. Notice of intent to repair, etc. Except as provided in § 145-15, before the
Town Manager proceeds to repair, rebuild, demolish, or take any other
action to eliminate or make safe any nuisance, blight, health hazard, or
dangerous, unsanitary, or unsafe condition, a notice must be posted on
the front of the structure stating that the violation has not been rectified
and that the Town Manager intends to undertake the necessary work
and charge the expenses of that work to one or more of the owner,
agent, person in control, or former owner of the premises, as the case
may be. This notice must also be mailed or delivered to the home,
business, or tax record address of the owner, agent, person in control,
former owner, or other person responsible for the property, as the case
may be, or their respective agents.
K. Exception. The notice required by § 145-15 need not be given:
§ 145-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-15
1:223
(1) In the case of an emergency;
(2) As provided in § 145-10 of this article for unsafe structures; or
(3) If the initial or any other prior notice or order issued by the Town
Manager informed the recipient of the Town Manager's authority to
take corrective action.
L. Actions not an abatement, etc. Actions taken by the Town Manager do
not constitute an abatement or cancellation of the underlying notice or
citation.
M. Extension of time limit on notices. The Town Manager may extend the
time within which to comply with a condemnation notice or violation
notice if, in the Town Manager's judgment, more time is needed to
comply.
N. Removal or defacement of posted notices. No person may remove,
deface, damage, or change any notice, poster, or sign placed under this
article on any land, structure, or other object, until the Town Manager
authorizes its removal.
O. Opportunity to contest notice. Any notice provided for under this article
shall state a date, time and place where any interested party may appear
and be heard in opposition to any order or other action proposed to be
taken with respect to any property or building. The notice may further
provide for a date by which any interested party must submit such
information that they intend to submit in support of their opposition.
§ 145-15 ELSMERE CODE § 145-15
1:224
Chapter 148
PARADES AND SPECIAL EVENTS
§ 148-1. Permit required. [Amended 10-9-2014 by Ord. No. 585]
No person, as defined in § 148-2 of this chapter, shall be permitted to
engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade or special event, as
defined in § 148-2 of this chapter, within the Town limits of Elsmere, without
a permit issued by the Town Manager.
§ 148-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EST — An abbreviation for Eastern standard time, and shall be deemed
to refer to Eastern daylight saving time during such periods as Eastern
daylight saving time shall be in effect in the Town.
NEIGHBORHOOD BLOCK PARTIES — An organized gathering of
neighborhood residents utilizing the public right-of-way abutting their
property for recreational purposes of a nonprofit or noncommercial nature.
"Neighborhood block parties" shall be synonymous with "neighborhood
street fairs," "neighborhood street picnics," and similar names representing
the same activity which require the closing of public streets to normal traffic
flow.
PARADE — Any parade, march or procession of any kind of persons, animals
or vehicles, upon any street in the Town.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, neighborhood or organization of any kind.
SPECIAL EVENT — Any gathering which is anticipated to or could
potentially result in the gathering of 20 or more people at any one time,
which is held outdoors, and is open to the public or to which admission
is being charged or where items will be offered for sale or a fee will be
charged for games or amusement, including fund-raising events being held
by charitable or nonprofit organizations, except for those events which are
sponsored by the Town of Elsmere.
STREET — Any street, public highway, lane, alley, sidewalk, public square
or public right-of-way within the Town limits.
§ 148-3. Exemptions.
The following are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
A. Funeral processions.
B. Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational
activities, provided that such conduct is under the immediate direction
and supervision of the proper school authorities.
§ 145-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-4
1:225
§ 148-4. Parades prohibited at certain times.
All parades or special events upon any street are prohibited Monday
through Friday between the hours of 7:00 a.m. EST and 10:00 a.m. EST, and
4:00 p.m. EST and 7:00 p.m. EST.
§ 148-5. Application for permit; review by Chief of Police. [Amended
10-9-2014 by Ord. No. 585]
A parade or special event permit is required for any parade or special event,
as defined in § 148-2 of this chapter. A person desiring a parade or special
event permit shall file an application with the Town Manager on forms
provided by the Town. All applications shall be reviewed by the Elsmere
Chief of Police for an opinion regarding the number of police and emergency
personnel necessary to service the parade or special event and contiguous
areas, and the Police Chief shall report his findings to the Town Manager.
§ 148-6. Permit procedures and requirements.
A. Parade or special event permits shall be issued by the Town Manager.
[Amended 10-9-2014 by Ord. No. 585]
B. The application shall be filed, with the Town Manager, not less than 14
days nor more than 30 days before the date on which it is proposed to
conduct the parade or special event; provided, however, that where an
applicant shall demonstrate special circumstances justifying expedited
review, the Town Manager may waive the requirement that an
application be filed 14 days prior to the date on which the applicant
proposes to conduct the parade or special event. [Amended 10-9-2014
by Ord. No. 585]
C. The application for a parade or special event permit shall set forth the
following information:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct such parade or special event;
(2) If the parade or special event is proposed to be conducted for,
on behalf of, or by an organization, the name address and phone
number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the
authorized and responsible heads of such organization;
(3) Name, address and phone number of the person who will serve as
parade or special event chairman and who will be responsible for
its conduct;
(4) The date and hours when the parade or special event is to start and
terminate;
(5) The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination
point;
(6) The approximate number of persons, animals and vehicles which
will constitute such parade or special event and the type of animals
and description of vehicles;
(7) The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade or
special event;
(8) The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any
such assembly area(s);
§ 148-4 ELSMERE CODE § 148-6
1:226
(9) The interval of space to be maintained between units of such
parade;
(10) If the parade or special event is designed to be held by, and on
behalf of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant
for the parade or special event permit shall file with the Town
Manager a communication in writing from the person proposing to
hold the parade or special event, authorizing the applicant to apply
for the permit on his or her behalf;
(11) Any special circumstances which demonstrate good cause for
expedited action by the Town Manager, pursuant to § 148-9B below.
[Amended 10-9-2014 by Ord. No. 585]
D. Neighborhood block parties/street fairs/picnics applications will require
all of the above information and additionally:
(1) A petition with the names, addresses and signatures of at least 60%
of the heads of household or their responsible adult representative
abutting the area of right-of-way proposed for closing.
(2) A sketch showing the location and streets of the proposed activity.
The sketch shall show the proposed location of any temporary
structures or equipment, the location, addresses and names of
abutting residents and the location of fire hydrants in the area to be
closed.
§ 148-7. Permit fee; bond.
A. There shall be paid at the time of the application for a parade or special
event permit a fee of $100 to defray the cost of processing the permit
application.
B. In addition, the person and/or organization applying for the permit will
deposit with the Town, at least 10 days prior to the event, a sum to
be determined on a case-by-case basis, but not to exceed $1,000, to
cover the costs incurred by the Department of Public Safety and/or the
Department of Public Works due to this event.
§ 148-8. Standards for permit issuance. [Amended 10-9-2014 by
Ord. No. 585]
The Town Manager of the Town of Elsmere shall issue a parade or special
event permit when, from the recommendation of the Chief of Police and
from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, it finds that:
A. The conduct of the parade or special event will not substantially
interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its
route;
B. The conduct of the parade or special event will not require the diversion
of so great a number of police officers of this Town to properly police the
line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal
police protection to this Town;
C. The conduct of such parade or special event will not require the
diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal
ambulance service to portions of this Town other than that occupied by
the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto;
§ 148-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-8
1:227
D. The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of
the parade or special event will not unduly interfere with proper fire and
police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such
assembly areas;
E. The conduct of such parade or special event will not interfere with the
movement of fire-fighting equipment en route to a fire;
F. The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of
termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route;
G. The parade or special event is not to be held for the sole purpose of
advertising any product, cause, goods or events and is not designed to
be held purely for private profit.
§ 148-9. Notice to Council. [Added 10-9-2014 by Ord. No. 58513]
A. Upon receiving an application, the Town Manager shall notify the Mayor
and the Councilperson(s) representing the district(s) where the event
will be held based on the application and request their comments or
concerns, if any.
B. Once a decision has been made to issue or deny the application, the
entire Mayor and Council shall be notified of that decision.
§ 148-10. Alternative permit. [Amended 10-9-2014 by Ord. No. 585]
The Town Manager, in denying an application for a parade or special event
permit, can authorize the conduct of the parade or special event on a date,
at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An
applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within three days
after notice of action, file a written notice of acceptance with the Town
Manager. An alternate parade or special event permit shall conform to the
requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade or special event
permit under this chapter.
§ 148-11. Appeal procedure. [Amended 10-9-2014 by Ord. No. 585]
Any person aggrieved by the denial of a permit required by this chapter
may appeal to the Mayor and Council. The appeal shall be in writing and
filed with the Town Manager. Once an appeal has been filed, the Mayor and
Council shall meet within five days and decide if a permit shall be issued
or denied and what, if any, conditions shall be placed on the issuance of a
permit. The decision of the Mayor and Council shall be final.
§ 148-12. Compliance with laws and regulations.
A person holding a parade or special event permit shall comply with all
permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and
ordinances.
Chapter 152
13.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 148-9, Notice of Council decision.
§ 148-8 ELSMERE CODE § 148-12
1:228
PARKING OF CERTAIN VEHICLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Handicapped parking — See Ch. 116.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 211.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 215.
Off-highway vehicles — See Ch. 219.
§ 152-1. Parking regulations. [Amended 9-18-2003 by Ord. No. 420]
No vehicle whose primary use is as a trailer, including but not limited to
travel trailer, house trailer, camper, boat or boat trailer, shall be parked on
the public streets of the Town of Elsmere, except for such a time as may be
necessary to immediately load or unload such trailer.
§ 152-2. Designated parking for fire police. [Added 6-9-2005 by Ord.
No. 44814]
A. Any member of the Elsmere Fire Company who has been appointed as a
fire police officer may apply for a designated parking space.
B. All requests for a designated parking space shall be submitted in writing
to the Elsmere Chief of Police, so that he or she may issue an opinion
and make a recommendation to Council.
C. A copy of the each request shall be distributed to the Special Services
Director, so that it may be determined if it is possible to place sign poles
at the requested site; and the Special Services Director will meet with
the Chief to check the logistics of installation.
D. Restricted parking spaces shall be provided only to those possessing a
letter from the Fire Chief advising that they are currently serving as a
fire police officer of the Elsmere Fire Company.
E. One parking space only shall be provided for each such vehicle.
F. The parking space designated shall be on the street and shall be
determined by the Chief of Police and the applicant.
G. No designated parking space shall be provided if the applicant has a
driveway on his or her property.
H. A sign shall be placed at the parking site stating "RESTRICTED
PARKING." This sign shall display the vehicle registration number that
has been assigned to the applicant's vehicle through the Delaware
Division of Motor Vehicles. The area will be designated a tow-away zone.
A yellow curb will be painted to designate the space.
I. All costs involved in providing the parking space shall be borne by the
Town of Elsmere.
J. A restricted parking space shall terminate and revert back to public
parking immediately upon notification by the Fire Chief that the
applicant is no longer serving as a fire police officer or change of
residence.
14.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former § 152-2 as § 152-3.
§ 148-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-2
1:229
K. The fine for unauthorized parking in the area shall be not less than
$100 nor more than $300, plus court costs, plus the cost of towing and
storage of the vehicle.
L. Final determination of eligibility for a restricted parking space shall be
made by the Mayor and Council of the Town of Elsmere.
M. Parking in restricted parking spaces; violations and penalties.
(1) Fire police officers who have obtained a handicapped parking space
granted by the Town of Elsmere must park their designated vehicle
in that space and no other within 200 feet.
(2) Fire police officers who park their designated vehicle outside their
designated handicapped parking space, but within 200 feet of that
space, shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $300 for a
first offense.
(3) Fire police officers who park their designated vehicle outside their
designated handicapped parking space, but within 200 feet of that
space, for a second offense shall have that vehicle towed away and
the space shall be revoked for a year. The fire police officers shall
be responsible for all towing and impoundment costs. After one year
has passed, such fire police officers may reapply to the Council for a
restricted parking space.
(4) Reapplication for a parking space shall follow the same procedure
as the original application.
§ 152-3. Violations and penalties.
Whoever knowingly commits a violation of this chapter shall be fined not
more than $100 or imprisoned no more than 30 days, or both. Each and
every day during which such violation shall occur, after written notice
thereof, shall be deemed a separate offense.
Chapter 155
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Consumption of alcoholic beverages in
public — See Ch. 67, Art. I.
Animals — See Ch. 71.
Firearms and weapons — See Ch. 99.
Loitering — See Ch. 135.
Noise — See Ch. 143.
§ 155-1. Rules and regulations.
The use of all parkland owned or operated by the Town of Elsmere shall be
in accordance with and bound by the following:
A. In any park owned, leased, maintained or operated by the Town of
Elsmere, no person shall cut, break, move, take or otherwise injure,
destroy or deface any trees, shrubs, plants, turf, rock or any building,
§ 152-2 ELSMERE CODE § 155-1
1:230
fence, bridge, sign or other structure, nor foul any spring or stream, nor
shall any person dump any earth, rubbish or other substance or material
in or upon any park.
B. The sale, consumption or possession of intoxicating liquors or beverages
or gambling of any kind is prohibited in any park.
C. No person shall make or kindle any open fire except in fireplaces and
grills provided for this purpose or in private portable commercially
manufactured grills or grills approved as safe by the Town of Elsmere.
Grills provided for public use shall be on a first-come, first-served basis.
D. No person shall, in any park, set a trap or snare, or shoot, injure, annoy,
disturb or poison any wild animal or bird, or injure or destroy any nest.
E. All persons are forbidden to use threatening, abusive, insulting or
indecent language or commit any obscene or indecent act or to fight in
any park.
F. No person shall ride in or drive any motor vehicle which is self-propelled
upon any parkland. It is prohibited for any person to commit any act,
by use or operation, of any motor vehicle on any parkland which, if
committed upon a public highway or street in the State of Delaware,
would be prohibited and unlawful. Speed limits within all parks shall be
15 miles per hour unless otherwise posted. No one shall test or repair
any vehicle or mechanical device in any park. There shall be no parking
at any time except in areas designated for such purposes.
G. No person shall, without written permission from the Town of Elsmere,
erect, paint, paste or otherwise affix or distribute any signs,
advertisements or circulars on park property. The sale of anything or the
solicitation of funds or donations within any park is forbidden, except
upon written permission of the Town of Elsmere.
H. Horses, cattle, livestock and domestic animals of any kind are prohibited
in any park. [Amended 9-18-2003 by Ord. No. 420]
I. Practicing, playing or using park areas for golf or archery is prohibited.
J. No person shall carry a knife upon their person having a blade of three
inches or longer in length or have possession of or discharge a BB
gun, air rifle, pistol, firearm, bow and arrow or any other type of lethal
weapon in any park.
K. No person or group may utilize any park area or facility for the purpose
of teaching an individual or group any recreational skill for personal
profit or financial gain without written permission from the Town of
Elsmere.
L. No persons are permitted in any park after sunset and before sunrise.
M. The Mayor, the Chief of Police or the Town Manager may temporarily
close or curtail activities within any park or any portions thereof, when
it has been deemed necessary to be in the best interest of public safety,
conduct, health or order. [Amended 9-11-2014 by Ord. No. 584]
N. No entertainment, demonstration, exhibition or tournament shall be
given or held in any park except under the supervision of the Town of
Elsmere or with the written permission of the Town of Elsmere.
O. Bark Park. Dogs shall be permitted in the Town of Elsmere's Bark Park.
In addition to the rules and regulations established by this chapter,
the Town Manager shall establish rules and regulations specific to the
§ 155-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-1
1:231
Bark Park and shall post those rules and regulations at the Bark Park.
Once posted those additional rules and regulations shall have the same
authority and shall be enforceable as if they had been contained in this
chapter and shall be enforced as such. [Added 9-11-2014 by Ord. No.
58415]
P. The rules and regulations established by this chapter shall not apply
to the Town when the parks are being used for a purpose deemed
appropriate by the Town. During the period of time parklands are being
used by the Town for its purposes, the Town Manager is authorized to
establish such additional rules and regulations as he deems appropriate.
[Added 9-9-2010 by Ord. No. 523]
§ 155-2. Enforcement. [Amended 9-9-2010 by Ord. No. 523]
The Public Safety Department is authorized to enforce these rules and
regulations and to prosecute violators thereof.
§ 155-3. Fees.
The use of park facilities may be subject to payment of fees as set by the
Mayor and Council.
§ 155-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-18-2003 by Ord. No.
420]
Any person violating any of these rules and regulations shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $250
for the first offense, and not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each
subsequent offense. Each violation shall be a separate offense.
§ 155-5. Additional penalties. [Added 9-11-2014 by Ord. No. 584]
In addition to the penalties set forth in § 155-4 of this chapter or of any law
of the State of Delaware, any person may be prohibited from entering any
park or recreation area within the Town of Elsmere in accordance with the
following:
A. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the exclusion
of any person lawfully exercising free speech rights or other rights
protected by the state or federal constitutions. However, a person
engaged in such protected activity who commits acts that are not
protected, but that violate applicable good conduct, shall be subject to
prohibition as provided by this section.
B. For purposes of this section, "applicable good conduct" includes any
violation of the provisions of this chapter as well as any violation of any
applicable Town ordinance, any applicable criminal or traffic law of the
State of Delaware or any applicable law controlling alcoholic beverages.
For purposes of this section, "applicable" means relating to the person's
conduct while in a parkland or recreational area.
15.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection O, regarding rules and
regulations pertaining to the tennis courts, as amended.
§ 155-1 ELSMERE CODE § 155-5
1:232
C. A prohibition issued under the provisions of this section shall be for
30 days. If the person to be prohibited from entering a parkland or
recreational area has been excluded from any parkland or recreational
area at any time within two years prior to the date of the present
prohibition, the prohibition shall be for 90 days. If the person to be
excluded has been excluded from one or more parks on two or more
occasions within two years before the date of the present exclusion, the
exclusion shall be for 180 days.
D. Before any person is prohibited from entering a parkland or recreational
area under this section, they shall be entitled to a hearing before the
Town Manager.
E. Procedure for a person to be prohibited from entering a parkland or
recreational area.
(1) Any person or person(s) alleging that another person has committed
an act which is in violation of applicable good conduct, which
warrants the person being prohibited from entering a parkland or
recreational area, must file a written complaint with the Town
Manager.
(2) Once a complaint has been filed, the Town Manager shall provide
written notice to the person alleged to have committed the violation
of applicable good conduct. The notice shall specify the following:
(a) A brief description of the alleged violation of applicable good
conduct.
(b) Notice that a hearing will be held to determine if the allegations
are valid.
(c) Notice that the accused has a right to appear at the hearing and
present any evidence or witnesses they may have as well as an
opportunity to question anyone accusing them as well as any
witnesses of the alleged violation of good conduct.
(d) The date, time and location of the hearing and the procedures
that will be followed during the hearing.
(e) Notice that failing to appear at the hearing may result in the
accused being prohibited from entering a parkland(s) or
recreational area(s).
(f) Notice that any prohibition from entering a parkland or
recreational area may be appealed to the Mayor and Council if
filed within 10 days of the Town Manager's decision or to a court
of competent jurisdiction within the time line set by that court.
F. If, at the conclusion of any hearing, the Town Manager finds that it is
more likely than not the person accused in fact committed the violation,
the Town Manager may:
(1) Attempt to determine if the parties can reach a consensus as to how
the issue can be resolved.
(2) Direct that the parties seek the services of a mediator provided by
many nonprofit organizations in an attempt to resolve the issue(s).
If this method is agreed to and the accused does not attend the
mediation, fails to reach an agreement at the mediation or fails to
follow any agreement made at the mediation, the Town Manager
shall issue a notice to the accused prohibiting him or her from
§ 155-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-5
1:233
entering a parkland(s) or recreational area(s) in accordance with
this section.
(3) Prohibit the accused from entering a parkland(s) or recreational
area(s) in accordance with this section.
(4) Any decision by the Town Manager to prohibit someone from
entering a parkland or recreational area may be appealed to the
Mayor and Council, provided that the appeal is filed in writing
and within 10 days of the Town Manager's decision. In any appeal
hearing before the Mayor and Council the following shall apply:
(a) The Mayor and Council shall set their own rules and procedures.
(b) At the conclusion of the hearing they shall:
[1] Affirm the Town Manager's decision.
[2] Reverse the Town Manager's decision.
[3] Modify the Town Manager's decision in whole or in part.
(5) Any decision of the Town Manager or the Mayor and Council to
prohibit a person from being permitted to enter a parkland or
recreational area may be appealed to a court with proper
jurisdiction, provided it is filed in accordance with the rules of that
court.
G. The following are examples of actions or conduct which would warrant a
person being prohibited from entering a parkland or recreational area.
It is not all-inclusive and is only provided as an example.
(1) Placing another person in fear of imminent physical injury by some
movement of a person's body or any instrument.
(2) Intentionally causing inconvenience, annoyance or alarm to any
other person utilizing a park or recreational area.
(3) Making an unreasonable noise or an offensively coarse utterance,
gesture or display, or addressing abusive language to any person
present.
(4) Creating a physically offensive condition which serves no legitimate
purpose.
(5) Insulting, taunting or challenging another person in a manner which
the person knows is likely to provoke a violent or disorderly response
or cause a reasonable person to suffer fear, alarm, or distress.
(6) The conviction or entering of a plea of guilty to any violation of Title
4,11,16, or 21 of the Delaware Code if committed in a parkland or
recreational area, or if the violation occurred outside of a parkland
or recreational area, but is directly related to an incident which
occurred at a parkland or recreational area.
H. Waiver.
(1) At any time within the period of prohibition, a person receiving such
notice of exclusion may apply in writing to the Town Manager for a
waiver of some or all of the effects of the prohibition for good reason.
(2) If the Town Manager grants a waiver under this Subsection, the
Town Manager shall promptly notify the Elsmere Police Department
and the Mayor and Council.
(3) The Town Manager shall consider the seriousness of the violation
for which the person has been excluded, the particular need of the
person to be in the parkland or recreational area during some or
§ 155-5 ELSMERE CODE § 155-5
1:234
all of the period of exclusion, such as for work or to attend or
participate in a particular event (without regard to the content of
any speech associated with that event), and any other criterion the
Town Manager determines to be relevant to the determination of
whether or not to grant a waiver.
(4) Notwithstanding the granting of a waiver under this Subsection,
the prohibition will be included for purposes of calculating the
appropriate length of prohibition.
(5) The Town Manager's decision to grant or deny, in whole or in part,
a waiver under this Subsection is at the sole discretion of the Town
Manager, and is not subject to appeal or review.
I. If an appeal of the prohibition is timely filed, the effectiveness of the
prohibition shall be stayed, pending the outcome of the appeal. If the
prohibition is affirmed, the remaining period of exclusion shall be
effective immediately upon the issuance of the decision.
J. If a person is issued a subsequent prohibition while a previous
prohibition is stayed pending appeal (or pending judicial review, should
a court stay the exclusion), the stayed prohibition shall be counted in
determining the appropriate length of the subsequent exclusion. If the
previous prohibition is set aside, the term of the subsequent prohibition
shall be reduced, as if the previous prohibition had not been issued.
If multiple prohibitions issued to a single person for a single park are
simultaneously stayed pending appeal, the effective periods of those
which are affirmed shall run consecutively.
K. No person shall enter or remain in any parkland or recreational area
at any time during which there is in effect a notice of prohibition
issued under this section prohibiting that person from that parkland or
recreational area.
L. Any person entering or remaining in any parkland or recreational area
at any time during which there is in effect a notice of prohibition
issued under this section prohibiting that person from that parkland
or recreational area shall be guilty of Trespass in the third degree as
defined by Section 821 of Title 11 of the Delaware Code.
Chapter 159
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garage and sidewalk sales — See Ch. 107. Precious metals and gems — See Ch. 167.
§ 159-1. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:
APPLICANT — Any person that files an application for a solicitation permit
provided by this chapter.
§ 155-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-1
1:235
CHARITABLE or CHARITABLE PURPOSE — Includes the words "patriotic,"
"philanthropic," "social services," "welfare," "benevolent," "educational,"
"civic" or "fraternal," either actual or purported.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION — Any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic,
or eleemosynary entity or one purporting to be such for solicitation and
collection of funds for charitable purposes, including any local, county, or
area division within this state of such charitable organization.
CHARITABLE SOLICITATION — Solicitation engaged in or for a charitable
purpose.
COMMERCIAL PURPOSE — The means of or relating to the carrying on of
a business for profit.
COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION — Solicitation engaged in or for a
commercial purpose.
CONTRIBUTION — The promise or grant of any money or property of
any kind or value, including the promise to payor to give anything of
value including, but not necessarily limited to, alms, food, clothing, money,
subscription, property or donations under the guise of a loan of money or
property, financial assistance or other thing of value.
DO-NOT-SOLICIT LIST — A list of names and addresses of individuals in
the Town of Elsmere who have requested in writing the placement of their
residences on a list of people who do not want to be solicited at their
residences, which list shall be maintained and published for purposes of
informing the general public of the individuals' intention.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, co-partnership, partnership, corporation,
company, association, church, religious sect, religious denomination,
society, organization, league, trust or any combination of the foregoing.
POLITICAL SOLICITATION — Solicitation engaged in for the purpose of
lobbying, campaigning, promoting, advancing, espousing or benefiting a
political cause, party or candidate for political office.
PREMISES — All separately addressed places of business, residences or
other locations in which persons live, work or otherwise occupy in the Town.
RELIGIOUS or RELIGIOUS PURPOSE — The means of or relating to an
organized religion or religious group or identifiable and definable set of
religious beliefs or other ideology.
RELIGIOUS SOLICITATION — Solicitation engaged in or for a religious
purpose.
RESIDENCE — Every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes
by one or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure.
SOLICITATION — Communicating with another person without invitation
for a specific commercial, charitable, religious, political or other purpose by
means of:
In-person contacts on streets, highways, sidewalks and at residences
within the Town; or
A.
§ 159-1 ELSMERE CODE § 159-1
1:236
SOLICITOR — A person who engages in solicitation as defined in this
chapter.
TOWN — The corporate boundaries of the Town of Elsmere, Delaware.
§ 159-2. Registration requirements.
A. No persons not currently located and licensed to conduct business with
the corporate limit of the Town of Elsmere shall enter the Town for
the purpose of selling or taking orders for the sale of goods, wares or
merchandise, or soliciting contributions without first registering with
the Code Enforcement Office of the Town and obtaining a solicitation
permit and registration card. Additionally, all persons before entering in
or upon a private residence for the purpose of selling or taking orders for
the sale of goods, wares or merchandise, or soliciting contributions, are
hereby required to register at the Town Office of Elsmere and on forms
provided by the Town furnish the following information:
(1) The full name as it appears on a driver's license, state ID or birth
certificate, birth date, mailing address and telephone number of the
individual person who will be engaged in the proposed solicitation;
(2) The present address and address of places of residence during the
past three years, if other than present address;
(3) The age of applicant and marital status; if married, the name of
spouse;
(4) A physical description of the applicant, including sex, height,
weight, hair color and eye color;
(5) The name, address and telephone number of the person, firm,
corporation or association by whom or on behalf of whom the
applicant is employed, sponsored, promoting or conducting the
proposed solicitation and the length of time of such employment or
association;
(6) The name and address of present employer and of all employer(s)
during the past three years, if other than the present employer;
(7) The nature of the business or activities conducted by the person
or organization on whose behalf the proposed solicitation will be
conducted;
(8) A description of the nature and purpose of the proposed
solicitation;
(9) Period of time for which the permit is applied, including the
beginning date, hours and expected duration of the proposed
solicitation;
(10) The date or approximate date of the latest previous application for
permit under this chapter, if any;
(11) Whether a solicitation permit issued to the applicant under this
chapter or by any other issuing agency has ever been revoked;
Distribution of written material, including the placement or delivery of
such materials at the premises or on any property belonging to a third
person.
B.
§ 159-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-2
1:237
(12) Whether the applicant ever been convicted of a violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter or the ordinance or laws of any other
state or municipality regulating solicitation;
(13) Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of the commission
of a felony and/or any crime involving theft or dishonesty under the
laws of this state or any other state or federal law of the United
States;
(14) The full name, mailing address and telephone number of at least
one reputable person, not related to, affiliated with, or employed by
the person who will be engaged in the proposed solicitation;
(15) If more than one solicitor will be soliciting on behalf of a person
or organization, then the name(s), address(es), and telephone
number(s) of the person(s) who will be in direct charge of the
solicitors on behalf of the person or organization;
(16) Such additional information and any documentation as the Code
Enforcement Office may deem necessary to process the application.
B. Exemptions. Persons engaging in the following activities shall be exempt
from the above registration requirement:
(1) Charitable solicitation, including solicitation for the benefit of a local
elementary, junior high, or high school or for the benefit of a local
community organization, such as scouts and little leagues, and
solicitation for the benefit of a local nonprofit organization
established for the benefit of the community, community schools,
community projects, and for other similar purposes;
(2) Political solicitation;
(3) Religious solicitation;
(4) The distribution of handbills, flyers, brochures, pamphlets, leaflets,
papers, and other literature and written materials, shall be exempt
from the registration requirement;
(5) All persons who are exempt from the registration requirement are
nevertheless subject to the nuisance and trespass restrictions
contained in § 159-10D of this chapter.
§ 159-3. Solicitation permits.
A. Application.
(1) Every person required to obtain a solicitation permit shall make a
written application for such permit, pay the permit fee and obtain
the permit prior to engaging in solicitation within the Town.
(2) Application for the solicitation permit shall be made on the form
provided by the Town and shall be submitted to the Code
Enforcement Office 10 days prior to the date on which the
solicitation is to begin and shall be accompanied by the proper
documentation necessary to complete the application. The applicant
shall truthfully state in full the following information requested on
the application:16
(3) A fee of $25 shall be charged for every solicitation permit application
to cover the cost of processing the application.
16.Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 159-2 ELSMERE CODE § 159-3
1:238
B. Exemption. Persons engaging in the following activities shall be exempt
from the solicitation permit requirement:
(1) Charitable solicitation, including solicitation for the benefit of a local
elementary, junior high, or high school or for the benefit of a local
community organization, such as scouts and little leagues, and
solicitation for the benefit of a local nonprofit organization
established for the benefit of the community, community schools,
community projects, and for other similar purposes;
(2) Political solicitation;
(3) Religious solicitation;
(4) The distribution of handbills, flyers, brochures, pamphlets, leaflets,
papers, and other literature and written materials, shall be exempt
from the permit requirement;
(5) All persons who are exempt from the solicitation permit requirement
are nevertheless subject to the nuisance and trespass restrictions
contained in § 159-10D of this chapter.
§ 159-4. Solicitation on public streets.
A. A permit for solicitation shall be obtained by a sponsoring person,
company or organization for the conduct of any solicitation taking place
upon any public street in the Town, and copies of the permit issued
for such solicitation shall be issued to and worn by each person
participating in such solicitation upon any public street in the Town.
B. Except for Subsections C and G hereunder, this section shall not apply
to persons engaging in the following activities:
(1) Charitable solicitation, including solicitation for the benefit of a
local elementary, junior high, or high school or for the benefit of
a local community organization, such as scouts and little leagues,
and solicitation for the benefit of a local nonprofit organization
established for the benefit of the community, community schools,
community projects, and for other similar purposes;
(2) Political solicitation;
(3) Religious solicitation;
(4) The distribution of handbills, flyers, brochures, pamphlets, leaflets,
papers, and other literature and written materials, shall be exempt
from the public streets solicitation permit requirement;
(5) All persons who are exempt from the public streets solicitation
permit requirement are nevertheless subject to the nuisance and
trespass restrictions contained in § 159-10D of this chapter.
C. No solicitation shall be conducted on any public street in the Town
between the times from one hour before sundown to one hour after
sunrise.
D. By applying for, and as a condition to the issuance of, a permit pursuant
to this section, a sponsor accepts liability, and agrees to hold harmless
and indemnify the Town for any injuries to any person or property
occurring during the solicitation that is causally related to an act of
ordinary negligence of the persons soliciting on behalf of the sponsor,
and the sponsor shall be responsible for supervising and controlling the
conduct of all persons soliciting under the sponsor's permit.
§ 159-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-4
1:239
E. The sponsor shall carry and provide proof of general liability insurance.
F. Persons soliciting on the public streets and sidewalks in the Town
pursuant to a permit granted under this section shall wear a badge or
other easily readable form of identification that identifies the name of
the sponsor and the name of the individual that is clearly visible at all
times.
G. Persons soliciting on the public streets and sidewalks in the Town shall:
(1) Wear a high-visibility vest;
(2) Not obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic, walk in the middle of
any traffic lane or remain in any lane when a light turns yellow or
green;
(3) Not touch any vehicle or harass any motorist or passenger; and
(4) Comply with all applicable traffic regulations.
H. Permit applications shall be reviewed by the Chief of Police and shall be
submitted in a time period which is sufficient enough to allow the Chief
or their designee to review the plans for the event and issue an opinion
as to rather or not a permit should be issued based upon safety.
I. The Chief of Police may recommend the approval of applications that
are in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Additionally,
the Chief of Police is hereby given the authority to withhold or to
suspend all permits for solicitation on any public streets within the
Town due to weather or other conditions or circumstances that pose
a potential threat to public health, safety or welfare hazard to the
solicitors, motorists or general public until such time as the hazard no
longer exists.
§ 159-5. Permit denial.
A. If the Code Enforcement Officer or Chief of Police determines that the
applicant has not provided all of the information and documentation
required by this chapter, or has failed to meet the terms and conditions
of a solicitation permit set forth in this chapter, then the Code
Enforcement Officer or Chief of Police shall deny the issuance of the
solicitation permit and shall give the applicant written notice and
explanation of such denial.
B. Any person who provides all of the requested information and
documentation and complies with the permit terms and conditions shall
be issued a permit.
C. No permit shall be denied based on the content of any written
publication in violation of the First Amendment freedoms of speech,
religion, and the press or upon the basis of any other discriminatory
factor including but not limited to race, religion, gender, sexual
orientation or age.
D. Any notice of denial shall be delivered in person or by first class U.S.
mail addressed to the applicant's current residence address as set forth
in the application. The applicant may appeal the denial of a solicitation
permit pursuant to this section.
§ 159-6. Permit revocation.
§ 159-4 ELSMERE CODE § 159-6
1:240
A. Any solicitation permit issued may be revoked by the Code Enforcement
Officer or the Chief of Police if the person engaged in solicitation is
convicted of a violation of any of the sections in this chapter, or has
refused to leave any premises when asked to do so, has made a false
statement in the application, or becomes disqualified for the issuance of
a solicitation permit under the provisions of this chapter.
B. Immediately after the revocation, the Code Enforcement Officer or the
Chief of Police shall give the person written notice in person or by
first class U.S. mail, return receipt requested, addressed to his or her
residence address set forth in the application. The permit shall become
null and void immediately on service of the notice of revocation. Receipt
of a revocation notice sent by mail shall be deemed given when the
recipient signs or refuses to sign the return card or otherwise fails to
claim the notice within the time allowed by the U.S. Postal Office.
§ 159-7. Appeal of a revocation or denial.
A. Any person desiring to contest the denial or revocation of a solicitation
permit shall have a right to appeal such decision to the Town Manager
as provided in this section within 14 days after receipt of the notice of
denial or revocation by providing to the Town Manager written notice
requesting an appeal hearing.
B. The Town Manager, after receipt of the written request for a hearing,
shall set a time and date for such hearing which shall be within 30 days.
C. The Town Manager shall give written notice of the time, date and place
for hearing to the applicant or permit holder at least five days in advance
of the hearing date.
D. At the hearing, the applicant or permit holder may present and submit
evidence and witnesses to rebut the reasons cited for revoking or
denying the permit. The appealing party shall have the right to file
additional documents, amend the written appeal and appear at such
hearing in person, be represented by an attorney and examine and
cross-examine witnesses.
E. The Town Manager shall not be bound by the rules of evidence or
procedures followed in state courts but shall take into account all
reliable, probative and substantial evidence produced at the hearing
relating to the denial of the application or revocation of the permit.
F. The appealing party may supply at his or her own cost a court reporter.
G. Within 10 days after the close of the hearing, the Town Manager shall
render a decision in writing and make it available to the appealing party.
H. The Town Manager may reinstate a revoked permit, grant the requested
permit or renewal thereof, or affirm the decision to revoke or deny a
permit.
I. The decision of the Town Manager shall be final.
J. The appealing party may waive an appeal hearing and submit what
documentation he or she desires to have the Town Manager consider as
a written appeal. The Town Manager shall render a decision within 14
days of the filing of a written appeal.
§ 159-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-7
1:241
K. Should the Town Manager find that a conflict of interest exists which
prohibits him from conducting the appeal, he may appoint a designee to
hear the appeal.
§ 159-8. Solicitation period.
A. Each solicitation permit issued shall be valid for a period of time set
by Code Enforcement Officer but shall not to exceed 60 consecutive
calendar days. The expiration date shall be printed and visible on the
face of the solicitation permit.
B. Each registration permit shall be valid for a period of one year, the
expiration date of which registration identification shall be printed and
visible on the face of the registration identification.
§ 159-9. Permit renewal.
Upon the expiration of a solicitation permit, the person shall be entitled
to renew the permit for an additional sixty-day period, provided that the
application for renewal continues to satisfy all conditions and requirements
necessary to obtain an original permit and provided that all relevant
information and documentation is updated and provided to the Code
Enforcement Officer.
§ 159-10. No-solicitation signs; do-not-solicit list; trespass.
A. Any owner, lessee, invitee or lawful occupant of a residence may prohibit
solicitation by posting prominently on the front door or primary door
to the residence, a sign that clearly states "No Solicitation" or "No
Soliciting" or words of similar meaning. Whenever any person engaging
in solicitation, whether having a solicitation permit or not, encounters
such a sign as described above, such person shall not engage in
solicitation at such residence and shall immediately and peacefully
depart from the premises.
B. When any solicitor has gained an audience with the owner, lessee,
invitee or occupant of a residence, whether the residence is posted
pursuant to Subsection A above or not, the solicitor shall immediately
and peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do so by any
owner, lessee, invitee or occupant.
C. The Code Enforcement Office or the department of Public Safety of the
Town shall maintain and publish a current do-not-solicit list on the Town
website and make it available in hard copy upon request. No solicitor
shall attempt to solicit on property that is included on the do-not-solicit
list.
D. Except as provided below, it is declared unlawful and shall constitute a
nuisance and a trespass:
(1) For any person to solicit or attempt to solicit at any residence that:
(a) Has a posted "No Solicitation" or "No Soliciting" or words of
similar meaning sign on the front door; or
(b) Is on the do-not-solicit list.
(2) For any person to leave paper or other solicitation materials on
property where the same or similar materials have been previously
§ 159-7 ELSMERE CODE § 159-10
1:242
left and have not been picked up by the owner or occupant of the
property.
(3) For any person to remain on the premises or fail to depart peacefully
from the premises immediately upon being requested to do so by the
occupant.
E. The provisions in this section prohibiting trespassing shall apply to any
and all persons engaging in solicitation within the Town regardless of
whether such persons are exempt from the requirement to obtain a
solicitation permit or not.
F. It shall be an affirmative defense to a charge of violation of Subsection
D(1) or (2) of this section if the person charged proves that the
solicitation was in response to a subscription or other request for the
subject of the solicitation.
§ 159-11. General rules and restrictions.
A. Identification. Every solicitor who is required to obtain a solicitation
permit shall display the permit, or other authorized form of
identification, so that every person being solicited shall have an
unobstructed view of the permit.
B. Fraud or misrepresentation.
(1) No person shall perpetrate a fraud or misrepresentation of any kind
while engaged in solicitation within the Town. No person engaged
in solicitation shall employ any ruse, plan or scheme, or make any
assertion, representation or statement of fact which misrepresents
the purpose of the solicitation. It shall be unlawful for any person
engaged in solicitation to represent that goods or services have
sponsorship, approval, characteristics, ingredients, uses, benefits or
qualities that they do not have or that a person has sponsorship,
approval, status, qualification, affiliation or connection with an
individual, organization, firm or corporation that he or she does not
have.
(2) It shall be unlawful for a person engaged in solicitation to represent
that goods are original or new if they are deteriorated, altered,
reconditioned, reclaimed, used or secondhand.
C. Public health and safety. No person shall engage in solicitation within
the Town in such a manner that creates a danger or threat of any kind
to the public health, safety and welfare.
D. Persons engaged in solicitation within the Town shall have a
nonexclusive right to use the sidewalks, streets and other public
property within the Town, but no person engaged in solicitation shall
establish a permanent, stationary location for such solicitation, nor shall
any person engaged in solicitation block or interfere with the ability of
the public to enter upon, travel across or use any sidewalk, street or
other public property.
E. No person engaged in solicitation shall use abusive, vulgar, obscene or
offensive language while engaged in solicitation within the Town.
F. No person engaged in solicitation shall threaten to use force, use force
or otherwise coerce a person being solicited within the Town.
§ 159-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-11
1:243
G. No person engaged in solicitation shall use any sound- or voiceamplification
system or any other device which causes loud or disturbing
noises.
H. Display of permit/registration. A solicitation permit card shall be
approximately two inches by four inches and containing the name and
address of the soliciting company, organization or association and the
product being solicited, the name and address of the solicitor, the
effective dates of the permit, in an easy readable form shall be visibly
displayed by each person subject to the engaged in a soliciting.
I. Change of information. During the application process for, or during
the term of, any solicitation permit, the applicant or permit holder shall
promptly notify the Code Enforcement Office in writing of any change in
any material information given by the applicant or permit holder in the
application for such permit.
J. Any person who solicits or distributes materials in the Town, whether
directly or indirectly through the use of an agent, shall be responsible
for complying with the terms of this chapter and shall also be liable for a
violation of the terms of this chapter, whether the violation is committed
directly or indirectly by an agent or employee.
K. Any person who hires or employs an employee or agent to solicit on their
behalf shall be vicariously liable for the acts of the employee or agent.
Whenever any employee or agent violates the terms of this chapter, the
person who employs the employee or agent shall also be responsible for
such violation and subject to the appropriate penalties.
§ 159-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-10-2015 by Ord. No.
600]
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $200 or
imprisonment for such a period not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment, at the discretion of the court.
§ 159-13. Fees.
A. The fee associated with the issuance of a solicitation permit which will
be valid for a period of time which is less than seven calendar days shall
be $50 per day.
B. The fee associated with the issuance of a solicitation permit which will
be valid for a period of time which is more than seven calendar days shall
be $700.
C. The fee associated with the issuance of a solicitation permit for any
person or group who is not in any manner selling or attempting to sell
any good, wares or merchandise and who is not attempting to solicit
contributions shall be $25, regardless of the period of time for which the
registration card is valid.
D. The fee associated with the renewal of any permit shall be in accordance
with the schedule listed in Subsections A, B, and C of this section.
Chapter 164
§ 159-11 ELSMERE CODE § 159-13
1:244
POLICE SERVICE FEES
§ 164-1. Purposes.
It is the intent of the Town's Council by the adoption of this chapter
to impose on and collect from the person or persons in charge of or
responsible for any nuisance event or activity that generates extraordinary
cost to the Town that cost over and above the cost of providing normal law
enforcement services and police protection Town-wide.
§ 164-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms defined in this section shall have
the meanings ascribed to them:
LAST KNOWN ADDRESS — The address shown on the records of the
New Castle County Recorder of Deeds Taxation or a more recent address
known to the Police Department. In the case of parties not listed in these
records, the last known address shall be that address obtained by the Police
Department after a reasonable search.
NUISANCE EVENT — One requiring special security assignment in order
to protect the public peace, health, safety and welfare. A nuisance event
includes, but is not limited to, the following: loud and boisterous conduct;
noises and activities disturbing the peace; congregation of two or more
persons in intoxicated conditions or under the influence of drugs or alcohol;
fighting or use of obscene or inflammatory language; loud music
constituting a nuisance or disturbing the peace; activities causing excessive
pedestrian or vehicular traffic and parking problems and congestions;
events occurring after 11:00 p.m. to sunrise of the following day which
disturb the peace and tranquility of the neighborhood; use and display of
narcotics, illegal drugs and controlled substances and paraphernalia for its
use; congregating in a tumultuous, noisy or rowdy crowd; and indecent
exposure and lewd conduct.
OWNER — A person or persons shown to be owner or owners of property
on the records of the New Castle County Recorder of Deeds.
PERSONAL SERVICE — Service by personally handing a copy to the
intended recipient or by leaving a copy at the intended recipient's residence
or place of business with a person of suitable age and discretion.
POLICE SERVICES FEE — The fee to be imposed for law enforcement
services associated with a special security assignment. Such fee may be
either a flat fee of $250 or an additional amount of up to a total of $1,000
based on, but not limited to, salaries of police officers while responding
to or remaining at the nuisance event, the pro rata cost of equipment, the
cost of repairing Town equipment and property, and the cost of any medical
treatment of injured police officers.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON — A person who owns the property where the
nuisance event takes place, and/or a person in charge of the premises, and/
or a person who organized or served as a host of the nuisance event. If the
§ 159-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-2
1:245
responsible person is a minor, then the parents or guardians of that minor
will be considered responsible persons.
SERVICE BY MAIL — Depositing the item with the United States Postal
Service addressed to the intended recipient at his or her last known address
with first class postage prepaid thereon.
SERVICE OF NOTICE — By personal service shall constitute the delivery
of the warning letter to the responsible person or by mailing it to the last
known address of the responsible person.
SPECIAL SECURITY ASSIGNMENT — The assignment of police officers,
services and/or equipment during a second or subsequent response to the
nuisance event after the service of a written notice to the responsible
persons that a police services fee may be imposed or costs incurred by the
city for any subsequent police response.
§ 164-3. Initial police responses to nuisance event.
When any police officer responds to any nuisance event and determines
that there is a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare,
the police officer may serve a written notice to the responsible person
or persons that any subsequent police response to that same location or
address within a thirty-day period shall be deemed a special security
assignment and that the responsible person or persons may be liable for a
police services fee.
§ 164-4. Subsequent police responses; liability.
A. If, after a written notice is served pursuant to this chapter, a subsequent
police response or responses are necessary to the same location or
address within a thirty-day period, then each subsequent response or
responses shall be deemed a special security assignment. Responsible
persons who had previously received a notice of warning shall be jointly
and severally liable for a police services fee for a special security
assignment.
B. The amount of the police services fee shall be a debt owed to the Town
by the responsible person or persons.
C. The Town reserves its rights to seek reimbursement for actual costs and
damages exceeding $1,000 through other legal remedies or procedures.
D. The police response or responses to a nuisance event may also result
in the arrest and/or citation for violations of state or local laws or
ordinances.
§ 164-5. Cost; collection.
The Chief of Police shall notify the Town Finance Director in writing of the
performance of each special security assignment, of the name and address
of the responsible person or persons, the date and time of the incident,
the services performed, and the amount of the police services fee. If the
police services fee is in excess of $250, the Chief of Police shall provide
documentation to support the additional amount. The Finance Director shall
§ 164-2 ELSMERE CODE § 164-5
1:246
thereafter cause appropriate billings to be made and be responsible for the
collection of the police services fee.
§ 164-6. Administrative appeal.
An administrative appeal of a police services fee may be made to the Chief
of Police or designee within 10 days from the date of mailing of the billing.
The request for a hearing shall be in writing and addressed to the Chief of
Police and shall include a copy of the billing and grounds for the appeal. The
Chief of Police or designee may modify the service fee upon a finding that
the responsible person or persons had made a good faith effort to remedy
the situation or that the nuisance event was not the fault of the person or
persons filing the appeal.
Chapter 167
PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 159.
§ 167-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORIZED LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENT — Any member of the Elsmere
Public Safety Department, Delaware State Police, New Castle County Police
Department, the Attorney General and Deputy Attorney General.
MINOR — Any person who has not attained the age of 18 years.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership or corporation.
PRECIOUS GEM — Prized stone such as diamond, ruby, emerald, sapphire,
pearl or the like.
PRECIOUS METAL — Any metal in the gold, silver or platinum group or any
combination or mixture thereof.
SECONDHAND DEALER OF PRECIOUS METALS OR GEMS — Any person,
firm or corporation who purchases, trades, handles, sells, deals in or
disposes of any secondhand or used watches, jewelry, cutlery, hummele
figurines and other products, gold, silver or other precious metals, wrought
gold or other wrought precious metals or any secondhand or used article
whatsoever composed or manufactured in whole or in part of gold, silver or
other precious metals or precious gems such as diamonds, rubies, emeralds,
sapphires, pearls and the like. This definition shall not include any bank
which is: regulated by the United States or the State of Delaware; and
§ 164-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-1
1:247
dealing in refinery ingots, minted bars, silver or bullion coins, with or on
behalf of its account customers.
§ 167-2. License required.
A. No person shall conduct business as a secondhand dealer of precious
metals or gems within the Town of Elsmere unless he has first obtained
a business license to engage in that business from the Town Manager.
This license is required in addition to any license already issued to that
person for any other business.
B. A separate license shall be required for each location, place or premises
used for conducting of business as a secondhand dealer of precious
metals or gems.
C. Every application for license for the operation of a secondhand
dealership of precious metals or gems shall state the full name(s) of
the applicant, including nicknames or aliases, residential address(es),
place(s) of employment, including address(es) and phone number(s),
social security number, date of birth, driver's license number, a
photograph of the applicant taken within 30 days of the application
and the address of the premises for which the application for license is
made. Each application shall further provide the full name(s), including
nicknames and aliases, residential address(es), place(s) of employment,
including address(es) and phone number(s), social security number and
a photograph, taken within 30 days of the application of the person(s) to
be employed by the establishment as either a full- or part-time employee.
In the case of a new employee, the information stated above shall be
provided to the Town Manager within 30 days of the commencement
of employment. This shall be provided by the license holder, who shall
personally appear before the Town Manager and affix his signature and
social security number to the form containing that information in the
Town Manager's presence and shall acknowledge under oath that said
information is true.
D. No license shall be issued except upon personal appearance of the
applicant before the Town Manager. The applicant shall affix his
signature and social security number to the application for the license
in the Town Manager's presence and shall acknowledge under oath that
said application for license is his act and deed and that the facts stated
therein are true.
E. Where the applicant is a corporation, Subsection D of this section shall
be satisfied by the appearance, signature and social security number
of a director on behalf of the corporation in the same manner. Where
the applicant is a partnership or other unincorporated association,
Subsection D of this section shall be satisfied by the appearance,
signature and social security number of a general partner or member on
behalf of the applicant.
F. The license fee for a secondhand dealer of precious metals or gems shall
be $100 per year for each place of business. [Amended 1-14-1982 by
Ord. No. 168; 9-18-2003 by Ord. No. 420]
§ 167-3. Place of business; soliciting on streets; canvassing.
§ 167-1 ELSMERE CODE § 167-3
1:248
A. Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall designate
the place in which the secondhand dealer shall carry on such business;
and such business shall not be carried on or conducted in any other place
than that designated in or by such license.
B. No secondhand dealer of precious metals or gems shall be permitted to
solicit business upon any street or public highway of the Town.
C. No person, firm or corporation shall conduct a house-to-house canvass
for the purchase or sale of secondhand or used watches, jewelry, cutlery,
hummele figurines and other products, gold, silver or other precious
metals, wrought gold or other wrought precious metals or any other
secondhand or used article whatsoever composed or manufactured in
whole or in part of gold, silver or other precious metals or precious gems,
within the Town.
§ 167-4. Record of purchases, sales and exchanges.
A. Every secondhand dealer of precious metals or gems shall keep a tightly
bound book, not loose-leaf, with pages numbered in sequence in which
there shall be made, at the time of transaction, a record in English of
every article received, purchased, sold or exchanged by him, setting
forth the following: The name, age, sex, residence and general
description of the individual with whom the transaction is made, the
price or consideration paid or received at the time of the transaction;
and a description of every article received, sold or exchanged, giving
the manufacturer's name or other marks of identification appearing on
same. The secondhand precious metal or gem dealer shall require that
the person with whom he is dealing produce two items of identification,
at least one of which must bear the photograph, name, address and date
of birth of such person.
B. The secondhand dealer of precious metals or gems shall be required
to have the person with whom he is dealing sign the book entry which
describes the transaction as set forth in Subsection A of this section.
§ 167-5. Record inspection.
A. The required record book, and all goods, articles or things purchased,
received or kept for sale or exchange, by every secondhand dealer of
precious metals or gems, shall at all reasonable times be open to the
inspection of an authorized law enforcement officer.
B. Any secondhand dealer of precious metals or gems, not at a permanent
place of business, shall at the conclusion of the last day of business
at a temporary place of business turn over to the Town Manager the
book containing the recordation of all purchases, sales, and exchanges
required by § 167-4 of this chapter. Such book shall be available for
inspection by any authorized law enforcement officer.
C. Any secondhand dealer of precious metals or gems with a permanent
place of business within the Town of Elsmere shall keep the book
required by § 167-4 of this chapter at least one year from the date of the
last transaction recorded in said book and make said book available for
inspection by any authorized law enforcement officer.
§ 167-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-5
1:249
D. In addition to the requirements set forth in § 167-5A, B and C, any
secondhand dealer of precious metals or gems shall submit a copy of
every completed transaction contained in the record book, properly
documented and maintained as required by § 167-4A and B, to the
Elsmere Public Safety Department on a weekly basis. [Added
4-12-1984 by Ord. No. 191]
§ 167-6. Goods to be retained without concealment.
Every secondhand dealer of precious metals or gems must retain without
concealment on the business premises for a period of 10 days, subject
to inspection by any authorized law enforcement officer, all goods, wares,
merchandise and other items purchased or received from any person before
selling, shipping, melting, compressing or otherwise altering or disposing of
the same.
§ 167-7. Duty of inquiry; seizure of stolen goods.
A. Every person conducting business as a secondhand precious metal or
gem dealer who buys or receives any property which has been acquired
under circumstances amounting to theft, as provided in Title 11 Del.
C. § 841, under such circumstances as should cause such person to
make reasonable inquiry to ascertain that the person from whom such
property was bought or received had the legal right to sell or deliver
it, without making such reasonable inquiry, shall be presumed to have
bought or received such property knowing it to have been so stolen
or obtained. This presumption may be rebutted by proof; however, the
burden of proof on this issue shall be upon the defendant.
B. Every person conducting business as a secondhand precious metal or
gem dealer who by such reasonable inquiry has reason to believe that
such goods offered are stolen shall seize or take into possession such
goods and shall immediately notify the police of such seizure, together
with the description of the person offering such goods for sale or trade.
§ 167-8. Purchasing or accepting goods from intoxicated persons or
minors.
A. No person conducting business as a secondhand precious metal or gem
dealer or acting for any person so engaged shall knowingly purchase
or trade any property from any person who is apparently under the
influence of any intoxicating liquor or drug.
B. A secondhand precious metal or gem dealer shall purchase or deal in
items only from persons who are 18 years of age or older. It is the
responsibility of the dealer to ascertain the true and correct age of the
seller.
§ 167-9. Violations and penalties; suspension of license;
jurisdiction.
A. Any secondhand dealer who violates any part of this chapter will receive,
upon conviction thereof, for the first offense, a fine not to exceed $500
and/or imprisonment for not more than 30 days; for each subsequent
§ 167-5 ELSMERE CODE § 167-9
1:250
offense, a fine not to exceed $1,000 and/or imprisonment for not more
than 60 days. For every conviction, the secondhand dealer in precious
metals or gems shall have his Town business license as required by this
chapter suspended for one year. He shall not apply for another such
license during the period of suspension.
B. Jurisdiction for any and all offenses will be the Justice of the Peace Court
of the State of Delaware.
C. The Elsmere Public Safety Department will have jurisdiction as to the
enforcement of this chapter in the Town of Elsmere and to see that each
secondhand dealer's license in the Town complies with this chapter.
Chapter 169
PROFESSIONAL FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 60. Zoning — See Ch. 225.
§ 169-1. Additional fees for applications, permits and hearings;
notification; appeals.
A. Whenever the Town of Elsmere finds it necessary and prudent to seek
the assistance of professionals, such as but not limited to engineers,
attorneys or any other professional and the Town is charged a fee by
those professionals, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to pay
those additional fees incurred by the Town prior to the issuance of a
permit, the scheduling of a hearing or the processing of any application.
B. The Town shall make every attempt to notify the applicant of the
estimated additional costs which they may be responsible for, prior to
incurring those costs. The standard permit fee shall still apply, and these
costs shall be in addition to any other fees that the Town currently
charges.
C. Should the applicant feel that these additional fees are excessive or
improper, they may appeal the assessment of any additional fee to the
Mayor and Council. Should such an appeal be requested, it will be heard
at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Mayor and Council. The
Mayor and Council may call a special meeting to consider an appeal
should they deem it necessary.
§ 167-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-1
1:251
Chapter 171
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 76.
Lawn care companies — See Ch. 123.
Dumping of yard waste and refuse — See Ch.
127.
Solid waste — See Ch. 187.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 192.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 211.
§ 169-1 ELSMERE CODE § 169-1
1:252
ARTICLE I
Maintenance of Right-of-Way
[Adopted 10-14-1999 by Ord. No. 377]
§ 171-1. Responsibility of property owners.
It shall be the responsibility of each property owner whose property adjoins
a public street to properly maintain the property and vegetation in the rightof-
way next to that public street on the side thereof adjoining or constituting
part of such owner's property.
§ 171-2. Standard of care.
The maintenance required by this article shall be that required to have
the property meet the standards provided for by the code adopted under
Chapter 76, Building Construction, Article II, Adoption of Building,
Residential, Plumbing, Mechanical and Fuel Gas Standards, and Chapter
171, Property Maintenance, Article II, Adoption of Standards, of the Code
of the Town of Elsmere.
§ 171-3. Reimbursement.
Notwithstanding any of the other provisions of this article, nothing in this
article shall preclude any property owner from seeking reimbursement from
another party for expenses incurred by him or her to comply with this
article.
§ 171-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-18-2003 by Ord. No.
420]
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $300 or imprisonment
for not more than 30 days, or both.
§ 171-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-4
1:253

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Standards
[Adopted 9-18-2003 by Ord. No. 420; amended in its entirety
3-9-2017 by Ord. No. 625]
§ 171-5. Adoption of Property Maintenance Code.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the Code
Enforcement Office of the Town of Elsmere, being marked and designated
as the "International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition," as
published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the
Property Maintenance Code of the Town of Elsmere, in the State of
Delaware, for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance
of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for
supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions
essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation
and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human
occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein
provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code on file in the
Code Enforcement Office of the Town of Elsmere are hereby referred to,
adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this legislation, with
the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 171-6
of this article.
§ 171-6. Additions, insertions and changes to Property Maintenance
Code.
The following sections of the 2012 Property Maintenance Code are hereby
revised or amended as follows:
A. Section 101, General, 101.1: by deleting the word "International" in this
section and inserting the words "The Town of Elsmere" where it says
"[NAME OF JURISDICTION]."
B. Section 103.2, Appointment: by deleting 103.2 in its entirety and inserting
a new 103.2 to read as follows:
103.2 Appointment.
The Code Enforcement Department and its Code Enforcement Officers, the
Chief of whom shall be the Town Manager, are hereby designated as the
primary department charged with enforcing the provisions of this Code and
shall also be known as the "Code Official(s)."
C. Section 103.3, Deputies: by deleting 103.3 in its entirety and inserting a
new 103.3 to read as follows:
§ 171-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-6
1:255
103.3 Deputies.
The Code Enforcement Officers shall be appointed under the authority of
the Town Manager. The Town Manager shall have the authority to employ
and/or appoint a third-party company or individual to serve with or in place
of other Code Officials.
D. Section 103.5, Fees: by deleting 103.5 in its entirety and inserting a new
103.5 to read as follows:
103.5 Fees.
The fees for activities and services performed by the Department in
carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be indicated in the
Code of the Town of Elsmere or as may be set by resolution of the Town
Council.
E. Section 109.6, Hearing: by deleting the words "appeals board" and inserting
in their place the words "Board of Adjustment."
F. Section 111, Means of Appeal. Section 111 shall be deleted in its entirety
and a new Section 111 shall be inserted in its place to read as follows:
[Amended 3-8-2018 by Ord. No. 633]
SECTION 111
MEANS OF APPEAL
111.1 Application for appeal.
Any person directly affected by a decision of the Code Official or a notice
or order issued under this code shall have the right to appeal to the Board
of Adjustment of the Town of Elsmere, provided that a written application
for appeal is filed within 20 days after the day the decision, notice or
order was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim
that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder
have been incorrectly interpreted or the provisions of this code do not
fully apply. Additionally, an application for appeal may be based on a claim
that an action other than what is required by the code: 1) provides the
same or better protections than what the code requires; and 2) will not
cost the Town of Elsmere any more money than enforcing the code as
written. If the appellant proves that an action other than what is required
by the code meets these two requirements, the Board of Adjustment may,
in its discretion, either enforce the code as written or permit the proposed
alternative action.
111.2 Notice of meeting.
Once an appeal has been properly filed, a date shall be set for when the
Board of Adjustment shall hear the appeal. If on the date the appeal was
filed there are more than 14 days before the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the Board, the appeal shall be heard at that meeting. However,
if there are fewer than 14 days before the next regularly scheduled meeting
of the Board, the date for the appeal hearing shall be the fourth Tuesday of
the month following the month in which the appeal was filed.
§ 171-6 ELSMERE CODE § 171-6
1:256
These requirements shall not prohibit the scheduling of the appeal hearing
from being held at any other public meeting of the Board, provided that
the provisions of this section are waived by mutual agreement by both the
appellant and the Town Manager in a written agreement.
111.3 Open hearing.
All hearings before the Board of Adjustment shall be open to the public.
The appellant, the appellant's representative, the Code Official and any
person who has been called as a witness or whose interests are affected
shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
111.4 Procedure.
The Board of Adjustment shall set and make available the procedures
under which a hearing will be conducted. The procedures shall not require
compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall mandate that only
relevant information be received.
111.5 Postponed hearing.
Either the appellant or the appellant's representative shall have the right
to request a postponement of the hearing.
111.6 Board decision.
After hearing the evidence provided at the hearing, the Board of
Adjustment shall modify or reverse the decision of the Code Official only by
a concurring vote of a majority of Board members present.
111.7 Records and copies.
The decision of the Board shall be recorded. Copies shall be furnished to
the appellant and to the Code Official.
111.8 Administration.
The Code Official shall take immediate action in accordance with the
decision of the Board of Adjustment.
111.9 Court review.
Any person, whether or not a previous party to the appeal, shall have the
right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct
errors of law. Application for review shall be made in the manner and time
required by law following the decision of the Board of Adjustment.
111.10 Stays of enforcement.
Appeals of notice and orders (other than imminent danger notices) shall
stay the enforcement of the notice and order until the appeal is heard by
the Board of Adjustment.
G. Section 112.4, Failure to comply: by adding where the first [AMOUNT]
appears $500, and by adding where the second [AMOUNT] appears $1,000.
H. Section 301.2, Responsibility: by adding a new sentence at the end of
the existing paragraph to read as follows: "Additionally, the owner of the
premises shall be responsible for maintaining all common areas of the
structure and ensuring that the entire structure and exterior property is
free of infestation."
§ 171-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-6
1:257
I. Section 302.4, Weeds:
(1) By deleting "[JURISDICTION TO INSERT HEIGHT IN INCHES]" and
replacing that phrase with the following: "eight inches."
(2) By deleting the words "other than trees or shrubs provided" as they
appear in the fifth and sixth lines of the first paragraph and replacing
that phrase with the following: "all unrestrained or unmanicured
shrubs, hedges, brush and undergrowth, any rotten, dead, diseased
or decaying tree, plant or other vegetation as well as any shrubs,
hedges, brush, undergrowth or other vegetation which expands beyond
the property line of the owner or creates a nuisance to any adjoining
property or to the neighborhood."
J. Section 302.10, Outdoor furniture or appliances: by adding a new Section
302.10 to read as follows:
302.10 Outdoor furniture or appliances.
The outdoor storage or use of any equipment, materials, furnishings or
appliances which are not specifically designed or manufactured for
exterior placement is prohibited. Items which are specifically designed
or manufactured for outdoor use such as lawn furniture, barbeque grills,
garden tools and children's outdoor play equipment may be stored outside,
provided that they are maintained in good condition and stored in an
orderly fashion.
K. Section 303.3, Additional regulations: by adding a new Section 303.3 to
read as follows:
303.3 Additional regulations.
These regulations shall be in addition to those established in Chapter
171, Property Maintenance, of the Code of the Town of Elsmere. Should
these regulations be in conflict with those in Chapter 171 the provisions of
Chapter 171 of the Code of the Town of Elsmere shall prevail.
L. Section 304.14, Insect screens: by deleting the words "During the period
from [DATE to [DATE],".
M. Section 308.4, Placement for collection: by adding a new Section 308.4 to
read as follows:
308.4 Placement for collection.
It is the responsibility of every occupant of a structure or dwelling unit
to place out for collection on the regularly scheduled collection day any
container which contains any amount of rubbish or garbage.
N. Section 308.5, Time limits for placement for collection: by adding a new
Section 308.5 to read as follows:
§ 171-6 ELSMERE CODE § 171-6
1:258
308.5 Time limits on placement for collection.
No occupant of a structure or dwelling unit shall place out for collection
any container before 6:00 p.m. on the night before the scheduled collection
date, and any container placed out for collection shall be returned to an
approved storage location by no later than 8:00 p.m. on the regularly
scheduled collection day.
O. Section 308.6, Approved storage location: by adding a new Section 308.6 to
read as follows:
308.6 Approved storage location.
The only approved storage location for containers shall be at a point on the
property which is located in the side or the rear of the property.
P. 309.2 Owner: Insert a new Section 309.2 to read as follows:
309.2 Owner responsible.
The owner of any structure shall be responsible for the extermination of
the entire structure as frequently as may be required to avoid or address
any infestation.
Q. Section 404.4.1, Room area: by adding a new sentence at the end of the
paragraph to read as follows: "Except that in all units constructed prior to
March 8, 2003, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person
shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area."
R. Section 602.3, Heat supply: by deleting the words "During the period from
[DATE to [DATE],".
S. Section 602.4, Occupiable work spaces: by deleting the words "During the
period from [DATE to [DATE],".
T. Section 603.7, Carbon monoxide detectors: by inserting a new Section
603.7 to read as follows:
603.7 Carbon monoxide detectors.
In all residential occupancy buildings, a single-station carbon monoxide
alarm in conformity with UL 2034 regulations shall be provided on all
levels with sleeping rooms. In multifamily dwellings with more than one
dwelling unit on each level, each dwelling unit shall be provided with a
carbon monoxide alarm.
§ 171-7. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who violates the Property Maintenance Code of the Town of
Elsmere, as adopted pursuant to § 171-5 of Chapter 171, shall be subject
to and liable for a civil penalty in the amount of $100. This civil penalty
shall be paid within 30 days of the date of the citation (the "payment
deadline"), even if the violation is cured by such date. If it is not paid by
the payment deadline, then the civil penalty imposed under this section
shall give rise to a lien pursuant to Title 25, Chapter 29, of the Delaware
Code. Each seventy-two-hour period that the condition giving rise to the
issuance of a citation continues after a citation has been issued shall be
§ 171-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-7
1:259
considered a new and separate offense and as such will be subject to a
separate citation and an additional civil penalty in the amount of $100.
B. Any citation issued for failure to comply with this article shall be mailed
to the owner of the property that is the subject of the citation.
C. The owner of a property aggrieved by any civil penalty imposed pursuant
to this section may appeal to the Board of Adjustment pursuant to
§ 171-6F of this article.
D. This section shall apply and remain valid despite any determination that
it is inconsistent with any other section of the Property Maintenance
Code of the Town of Elsmere.
E. Waiver of fines for a first offense. Whenever a citation is issued pursuant
to this chapter and the owner, person, firm, company, or corporation who
is receiving the citation has not received any other citation or violation
of any kind from the Town within the twelve-month period immediately
preceding the issuance date of the citation being issued, the fine portion
of the citation may be waived if the following conditions have been
met. The waiving of the fine shall only occur once and only if whoever
received the citation meets the requirements of Subsection E(1) and (2)
below.
(1) Within 48 hours of receiving the citation the person receiving it takes
the required corrective action to abate the situation which gave rise
to the issuance of the citation and brings proof that the abatement
has been completed to the Code Enforcement Office; and
(2) Once the Code Enforcement Officer determines that the situation
has been properly abated, either by the evidence brought to the
Code Office or the Code Officer visiting the site, the fine shall be
waived. However, the record of the violation occurring at the
property shall remain and the violation shall be considered a first
offense. The property will still be subject to all other fines, including
a fine for a repeated public nuisance.
§ 171-7 ELSMERE CODE § 171-7
1:260
Chapter 182
RENTAL LICENSES
§ 182-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, and not for the purpose of altering or
amending any provisions in the Residential Landlord-Tenant Code in
Chapters 51, 53, 55, 57, and 59 of Title 25 of the Delaware Code, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
APARTMENT HOUSES — All structures that include more than two
dwelling units (as described herein).
COMMERCIAL RENTAL UNIT — Any building, store, storefront, garage,
warehouse or other structure that is owned by someone other than the
person(s) who occupy or are using the building or which is assessed as
a commercial property for the purpose of tax collection by the Town of
Elsmere and is occupied or operated by someone other than the owner.
DWELLING UNIT —
EXTERMINATION — The inspection of the rental unit by a pest control
company licensed in the State of Delaware and the Town of Elsmere for the
purpose of identifying the presence of bed bugs, roaches, ants, other insects
and rodents and a certification by that company that these insects, bugs or
rodents are not present in the unit or that the unit has been properly treated
to exterminate the presence of any of these insects, bugs or rodents.
FAMILY — An individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage
or law. For this chapter, a "family" may also be a group of not more than any
five persons living together in a dwelling unit.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY — For the purpose of this chapter, spouse, mother,
father, guardian, child, sister, brother, grandparent, grandchild, plus the
various combinations of half, step, in-law and adopted relationships that can
be derived from those named.
OCCUPANCY — The maximum number of occupants that may reside in a
dwelling unit shall be as specified in the most current edition of the ICC
International Property Maintenance Code, which has been adopted by the
A family dwelling unit intended for living purposes, providing private
entrance and independent permanent facilities for sleeping, eating,
cooking and sanitation. Dwelling units may share common heat,
ventilation and air-conditioning units, as provided, or may be
individually equipped.
A.
In the case of structures where rooms are rented on a daily, weekly
or other basis, primarily for housing individuals and without private
entrances to the structure or the independent permanent facilities
described in Subsection A of this definition not shared with other
inhabitants of the structure, each such room rented shall be considered
a separate dwelling unit.
B.
§ 171-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-1
1:261
Town of Elsmere and includes any amendments made to that code by the
Town.
RENTAL UNIT — Any dwelling unit which is rented, leased, let or hired or
is intended, advertised or designed to be rented, leased, let or hired which
is not occupied by the legal property owner or a member of the property
owner's immediate family or which is occupied by anyone other than the
legal property owner or a member of his or her immediate family.
§ 182-2. Rental licenses required.
Every owner (or an authorized agent) of a rental unit or a structure which
is defined as a "commercial rental unit" by this chapter is required to make
application for and receive an annual license for each and every rental unit
or unit which is defined as a "commercial rental unit" by this chapter. The
Town Manager shall develop an application for rental licenses which shall
require any information which he feels is appropriate or required to enforce
the provisions of this chapter as well as any other code or regulation. At a
minimum, the application shall require the owner to supply the following
information:
A. At the time of application for a rental license intended for a residential
rental unit, written documentation must be supplied by the applicant for
each tenant of the property denoting the following information:
(1) A copy of the lease or agreement between the tenant and the owner
of the property or a statement that the rental unit is currently vacant.
(2) The number of bedrooms in the dwelling unit.
(3) The area (in square feet) of each dwelling unit.
(4) The name of any and all tenants intending or approved to occupy the
unit, or a statement that the unit is vacant.
(5) Number of tenants per unit.
B. At the time of application for a rental license intended for a commercial
rental unit, written documentation must be supplied by the applicant for
each tenant of the property denoting the following information:
(1) A copy of the lease or agreement between the tenant and the owner
of the property, which clearly notes the expiration of and renewal
options of the lease.
(2) The area in square feet of the entire structure.
(3) The area in square feet of the space occupied by the particular
tenant.
(4) The name of the business or person who currently occupies the
structure or a statement that the structure is currently vacant.
(5) The type of business that is being performed on the premises.
(6) The State of Delaware and Town of Elsmere business license for the
business or person occupying the structure.
(7) The total number of tenants occupying the structure.
§ 182-3. Inspections and certificate of occupancy for occupied
units.
A. Prior to the occupancy of a rental unit by a tenant and prior to any
change in the occupancy of a rental unit by a new tenant of the rental
§ 182-1 ELSMERE CODE § 182-3
1:262
unit who is not an immediate family member of the legal owner, a
certificate of occupancy shall be required to be issued by the Code
Enforcement Department.
B. A certificate of occupancy shall only be issued after:
(1) On-site inspections have been made by the Code Enforcement
Officer, or authorized deputy of the Code Enforcement Officer, to
ensure that said unit is in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter; and
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer has concluded that the rental unit is
in compliance with the most current edition of the ICC International
Property Maintenance Code which has been adopted by the Town
of Elsmere and includes any amendments made to that Code by the
Town; and
(3) The owner has provided the Code Enforcement Officer with the
following:
(a) Written proof that the property to be occupied has been
exterminated in accordance with this chapter within a period
of time not to exceed 15 days prior to the occupancy of the
rental unit by its occupants. Extermination in accordance with
this chapter shall be required within a period of time not to
exceed 15 days prior to every change in occupancy of the rental
unit; and
(b) A copy of the signed lease agreement; and
(c) A copy of a signed document stating that the owner has provided
the renter with a summary document of the Delaware Landlord-
Tenant Code; and
(d) A copy of the official vehicle registration card issued by the
agency having the legal authority to issue such cards for the
state in which the vehicle is registered, for each and every
vehicle which is owned, leased, operated by or in the possession
of the tenant and/or any other person(s) occupying the rental
unit. Written on the copy of each registration card required by
this section shall be the color of the vehicle.
(e) Persons seeking a commercial rental permit shall only be
required to supply a copy of the signed lease agreement.
C. The cost for this inspection will be included in the rental licensee fee.
Additional inspections to ensure compliance will be made at additional
cost to the owner.
D. A record of each inspection will be kept on file at the Town Hall.
E. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude that other inspections may be
made by the Code Official in the regular performance of his or her
duties.
§ 182-4. Inspections of vacant units.
Annually and within 90 days after the issuance of a rental license for a
unit which is vacant at the time of the issuance of the license, the owner
shall schedule an inspection of the vacant unit with the Code Enforcement
Officer. The purpose of the inspection shall be for the same purpose and
§ 182-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-4
1:263
conducted in the same manner as the inspection required by § 182-3 of this
chapter.
§ 182-5. Inspections of common areas and shared equipment.
Any inspection conducted in accordance with this chapter shall include an
inspection of the following to ensure compliance with the most current
edition of the ICC International Property Maintenance Code which has been
adopted by the Town of Elsmere and includes any amendments made to that
code by the Town:
A. Basements.
B. Common areas, such as hallways.
C. Individual or common equipment, such as but not limited to:
(1) Heating, ventilation and air-conditioning units.
(2) Exterior grounds.
(3) Exterior structures.
§ 182-6. Required notifications by owners.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to notify the Code
Enforcement Department within 72 hours when the person reported as
occupying any rental unit no longer occupies the property.
B. Whenever a previously occupied rental unit is vacated and intended to
be reoccupied by someone other than the previous tenant, it shall be
the responsibility of the property owner to notify the Code Enforcement
Office within 72 hours of the vacancy and provide the information
required by § 182-2A(1), (4) and (5) and, in the case of a commercial
rental unit, the information required by § 182-2B.
§ 182-7. Fees.
A. The cost of a rental license shall be as follows:
(1) For residential units containing two or fewer units within a structure:
a fee of $200 per unit.
(2) For residential units with more than two units within one structure:
a fee of $150 per unit.
(3) For commercial rental units that contain two units or fewer within
one structure: a fee of $350 per unit.
(4) For commercial rental units that contain more than two units within
one structure: a fee of $250 per unit.
B. These fees are also subject to the following:
(1) Each license is valid for one year. No fees will be prorated. Annual
renewal forms will be mailed by the Town.
(2) License fees are payable upon receipt and are due no later than
October 31.
(3) A charge of $50 will be assessed for compliance inspections, if
required, beyond the initial inspection mandated and included in the
license fee. This fee shall not be assessed if the additional inspection
is required due to a change in the occupants and no additional
inspections are required.
§ 182-4 ELSMERE CODE § 182-7
1:264
(4) It shall be the sole responsibility of the owner(s) to provide shelter
and pay expenses of relocation for persons required to vacate the
owner's rental property as a result of an order condemning a
building or structure deemed unfit for human habitation.
(5) The owner(s) who fails to provide the shelter and relocation required
by Subsection B(4) shall also reimburse the Town of Elsmere for
any expenses that it incurs in connection with obtaining shelter
and relocation services for persons required to vacate the owner’s
property. However, nothing in this section of the Code shall require
the Town of Elsmere to undertake such expenses. [Added
4-14-2016 by Ord. No. 613]
§ 182-8. Length of lease.
No property required by this chapter to obtain a rental license shall be
rented, leased or otherwise occupied or used by anyone other than the
owner of said property if the initial length of the lease or agreement or the
length of any renewal options is for a period of time which is less than 28
consecutive days.
§ 182-9. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person or persons who shall violate the provisions of this chapter
or who shall fail to comply with a notice or order issued by the Code
Official pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $300 nor more than $500 or
imprisonment of not more than 30 days, or both.
B. Each day that each violation continues shall be deemed a further offense
punishable by a further sum of $50 per day, per violation. The imposition
of a penalty for any violation of this chapter shall not excuse the violation
or permit it to continue.
C. The owner of any rental property who shall fail to register or to pay to
the Town the appropriate fee(s) as determined by this chapter or fails to
comply with § 182-7B of this chapter shall pay a late fee of $100 for each
and every rental unit which he or she failed to register or to pay to the
Town the appropriate fee(s).
Chapter 184
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS
§ 184-1. Maximum size. [Amended 11-11-2010 by Ord. No. 525]
All satellite dish antennas installed within the Town of Elsmere shall be no
greater in size than one meter (39.37 inches) in diameter.
§ 184-2. Satellite dish antennas in front yards.
All satellite dish antennas installed in the front yard of any residence or
business property must be securely attached to the residence or building.
§ 182-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-3
1:265
§ 184-3. Preexisting satellite dish antennas.
All satellite dish antennas installed within the Town of Elsmere prior to the
enactment of this chapter are not subject to the provisions of this chapter
unless the preexisting satellite dish antenna is moved or altered.
§ 184-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-18-2003 by Ord. No.
420; 9-10-2015 by Ord. No. 600]
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter and who shall fail to
comply with any notice or order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
relating to the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
fined not less than $100 nor more than $200 for each violation thereof.
Each day that each violation continues shall be deemed a further offense
punishable by a further sum of $100 per day, per violation. The imposition
of a penalty for any violation of this chapter shall not excuse the violation
nor permit it to continue.
Chapter 186
SMOKING OR USE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS
§ 186-1. Definitions.
The terms used in this chapter shall be defined as follows:
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any self-propelled device capable of being moved
upon a road or other surface by which any persons or property may be
transported and shall include but not limited to automobiles, boats, trucks,
motorcycles, motor scooters, jeeps or similar type four-wheel-drive vehicles
and snowmobiles.
PARK — All public parks, plazas, public squares, playgrounds, activity
centers, library and public buildings, designated open spaces, lands and
other facilities or lands owned and operated by the Town and/or jointly
owned and operated by the Town and other designated entities and shall
include within any motor vehicle, trailer, concession stand or other
structure located within a portion of any park.
PERSON — All persons, firms, partnerships, corporations, clubs and all
associations or combinations of persons whenever acting for themselves or
by an agent, employee or member.
SMOKING OR USING A TOBACCO PRODUCT — The carrying or smoking
of any kind of lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette or any other lighted smoking
equipment as well as the use of any other tobacco products.
STRUCTURE — Any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts
jointed together in some definite manner.
§ 184-3 ELSMERE CODE § 186-2
1:266
§ 186-2. Smoking and tobacco use regulated.
No person shall smoke or use a tobacco product in any of the Town's parks
or any structure located within a park or within 50 feet of any entrance
or exit to any public library, public building or facility owned and operated
by the Town and/or jointly owned and operated by the Town and other
designated entities.
§ 186-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any section of this chapter shall for a first offense be
fined no less than $50 and upon a second or subsequent offense shall be
fined not less than $100.
Chapter 187
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dumping of yard waste and refuse — See Ch.
127.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 171.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 211.
§ 187-1. Applicability.
A. The Town shall ensure the collection of municipal solid waste, yard waste
and recyclables to every residential property and to the owners of all
multifamily dwellings throughout the Town of Elsmere. All properties
throughout the Town that are assessed as a residential unit for tax
purposes shall be subject to the terms and conditions of this chapter,
regardless of whether or not they elect to use the services provided by
the Town.
B. Collection of solid waste, yard waste and recyclables for properties other
than those defined in Subsection A of this section of this chapter shall
only be by private commercial contractors that are licensed by the Town
to operate within the limits of the Town of Elsmere.
§ 187-2. Rules and regulations.
A. Containers.
(1) Municipal solid waste containers.
(a) The Town will provide to every person occupying a residence
and every owner of a multifamily dwelling what it determines to
be a sufficient number of solid waste containers as to provide
adequate capacity for the municipal solid waste which is placed
out for collection, without overloading the capacity of such
containers.
(b) Should any citizen wist to purchase their own municipal solid
waste container, it shall be fitted with a lid which makes the
§ 186-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-2
1:267
container watertight and shall be constructed of a solid and
durable grade of plastic material.
(c) Containers that are manually emptied by the sanitation crews
shall not exceed a combined weight of 75 pounds, including the
container and its contents.
(d) All privately purchased containers shall be provided with
suitable lifting handles which are in good working condition.
(e) No container size shall exceed a capacity of 96 gallons unless
waived, in writing, by the Town Manager.
(f) Containers shall not contain any inside structures, such as bands
or reinforcing angles, or anything else within the container
which prevents the free discharge of the contents.
(g) Privately owned containers that have deteriorated or that have
become damaged to the extent that covers will not fit properly
or that have ragged or sharp edges that are capable of causing
injury will not be collected and shall be condemned by the Town,
and if not replaced after notice to the owner or user, such
container(s) shall be removed by the Town and destroyed.
(h) Underground containers are prohibited for use within the limits
of the Town.
(i) Owners of multifamily units desiring to utilize a dumpster may
do so, provided that the container and the placement of the
container shall be approved in advance by the Town Manager or
his designee. In no case, however, shall the size of the container
exceed 12 cubic yards in capacity.
(2) Yard waste containers.
(a) The Town will provide to every person occupying a residence
and every owner of a multifamily dwelling what it determines to
be a sufficient number of yard waste containers as to provide
adequate capacity for the municipal solid waste which is placed
out for collection, without overloading the capacity of such
containers.
(b) Should any citizen wish to purchase their own yard waste
container, it shall be fitted with a lid which makes the container
watertight, shall be clearly marked as a yard waste container
and shall be constructed of a solid and durable grade of plastic
material.
(c) Commercially available paper bags which are designed for the
disposal of yard waste and are biodegradable shall be permitted
and shall be secured at the top to prevent spillage when placed
out for collection.
(d) Containers that are manually emptied by the sanitation crews
shall not exceed a combined weight of 75 pounds, including the
container and its contents.
(e) All privately purchased containers (except approved paper bags)
shall be provided with suitable lifting handles which are in good
working condition.
(f) No container size shall exceed a capacity of 96 gallons unless
waived, in writing, by the Town Manager or his designee.
§ 187-2 ELSMERE CODE § 187-2
1:268
(g) Containers shall not contain any inside structures, such as bands
or reinforcing angles, or anything else within the container
which prevents the free discharge of the contents.
(h) Privately owned containers that have deteriorated or that have
become damaged to the extent that covers will not fit properly
or that have ragged or sharp edges that are capable of causing
injury will not be collected and shall be condemned by the Town,
and if not replaced after notice to the owner or user, such
container(s) shall be removed by the Town and destroyed.
(i) Underground containers are prohibited for use within the limits
of the Town.
(3) Recyclable containers.
(a) The Town will provide to every single-family residence and every
owner of a multifamily dwelling what it determined to be a
sufficient number of containers for recyclables.
(b) Should any citizen wish to purchase their own recycling
container, it shall be approved and provided by the Town. They
shall be clearly identifiable as containers to be used for recycling
only and shall be fitted with a lid which makes the container
watertight and constructed of a solid and durable grade of
plastic material.
(c) Containers that are manually emptied by the sanitation crews
shall not exceed a combined weight of 75 pounds, including the
container and its contents.
(d) All privately purchased containers shall be provided with
suitable lifting handles which are in good working condition.
(e) No container size shall exceed a capacity of 96 gallons unless
waived, in writing, by the Town Manager or his designee.
(f) Containers shall not contain any inside structures, such as bands
or reinforcing angles, or anything else within the container
which prevents the free discharge of the contents.
(g) Privately owned containers that are no longer in the possession
of the property to which they were issued, have deteriorated or
that have become damaged to the extent that covers will not fit
properly or that have ragged or sharp edges that are capable of
causing injury will not be collected and shall be removed by the
Town. The owner of the property to which the can was issued
shall pay to the Town the costs of providing a new container.
(h) Underground containers are prohibited for use within the limits
of the Town.
(i) Owners of multifamily units desiring to utilize a dumpster may
do so, provided that the container and the placement of the
container shall be approved in advance by the Town Manager or
his designee. In no case, however, shall the size of the container
exceed 12 cubic yards in capacity.
B. Collection.
(1) All collection of solid waste material from any residence or
multifamily unit throughout the Town which is classified for tax
§ 187-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-2
1:269
purposes as a residential unit shall be arranged for by the Town
Council and may include contractors.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed
any solid waste, yard waste or recycling container within any public
utility easement or public way, except in accordance with
Subsection B(5) at the curbline. All containers shall be placed just
behind the curbline of the street abutting such property but shall
not be placed where it will interfere with vehicular or pedestrian
traffic.
(3) All containers that are collected through the rear alleyways of a
residence shall be placed just outside of the rear fence of the
property and shall not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
Containers shall not be placed in the front of the residence or any
location other than the rear alley.
(4) Any container placed in such a position that it will need to be lifted
over a fence or other obstacle to be collected will not be collected.
(5) Municipal solid waste, yard waste and recyclables which are due
to be collected in accordance with the approved municipal solid
waste, yard waste and recyclable collection schedule shall be
placed in the appropriate area for collection no earlier than 5:00
p.m. of the day preceding the day of the scheduled collection and
no later than 12:00 midnight on the day before the scheduled
collection. All containers must be removed to a point at the side or
the rear of the property by no later than 7:00 p.m. on the day of the
collection.
(6) All containers that are collected through the rear alleyways of a
residence shall only be placed just outside of the rear fence of the
property in accordance with Subsection B(5) of this regulation and
shall be removed to a point inside of the fence line by no later than
7:00 p.m. on the day of the collection.
(7) No municipal solid waste, yard waste, recyclables or any other
material shall be placed upon any street, alley or sidewalk in such
a manner as to obstruct or interfere with the safe and efficient flow
of any vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(8) No municipal solid waste, yard waste or recyclables of any
description shall be disposed of within the limits of the Town of
Elsmere in any manner other than that prescribed herein.
(9) The deposit of any municipal solid waste, yard waste, recyclables
upon any land, alley, street, public place, vacant lot, watercourse,
ditch or any other method of disposal not in accordance with this
chapter shall be a violation as prescribed in § 187-5 of this chapter.
(10) The deposit of any municipal solid waste, yard waste, recyclables in
any manner within in the limits of the Town of Elsmere by a person
who is not a resident of the Town shall be a violation as prescribed
in § 187-5 of this chapter.
(11) Any resident who willfully permits a nonresident to deposit
municipal solid waste, yard waste or recyclables within the Town
shall be guilty of the same offense as described in Subsection B(10)
§ 187-2 ELSMERE CODE § 187-2
1:270
of this section and shall be subject to the same penalties as the
person who is bringing the solid waste into the Town.
(12) Brush or tree trimmings placed for pickup shall be cut into lengths
not to exceed four feet in length and 50 pounds in weight and shall
be bundled. Loose items will not be collected.
(13) Any person(s) who rummages through solid waste which has been
placed out for collection by the Town, in search of usable or
recyclable items, and who fails to replace all of the solid waste not
removed from the location by them in an orderly and neat manner
shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to
the penalties set forth in § 187-5 of this chapter.
C. Heavy pickups.
(1) Residents may arrange through the Town's contractor for the pickup
of normal household items such as chairs and small appliances which
are not collected as part of the normal collection process. However,
the contractor is authorized to charge an additional fee for this
service, which will be paid directly to the contractor by the person
requesting the service.
(2) Residents who place items which are scheduled for a heavy or
special pickup by the contractor out for collection more than 24
hours prior to the collection date or without scheduling the heavy or
special pickup shall have violated this chapter and shall be subject
to a fine of $250 per day for each day that the item(s) remain.
D. Town wide cleanup day.
(1) The Town Manager shall attempt to designate yearly a day which
will be known as the "Town Wide Cleanup Day." This day shall be
a Saturday during the month of March, April or May of each year,
and public notice shall be made to alert all citizens of the designated
date.
(2) On this day, residents shall be permitted to place out for collection
(at designated locations) all items that are normally not picked up by
the Town's contractor or which are only picked up for an additional
charge, except on this day, and this day only, there shall be no
additional charge to the occupants for the collection of these items.
However, items that are listed in Subsection E of this section will not
be collected on this or any other day unless such a day is specifically
designated to address all or some of these items.
E. Items that the Town will not collect.
(1) The scope of the service rendered or provided for by the Town in
the collection and removal of municipal solid waste, yard waste and
recyclable materials is intended to serve the needs of residential
units and the activities directly related to such use. It is considered
to be beyond the scope of such service to collect or remove solid
waste materials generated by clearing, construction, demolition and
any other such activities which produce excessive quantities of solid
waste.
(2) Rocks, scrap building materials or other trash resulting from
construction, remodeling or destruction by fire, the elements, acts
of God or other causes resulting from a general cleanup of a vacant
§ 187-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-2
1:271
or improved property or trees, brush and/or debris cleared from a
property in preparation for construction or landscaping shall not be
collected by the Town. Tires will not be collected by the Town.
(3) Items which are by their nature a hazardous material, such as
gasoline, asbestos, oils, paints, chemicals, etc., shall not be collected
by the Town.
(4) Anyone placing items defined as hazardous materials out for
collection in such a manner as to conceal the item(s) from plain view
shall be guilty of an offense and shall be subject to the penalties set
forth in § 187-5 of this chapter in addition to being charged with a
violation of Delaware law which may be appropriate.
(5) The placing of leaves in the streets of the Town is prohibited.
§ 187-3. Commercial haulers of solid waste.
A. All vehicles used in the collection of solid waste by commercial haulers
within the Town of Elsmere shall have enclosed bodies or shall have
bodies covered with a tarpaulin or canvas cover. The name of the owner
of the vehicle shall be displayed in a prominent place on the vehicle and
shall be legible.
B. Each commercial hauler which does business within the Town shall apply
for and obtain a business license from the Town prior to providing such
service.
C. The owner of any commercial vehicle who collects solid waste within the
Town of Elsmere shall be financially responsible to the Town for any and
all cost associated with the cleanup of any spill that may occur within the
Town or any damage caused by any of his or her vehicles while collecting
solid waste within the Town.
D. Any commercial hauler who violates any of the provisions of this chapter
may have his or her business license suspended for a period of 30 days
for a first offense, and the business license may be revoked if a second
or subsequent offense should occur within one year of the first offense.
§ 187-4. Authority to establish supplemental rules and regulations.
The Town Manager is hereby authorized to make additional rules and
regulations for the efficient collection and disposal of all municipal solid
waste, yard waste, recyclables, provided that no such supplemental rule or
regulation shall be in conflict with the specific provisions of this chapter
and is in no way inconsistent with the established policies of the Mayor and
Council.
§ 187-5. Violations and penalties; responsibility for compliance;
suspension of pickup service; hearing.
A. Any person or any officer of any firm, corporation or business violating
any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof by a
court having judicial authority to adjudicate the case, be fined not less
than $100 and not more than $500, along with the costs of prosecution
and any other legally appropriate fees, or imprisoned for a period of not
more than 90 days, or both.
§ 187-2 ELSMERE CODE § 187-5
1:272
B. When the owner of a property found to be in violation of this chapter
is not the occupant of the property and the person who occupies the
property fails to comply with a notice of violation, it shall be the owner of
the property who is held responsible for the violation and any penalties
associated with the violation.
C. Any person found guilty or pleading guilty to a violation of § 187-2B(6),
(7), (8), (9) or (10) of this chapter shall, in addition to any other penalties
described in § 187-5A, pay a minimum fine of not less than $100 and in
addition to the fine shall pay any reasonable cost incurred by the Town
associated with action taken to bring the property into compliance with
this chapter.
D. Every violation of this chapter shall be deemed a separate offense for
each and every day that the violation continues after being notified by
the Town of the violation and shall be subject to the penalty imposed by
this section for each and every such separate offense.
E. Any owner or resident being convicted of or pleading guilty to three or
more violations of this chapter within a two-year period may have their
collection service suspended for a period of time not less than 30 days
and not more than 120 days by the Town Manager.
§ 187-6. Reward for information leading to conviction.
The Town Manager is authorized to pay to any person(s) who provided
the Town with information which leads to the conviction of the person
responsible for the violation a reward in an amount to be determined by the
Town Manager so long as the amount does not exceed 1/2 of the amount of
any fine imposed.
Chapter 189
(RESERVED)
Chapter 190
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dumping of yard waste and refuse — See Ch.
127.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 171.
Snow and ice removal — See Ch. 192, Art. I.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
196.
§ 187-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-6
1:273

ARTICLE I
Illicit Discharges to Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
[Adopted 6-8-2017 by Ord. No. 62817]
§ 190-1. Purpose and intent.
A. The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens and businesses of the Town of Elsmere
through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) to the maximum extent practicable
as required by federal and state law. This article establishes methods
for controlling the discharge of pollutants into the MS4 in order to
comply with requirements of the Town's National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permit.
B. The objectives of this article are:
(1) To regulate the discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) by any user.
(2) To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal
separate storm sewer system.
(3) To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance,
monitoring, and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure
compliance with this article.
§ 190-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY — Employees or designees of the
Town of Elsmere, including, but not limited to, the Town Manager and Code
Enforcement Officers of the Town.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants. BMPs also
include treatment requirements, operating procedures and practices to
control facility site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or
drainage from raw material storage. BMPs can be applied before, during or
after pollution-generating activities to reduce or eliminate the introduction
of pollutants into receiving waters.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activities subject to NPDES construction
permits. Currently, NPDES construction permits are required for
construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre or more.
Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing,
grading, excavating, and demolition. All construction projects, regardless of
17.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 190, Stormwater Management,
adopted 12-8-2005 by Ord. No. 459.
§ 190-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-2
1:275
size, must comply with the Delaware Sediment and Stormwater Regulations
(DSSR).
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any material, including any substance, waste,
or combination thereof, which, because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS — Either of the following:
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the municipal separate storm
sewer that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except those sanctioned
by a NPDES permit other than the NPDES permit for discharges from the
municipal separate storm sewer and discharges resulting from fire-fighting
and other activities referenced in Part II.A.3. of the NPDES permit for
discharges from the municipal separate storm sewer.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as
defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance,
or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains), owned or operated by a city, town, county, district, association, or
other public body created by or pursuant to state law having jurisdiction
over the disposal of sewage, industrial waste, stormwater, or other wastes,
stormwater management, drainage or flood control, which is:
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the EPA [or
by a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b)] that
authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States,
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows an illegal discharge to enter the MS4, including but not limited
to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge,
including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water, to enter the
MS4 and any connections to the MS4 from indoor drains and sinks,
regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously
allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency;
or
A.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the MS4 which has not been documented in plans, maps, or
equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
B.
A. Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
B. Not a combined sewer; and
Not part of a publicly owned treatment works as defined at 40 CFR
122.2.
C.
§ 190-2 ELSMERE CODE § 190-2
1:276
whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general areawide
basis.
NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the MS4 that is not
composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, trust, firm, corporation (including a government
corporation), partnership, association, institution, enterprise, state,
municipality, commission, agency, political subdivision of a state or an
interstate body, or an agent or employee thereof.
POLLUTANT — Any substance which causes or contributes to, or may cause
or contribute to, the degradation of water, air, and soil resources or to
the health of humans, animals, or aquatic life. Examples may include, but
are not limited to, excess nutrients, chemicals, toxic substances, industrial,
municipal or agricultural wastes, etc.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
STORMWATER — Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely
of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A document
which describes the best management practices and activities to be
implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or
contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant
discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or
receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
TOWN — The Town of Elsmere, Delaware, a municipal corporation located
in New Castle County, Delaware, and any of its officers and employees or
their designee.
WASTEWATER — Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
stormwater, discharged from a facility.
§ 190-3. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all water entering the MS4 generated on any
developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an
authorized enforcement agency.
§ 190-4. Responsibility for administration.
The Code Enforcement Department shall administer, implement, and
enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted or duties imposed
upon the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the
Town Manager to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or
in the employ of the Town.
§ 190-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-5
1:277
§ 190-5. Severability.
The provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this article or the application
thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this
article.
§ 190-6. Minimum standards.
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are
minimum standards; therefore, this article does not intend nor imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
§ 190-7. Discharge and connection prohibitions.
A. Prohibition of illegal discharges.
(1) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the
municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials,
including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any
pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water
quality standards, other than stormwater.
(2) The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge
to the MS4 is prohibited except as described as follows:
(a) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this article:
[1] Water line flushing;
[2] Diverted stream flows;
[3] Rising groundwaters;
[4] Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to separate storm
sewers;
[5] Uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
[6] Discharges from potable water sources;
[7] Foundation drains;
[8] Air-conditioning condensate;
[9] Irrigation water;
[10] Springs;
[11] Water from crawl space pumps;
[12] Footing drains;
[13] Individual residential vehicle washing;
[14] Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
[15] Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; and
[16] Discharges or flows from emergency fire-fighting activities.
(b) Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement
agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
(c) Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal
notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the
time of the test.
(3) The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge
permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order
§ 190-5 ELSMERE CODE § 190-7
1:278
issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the
United States Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the
discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit,
waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and
provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge
to the MS4.
B. Prohibition of illicit connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the MS4 is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person
connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a
connection to continue.
§ 190-8. Suspension of MS4 access.
A. Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The Code
Enforcement Officer may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge
access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual
or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and
substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of
persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator
fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the
authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed
necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the
United States, or to minimize danger to persons.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge.
(1) Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may
have his or her MS4 access terminated if such termination would
abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement
agency will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4
access. The violator may petition the authorized enforcement agency
for a reconsideration and hearing.
(2) A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access
to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior
approval of the authorized enforcement agency.
§ 190-9. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer prior to the allowing of
discharges to the MS4.
§ 190-10. Monitoring of discharges.
§ 190-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-10
1:279
A. Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater
discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction
activity.
B. Access to facilities.
(1) The Code Enforcement Officers shall be permitted to enter and
inspect facilities subject to regulation under this article as often
as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. If
a discharger has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the
discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access
to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency.
(2) Facility operators shall allow the Code Enforcement Officers ready
access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept
under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater,
and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and
federal law.
(3) The Town shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility
such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the authorized
enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the
facility's stormwater discharge.
(4) The Town has the right to require the discharger to install
monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and
proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense.
All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be
calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access
to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the Town
and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be
borne by the operator.
(6) Unreasonable delays in allowing the Town access to a permitted
facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this
article. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES
permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity
commits an offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement
agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of
conducting any activity authorized or required by this article.
(7) If the Town has been refused access to any part of the premises
from which stormwater is discharged, and the Code Enforcement
Officer is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there
may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect
and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued
hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare
of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may
seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent
jurisdiction.
§ 190-10 ELSMERE CODE § 190-11
1:280
§ 190-11. Use of best management practices to prevent, control,
and reduce stormwater pollutants.
The Town requires best management practices for any activity, operation,
or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination
of stormwater, the MS4, or waters of the United States. The owner or
operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at its
own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited
materials or other wastes into the MS4 or watercourses through the use of
these structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible
for a property or premises which is, or may be, the source of an illicit
discharge may be required to implement, at said person's expense,
additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further
discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system.
Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity,
to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of
this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention
plan (SWPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES
permit.
§ 190-12. Watercourse protection.
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse
so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or
physical integrity of the watercourse.
§ 190-13. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation, has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the MS4, or waters
of the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure
the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of
such a release of hazardous materials, said person shall immediately notify
emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch
services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person
shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone or
facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by
phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the
Town of Elsmere within three business days of the phone notice. If the
discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial
establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain
§ 190-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-13
1:281
an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent
its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least five years.
§ 190-14. Enforcement.
A. Notice of violation. Whenever the Town finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the authorized
enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of violation
to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(2) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(3) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
(6) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
B. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further
advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the
established deadline, the work will be done by a designated
governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator.
C. The Town, at its discretion, may file charges in Justice of the Peace (JP)
Court for violating this article of the Town Code. If needed, the Town will
contact DNREC's Office of Community Services' Environmental Crimes
Unit. All of DNREC's environmental officers are certified police officers
with full police powers.
§ 190-15. Appeal of notice of violation.
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of
the authorized enforcement agency. The notice of appeal must be received
within 10 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the
appeal before the appropriate authority or his/her designee shall take place
within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision
of the municipal authority or its designee shall be final.
§ 190-16. Enforcement measures after appeal.
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 15
days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of
the authorized enforcement agency, then representatives of the authorized
enforcement agency shall enter upon the subject private property and are
authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation
and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner,
agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the
government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for
the purposes set forth above.
§ 190-13 ELSMERE CODE § 190-17
1:282
§ 190-17. Cost of abatement of violation.
Within 10 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property
will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The
property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the
assessment within 10 days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely
manner as determined by the decision of the municipal authority or by the
expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become
a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the
property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the
provisions of this article shall become liable to the Town by reason of such
violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than 12 equal payments and
shall also include per-annum interest on the total amount due, computed on
the basis of the amortized amount outstanding at the rate provided by 6 Del.
C. § 2301.
§ 190-18. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this article, the authorized
enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction
restraining the person from activities which would create further violations
or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the
violation.
§ 190-19. Compensatory action.
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by
this article, the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a violator
alternative compensatory action, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance
at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc.
§ 190-20. Violations deemed public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at
the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 190-21. Criminal prosecution.
Any person who has violated or continues to violate this article shall be
liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and shall
be subject to a criminal penalty of $200 per violation per day and/or
imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed 120 days. The authorized
enforcement agency may recover all attorneys' fees, court costs and other
expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling
and monitoring expenses.
§ 190-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-22
1:283
§ 190-22. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law, and it is within
the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative
remedies.
§ 190-22 ELSMERE CODE § 190-22
1:284
Chapter 192
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garage and sidewalk sales — See Ch. 107.
Handicapped parking — See Ch. 116.
Parades and special events — See Ch. 148.
Parking of certain vehicles — See Ch. 152.
Maintenance of right-of-way — See Ch. 171,
Art. I.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 211.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 215.
Skateboards, skates and roller blades — See
Ch. 215, Art. III.
Off-highway vehicles — See Ch. 219.
§ 190-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-22
1:285

ARTICLE I
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 3-6-1958 by Ord. No. 63; amended in its entirety
5-30-1996 by Ord. No. 326]
§ 192-1. Removal of snow and ice. [Amended 8-10-2000 by Ord. No.
384; 4-10-2014 by Ord. No. 577]
Within eight daylight hours after the conclusion of each snowfall, it shall be
the responsibility of each property owner whose property adjoins a public
street or right-of-way to ensure that the sidewalk area upon his or her
property or located within the right-of-way next to the public street in front
of or on the side adjoining his or her property is free of any snow or ice.
Additionally, no snow or ice which is removed from these areas shall be
placed in any public street, nor shall it interfere with the drainage of water
along the curbline into any storm sewers or otherwise prohibit the free flow
of water.
§ 192-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-18-2003 by Ord. No.
420; 9-10-2015 by Ord. No. 600]
Violation of this article is not less than $100 nor more than $200.
§ 192-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-2
1:287

ARTICLE II
Restrictions on Vehicular Access to Public Streets
[Adopted 7-10-1990 by Ord. No. 260]
§ 192-3. Restriction and designation by Council.
The Council of the Town of Elsmere, by resolution, may restrict or prohibit
vehicular access to and from public streets and establish and designate
dead-end streets with appropriate signage whenever such action shall not
eliminate or deny any property owner access to and from any public streets
as a result thereof and shall be in the interest of the public health and safety
and welfare.
§ 192-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-18-2003 by Ord. No.
420]
Any person who shall violate a resolution adopted pursuant to this article,
or fail to do any act or thing required to be done, shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject for each violation to a forfeit fine of not less than
$50 nor more than $100. In default of the payment of any fine imposed
hereunder, such violator may be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30
days. Whenever such person shall have been officially notified by the Town
Manager or by service of a summons in a prosecution, or in any other official
manner, that he is committing a violation, each day's continuance of such
violation after such notification shall constitute separate offense punishable
by a like fine or penalty.
§ 192-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-4
1:289

ARTICLE III
Roadway Obstructions
[Adopted 12-8-2005 by Ord. No. 457]
§ 192-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DUMPSTER — A metal storage bin commonly used for the temporary
storage of municipal waste, construction debris and other solid waste prior
to disposal.
PODS — A commercially marketed "portable on-demand storage" container
or similar device intended to store personal items at an off-site location for
short- or long-term storage or transportation from one point to another.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any duly authorized law enforcement officer,
any Code Enforcement Officer of the Town of Elsmere and any full-time
employee of the Town's Special Services Department.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any strip of land located beginning at the end of the
roadway curbing closest to any structure, or the edge of a roadway if no
curb is present and running perpendicular to the curbing or road edge for a
distance of 10 feet, including any grass, sidewalk or driveway.
ROADWAY — The entire width between boundary lines of every way or
place of whatever nature open to the use of the public as a matter of
right for the purpose of vehicular travel, including any curb, but does
not include a road or driveway upon grounds owned by private persons,
colleges, universities or other institutions.
ROADWAY OBSTRUCTION — Any of the following items or any part thereof
as well as any likeness of these items:
A. Unofficial sign(s).
B. Unofficial pole(s).
C. Basketball net, backboard, pole or other stand.
D. Hockey net(s).
E. Soccer net(s).
Skateboard ramp, pole or other item designed or used to test the skills
of those using skateboards.
F.
Any item determined by an enforcement officer, as defined by this
article, to be a hazard or obstruction to the free and unrestricted
passage of the public.
G.
Any item designed or intended to be used or potentially used to restrict
or save a parking space(s).
H.
§ 192-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-6
1:291
§ 192-6. Prohibited acts.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to place or construct any roadway
obstruction as defined by this article into or upon any roadway or rightof-
way as defined by this article.
B. It shall be unlawful for anyone age 18 or older and who is the parent or
legal guardian of any person under the age of 18 to knowingly allow or
permit their child or a child to whom they are the legal guardian to place
or construct any roadway obstruction as defined by this article into or
upon any roadway or right-of-way as defined by this article.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to place into any roadway or rightof-
way any item designed or intended to be used, or potentially used
to restrict or save a parking spaces(s), except those which have been
authorized by the Elsmere Bureau of Police or which has been placed
for official purposes by the Special Services Department of the Town of
Elsmere.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to place into any roadway or rightof-
way any dumpster or PODS, unless the person(s) has first obtained
a permit allowing the placement of these items issued by the Code
Enforcement Department of the Town of Elsmere.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person(s), corporation or other business who
or which sells, leases or rents dumpsters, PODS or similar devices to
place such a device in or upon any roadway right-of-way at any location
located within the corporate limits of the Town of Elsmere without first
obtaining proof that a permit has been issued for the placement of the
device. Failing to do so shall subject the person(s), corporation or other
business to the same penalties as described in § 192-10 of this article.
§ 192-7. Enforcement.
A. This article shall be enforced by any duly authorized law enforcement
officer, any Code Enforcement Officer of the Town of Elsmere and any
full-time employee of the Town's Special Services Department.
B. First offense.
(1) Any enforcement officer observing a violation of this article who is
able to reasonably identify the owner or responsible party shall order
the responsible party or owner of the roadway obstruction to cease
and desist such activity immediately. Additionally, the enforcement
officer shall order that the roadway obstruction be removed from the
roadway or right-of-way immediately.
(2) The enforcement officer shall then issue the responsible party or
owner of the roadway obstruction a written warning. If such
responsible party is a juvenile, a copy of the written warning shall be
delivered or mailed to the juvenile's parents or lawful guardians, at
their last known address.
(3) Should the responsible party or owner of the roadway obstruction
refuse to immediately remove the roadway obstruction or the
enforcement officer observing a violation be unable to reasonably
identify the owner or responsible party, the item shall be seized in
accordance with § 192-8 of this article.
§ 192-6 ELSMERE CODE § 192-8
1:292
§ 192-8. Removal and disposal of roadway obstructions.
The Special Services Department shall remove or cause to be removed any
item placed in violation of this article.
A. If the owner of an item which has been seized can be determined,
the notice of the seizure shall be sent to the owner of the roadway
obstruction via United States mail or personal delivery to the owner's
last known address.
B. The notice shall advise the owner that his/her property has been seized
in accordance with this article and is being stored at the Special Services
Department. The notice shall advise the owner that he/she has 30 days
to make arrangements to recover the property at his/her expense and
pay to the Town any reasonable cost incurred by the Town in the seizing
of the item.
C. The notice shall further advise the owner that if the property is not
claimed by the owner within thirty (30) days it will be disposed of.
D. After the expiration of 30 days from the date on which the notification
letter was mailed to the owner, the property shall be disposed of in any
manner the Town Manager deems appropriate.
E. Should the Town be unable to determine the owner of a roadway
obstruction which has been seized, the item shall be maintained by the
Special Services Department for 30 days. After the expiration of 30
days from the date in which the item was seized, the property shall be
disposed of in any manner the Town Manager deems appropriate.
§ 192-9. Permits.
A. Any person may apply to the Code Enforcement Officer for a permit for
the temporary placement of a dumpster or PODS in upon any roadway
or right-of-way.
B. A permit may only be issued by the Code Enforcement Officer if he/she
determines:
(1) That it is impossible or impractical to place the dumpster or PODS
in a position which is totally on the property of the applicant.
(2) That the placing of the dumpster or PODS will not create a traffic or
pedestrian hazard.
(3) The person requesting the permit will install adequate warning
devices if they are determined to be appropriate.
(4) The placement of the dumpster or PODS will not create an undue
hardship for other residents in the area.
C. The length of time for which the permit is valid shall be determined
by the Code Enforcement Officer and shall not exceed the absolute
minimum amount of time needed to accomplish the desired task. Only in
the case of an emergency shall any permit be valid for a period of time
exceeding seven days.
D. The fee associated with a permit shall be $25 per day.
E. The Town Manager may waive any fee associated with a permit.
F. Any permit issued may be revoked and the dumpster or PODS ordered
to be removed immediately if the Code Enforcement Officer determines
that the site is not being maintained in a clean and safe manner.
§ 192-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-9
1:293
G. While a permit will not be required for a portable-on-demand storage
device (PODS) to be placed on private property, no such device shall
remain on private property for a period of time which exceeds 30 days.
If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that an emergency or
hardship exists, the Code Enforcement Officer may extend the period of
time. [Added 4-11-2013 by Ord. No. 564]
H. While a permit will not be required for a dumpster to be placed on
private property, no such dumpster shall remain on private property for
a period of time which exceeds 30 days. In any such case, dumpsters
which are full must be emptied or removed within 48 hours of becoming
full or such work requiring said dumpster has been completed. If the
Code Enforcement Officer determines that an emergency or hardship
exists, the Code Enforcement Officer may extend the period of time.
(1) Any dumpster, whether in a public right-of-way pursuant to a permit
or on private property, may be ordered to be removed by the Code
Enforcement Officer if the officer determines that the dumpster is;
(a) Creating a public nuisance due to offensive smell.
(b) Is leaking any liquid from inside the dumpster to outside the
dumpster.
(c) Contains trash or other municipal solid waste.
(d) Is overflowing.
(e) Is unsecured.
(f) Is attracting rats and other rodents.
(g) Is being used by those other than the person who rented the
dumpster to perform illegal dumping.
(2) Any dumpster ordered to be removed by the Code Officer must be
removed within 48 hours of the time which the Code Officer ordered
the removal.
(3) Should the dumpster not be removed within 48 hours, both the
person who rented the dumpster and the owner of the dumpster
shall pay a fine of $50 per day until such time as the dumpster is
removed.
§ 192-10. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person having previously been issued a written warning under
§ 192-7B(2) of this article who is observed violating this article a second
or subsequent time shall, upon conviction, forfeit and pay a fine of
not less than $50 nor more than $100 plus court costs and Victim's
Compensation Fund and other assessment if applicable.
B. If such person is a juvenile, a copy of the charges shall be delivered or
mailed to such juvenile's parents or lawful guardians at the parent's or
guardian's last known address.
C. The parents or legal guardian of a juvenile under the age of 18 shall
be responsible for the payment of any fine which may be imposed for a
violation of this article.
D. Any person age 18 or older and who is the parent or legal guardian of
any person under the age of 18 and who violates § 192-6B of this article
shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $100 for a first offense,
and not less than $100 nor more than $500 for a second or subsequent
§ 192-9 ELSMERE CODE § 192-10
1:294
offense, plus court costs as well as any Victim's Compensation Fund and
other applicable assessments.
E. Any person violating § 192-9 of this article shall be fined not less than
$100 nor more than $500 for a first offense, and not less than $500
nor more than $1,000 for a second or subsequent offense, plus court
costs as well as any Victim's Compensation Fund and other applicable
assessments.
F. Any person(s), corporation or other business who or which sells, leases
or rents dumpsters or PODS devices who or which fails to obtain proof
that a permit has been issued for the placement of the dumpster prior
to placing the dumpster or PODS or who fails to follow an order by the
Code Enforcement Officer to immediately remove a dumpster or PODS
shall be subject to the same penalties as described in Subsection E of
this section.
§ 192-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-10
1:295

ARTICLE IV
Utility Construction
[Adopted 9-10-2009 by Ord. No. 49418]
§ 192-11. Permit required for utility construction work.
Any work related to the installation, replacement, extension, repair,
maintenance and/or inspection of utility services, which will disturb any
part of the paved or unpaved portions of the Town's rights-of-way or the soil
underneath any paved street, shall require prior to the start of such work, a
written permit from the Town issued after approval by the Town of a permit
application and payment to the Town of applicable permit fees.
§ 192-12. Emergency work.
If any such work, as described in § 192-11 above, must be performed on
an emergency basis outside of normal Town business hours and prior to
obtaining the required permit, the utility or its contractor must so notify
the Elsmere Bureau of Police before starting such work and obtain a permit
retroactively on the first regular business day thereafter.
§ 192-13. Prerequisites to obtaining a utility construction permit.
Permits shall only be granted upon compliance with the following expressed
provisions:
A. A written application shall be filed with the Town and signed by the
person desiring such permit. Such application shall set forth the purpose
and full scope of the proposed utility construction work and approximate
dates during which such work is to be carried out, including restoration
of all disturbed areas. An applicant shall furnish with the application a
drawing or other applicable information necessary provide an adequate
description of the proposed scope of work. Description of work provided
with the application shall include all necessary construction information,
including but not limited to the location and depth of all trenches and
borings, width of trench, fill material, compaction methods, type of
boring sleeve, location and size of boring pit, etc. In cases where the
extent of the work is not known, such as attempting to locating leaks in
existing pipes, the Town Manager shall determine what information is
necessary.
B. Each applicant shall agree to comply with all provisions contained in this
article.
C. Each applicant shall pay to the Town a permit fee as stated in Schedule
A attached.19
18.Editor's Note: Section III of this ordinance provided the following: "Conflicts. Ordinances
or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed, provided that any such
repeal shall not abate a right of action already accrued under any repealed ordinance.
Additionally, the provisions of any valid franchise agreement in full force and effect at the
time this ordinance is enacted and which is in conflict with this ordinance shall remain in
full force and effect until such time as the franchise agreement is renegotiated."
19.Editor's Note: Schedule A is on file in the Town offices.
§ 192-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-13
1:297
D. For major projects, the Town reserves the right to require each applicant
to notify all other applicable utilities of the proposed work, to determine
if simultaneous installations of other utility services can be made, so as
to limit the amount of disturbance in the right-of-way.
E. Where the permit is required for water supply or sewer service, the
application shall be countersigned by the Town Code Enforcement
Officer.
F. The applicant shall pay to the Town any and all monies then due to
the Town for any losses, damages or expenses incurred by the Town
arising from prior work done by the applicant under the provisions of
this article. In the case where the applicant is in a legal dispute with the
Town pertaining to a previous permit, the Town Solicitor shall review the
application on a case-by-case basis.
G. The applicant shall have a valid permit from the State of Delaware, or
New Castle County as is applicable, and a valid business license issued
by the Town prior to the issuing of the permit except for emergency
work.
H. Applicant shall agree to save and hold harmless the Town, its officers,
employees and agents from any and all costs, damages and liabilities
which may accrue or be claimed to accrue by reason of personal injury
and/or property damage arising from such work done by the permittee
under the provisions of this article. The acceptance of any permit under
this article shall constitute such an agreement by the permittee whether
the same is expressed or not.
I. Unless a certificate is on file with the Town, the applicant shall submit to
the Town a certificate of insurance properly executed by the applicant's
insurance agency. Such certificates of insurance shall verify that the
applicant is insured against claims for personal injury as well as against
claims for property damages which may arise from or out of the
performance of the work, whether such performance is by the permittee
or anyone directly or indirectly employed by him. Such insurance shall
include protection against liability arising from completed operations,
underground utility damage and collapse of any property. Liability
insurance for bodily injury to each person, each accident, and for
property damages shall be required in an amount $1,000,000 per
person/$3,000,000 per occurrence.
J. Any person other than public utility companies applying to cut a paved
street or excavate within the Town right-of-way shall furnish a corporate
surety bond executed by a reputable surety company licensed to do
business in the State of Delaware. Such bond shall cover all street
opening and restoration work that will be performed under the permit.
The bond shall be in effect for a thirty-six-month period. The minimum
amount of the surety bond shall be $1,000 unless any excavation and
restoration work under a permit exceeds such amount. In this case,
such person shall secure additional bonding in an amount equal to
the difference between the $1,000 and the dollar amount computed in
accordance with Schedule B attached.20
20.Editor's Note: Schedule B is on file in the Town offices.
§ 192-13 ELSMERE CODE § 192-14
1:298
§ 192-14. Time extension and fee.
A. All permits issued hereunder shall expire at the end of time specified
on the permit. Unless specified otherwise on the permit, the duration of
the permit shall be 30 days from the issuance thereof. If the applicant
believes 30 days is insufficient, the applicant shall submit with the
application a written explanation of the reasons for the additional length
of time requested.
B. If any permittee is unable to complete the work on or before the date
specified on the permit, the permittee shall file a written application
explaining the reasons for the requested extension of time. A fee of $20
shall accompany the application.
§ 192-15. Additional work.
In no case shall a permittee disturb in any way a greater or different area
not specified in the original permit. If the permittee determines during
construction that an additional or greater area will have to be disturbed,
he shall notify and secure permission from the Town for the additional
disturbance. Upon receipt of verbal permission from the Town, the
permittee shall file a supplementary written application for the work no
later than the next workday. The fee for such supplementary permit shall be
as stated in Schedule A attached.21 In cases where the extent of the work
is not know, such as attempting to locate leaks in existing pipes, it shall be
noted on the application that additional work may be necessary to complete
the work.
§ 192-16. Revocation of permit.
A. All utility permits are subject to revocation at any time by the Town after
written notice for:
(1) Violation of any condition of the permit;
(2) Violation of any provision of this article or any other applicable
ordinance or law relating to the work; or
(3) The existence of any condition or the doing of any act constituting or
creating a nuisance or endangering the lives or property of others.
B. Written notice of such violation shall be served upon the person to
whom the permit was granted, or his agent or employee engaged in the
work. Such notice shall also contain a brief statement of the reasons for
revoking such permit. Notice may be given either by personal delivery
thereof to the person or by the United States mail, addressed to such
person to be notified. If notice has been given by personal delivery, such
notice will be followed up by United States mail within five working days.
§ 192-17. General responsibilities.
A. The permittee for any utility construction work covered by this article
shall be whatever utility company owns the utility service, even if that
utility company uses an authorized agent or subcontractor to apply
for the permits and/or perform work on behalf of the utility company.
As permittee, the utility company shall be responsible for all work
21.Editor's Note: Schedule A is on file in the Town offices.
§ 192-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-17
1:299
performed and compliance with all aspects of this article. The Town will
contact the utility company whenever adjustments or corrections in the
work are required, regardless of whether the work is actually performed
by the utility company or its subcontractors. A copy of the approved
permit shall be on the job site at all times.
B. The permittee shall be responsible for determining the location of all
existing utilities and shall contact Miss Utility as necessary. Any damage
to existing utilities or structures such as curbing, sidewalk, drainage
facilities, utility boxes, etc., shall be replaced and/or repaired by the
permittee or other responsible parties at no expense to the Town or
property owner. The Town shall determine the extent of restoration
required and the method of correction. Any and all work not completed
within a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 30 days, may be
completed by the Town. The permittee will reimburse the Town for the
cost of such work, as invoiced by the Town to the permittee. If weather
conditions prevent the completion of work within a reasonable time
frame, the Town may grant a time extension.
C. All work and materials relative to trenching, borings, street repair and
other restoration work within the right-of-way shall be of the best quality
as specified by the State of Delaware Department of Transportation's
most recent Road Design Manual or Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, until such time as the Town of Elsmere adopts its own
roadway construction standards (once adopted, the Town's roadway
construction standards shall be attached hereto and made a part herein
of this article22), and shall be at all times subject to inspection by the
Town. The permittee shall provide reasonable and necessary facilities
for such inspection. Except in the case of emergencies, the permittee
shall notify the Town 48 hours prior to any work performed relative to
the permit to allow sufficient time to assign inspectors to inspect said
work. Failure to provide required notification may result in the Town
requiring the permittee to take apart or uncover portions of finished
work at the permittee's expense.
D. Inspection of work by the Town does not relieve the permittee of the
responsibility for the quality of all work and materials, safety or liability
for loss, damage or injury to persons or property. The permittee is
required to observe all local, state and federal (OSHA) safety codes. Any
omission or failure on the part of the Town to disapprove or reject any
defective work or materials shall not be construed to be acceptance of
any defective work or material.
E. The Town shall have the right to suspend work if the permittee does
not comply with this article, the State of Delaware Department of
Transportation's most recent Road Design Manual or Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction, or the Town of Elsmere roadway
construction standards, or any other codes, specifications, regulations
or policies of the Town. Work may not proceed until the Town is satisfied
that all problems have been adequately addressed and the permittee has
received written permission from the Town to proceed.
22.Editor's Note: See Art. V, Roadway Construction.
§ 192-17 ELSMERE CODE § 192-17
1:300
F. The permittee shall be responsible to maintain proper storm drainage
flows during the course of all work. Erosion and sediment controls
around work sites shall be in accordance with the Department of Natural
Resources Manual on Erosion and Sediment Controls and the New
Castle County Soil Conservation Service Regulations. The permittee
shall be responsible for all water damage and costs due to the
permittee's work.
G. The permittee shall keep the work area and surrounding area free from
accumulation of waste materials or rubbish caused by work under the
permit. At the completion of the work, the permittee shall remove from
the site all materials, rubbish, tools, equipment, machinery and all other
objects associated with said work. Streets shall be kept clean and free of
debris at all times. Dust control measures shall be initiated as conditions
require. Upon failure of the permittee to keep the site of the work clean
to the satisfaction of the Town, the Town may, upon twenty-four-hour
notification to the permittee, remove any rubbish, materials, tools or
equipment as deemed necessary. The permittee will reimburse the Town
for the cost of such work, as invoiced by the Town to the permittee.
H. In case the work has not been completed before the date of expiration
as shown on the permit, which time shall be fixed when the permit and/
or time extension is granted, the Town may take steps to backfill the
trench and replace the street surface over the opening for which the
permit has been issued upon proper notification from the Town to the
permittee. The permittee will reimburse the Town for the cost of such
work, as invoiced by the Town to the permittee.
§ 192-18. Excavations, cuts and borings.
A. Open cuts for utility crossings in paved streets shall not be permitted
except in cases where there is no practical alternative as determined
by the Town on a case-by-case basis. When exceptions are made, the
permittee shall be required to perform more extensive restoration, as
specified in § 192-18 herein and stated on the permit.
B. Borings.
(1) Borings under any paved street shall be made by an approved boring
method that allows control and adjustment of the depth, alignment
and angle of the boring. Method of boring shall be specified on the
application.
(2) All borings shall maintain minimum clearances and depth as
required by all applicable federal, state and local codes. All borings
shall be perpendicular to the longitudinal center line of the paved
street.
(3) In cases where the permittee must use private property for the
boring setup, the permittee shall be responsible for notification of
the affected property owner and for obtaining permission and/or
necessary easements from the property owner.
C. Underground nonmetallic utilities shall be placed with a traceable tape
for future locating purposes.
D. A separate permit shall be obtained for any test hole work that is not
part of the work defined in an approved permit. No test holes shall be
§ 192-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-18
1:301
made in a greater surface area of the paved street than as specified in
such permit, and no excavation or test hole shall interfere with any of the
water pipes, sewers, drains or any other underground utility services.
Test holes shall be backfilled in accordance with the provisions set by
the State of Delaware Department of Transportation's most recent Road
Design Manual or Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, or
the Town of Elsmere roadway construction standards.23
§ 192-19. Restorations.
A. The permittee shall be responsible for restoring to the original condition
prior to the work all portions of the right-of-way which are disturbed,
including the paved street surface, subsurface, drainage facilities and
unpaved shoulders. Disturbance of existing drainage structures shall not
be permitted unless there is no alternative as determined by the Town
on a case-by-case basis. When exceptions are made, the permittee shall
be required to perform any necessary restoration, as determined by the
Town and shall be stated in detail on the permit.
B. The permittee shall be required to reinstall all mailboxes, shrubbery
and the like, subject to any prior agreements. Grassed areas that are
disturbed shall be reseeded.
C. Temporary street repairs shall be made immediately upon the
installation or repair of utility services and shall remain in place a
minimum of two weeks prior to permanent street repairs unless
otherwise approved in the permit. The temporary street repairs shall be
maintained in good condition at all times. Unless otherwise approved in
the permit, permanent repairs shall be completed within 60 days after
the completion of the temporary repairs, except that, during the period
of November 1 to April 1, inclusive, they shall be completed not later
than May 15.
D. When open trenching has been approved, the length of trench that may
be opened shall not exceed 100 feet before backfilling work is initiated.
The method of excavation and backfilling shall be in accordance with
the State of Delaware Department of Transportation's most recent Road
Design Manual or Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, or
the Town of Elsmere roadway construction standards.24
E. In cases where open trenching has been approved and the excavation
disturbs restoration shall include covering the entire cross-section from
curb to curb with a new two-inch-thick hot-mix asphalt overlay extending
for a distance of 25 feet past the far edges of the patch in both directions.
If the curb reveal prior to the overlay is less than six inches, the street
shall be rotomilled prior to being overlayed. In all cases, the overlay
must match all driveways and utilities and not impede the drainage of
stormwater runoff.
F. Modification of restoration work. [Added 7-12-2012 by Ord. No. 557]
(1) Any contractor feeling that the requirements of Subsection E of this
section are excessive for the project being applied for may request
23.Editor's Note: See Art. V, Roadway Construction.
24.Editor's Note: See Art. V, Roadway Construction.
§ 192-18 ELSMERE CODE § 192-19
1:302
to meet with the Town Manager and present facts to support his or
her position.
(2) After reviewing the facts presented by the contractor, should the
Town Manager determine that the requirements of Subsection E
could be amended for a particular project while not having a
negative impact upon the Town, the Town Manager may modify the
restoration work required to be performed.
(3) Any modification of the restoration work granted by the Town
Manager shall be in writing and attached to the permit. The decision
of the Town Manager shall be final.
§ 192-20. General safety.
A. The permittee, when required by the Town, shall be responsible for
timely notification of intended work to all emergency response agencies
including the police and fire departments and all affected property
owners.
B. The permittee shall be responsible for pedestrian safety and keeping any
sidewalks clean, clear and protected.
C. All excavations or material from them shall have placed upon them
sufficient lights and barricades to identify them from all directions
during the day and after dark. If, for safety purposes, the Town deems it
necessary to install additional warning devices such as lights, barricades
or signs, the permittee shall be notified of the decision and shall receive
instructions on the installation. In case of emergencies, the Town may
install all additional warning devices deemed necessary. The permittee
will reimburse the Town for the cost of such work, as invoiced by the
Town to the permittee.
D. The Town Manager or his designee is authorized to make such other
rules and regulations for work performed by the permittee which he may
deem necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public
and its property, which rules and regulations shall be printed upon the
permit granted or forwarded from the Town Manager in writing from
time to time.
§ 192-21. Traffic safety.
A. Any permittee carrying out utility construction work shall protect the
safety of the general public. This includes providing appropriate traffic
control within work areas which meet the requirements of DelDOT
manual Traffic Controls for Street and Highway Maintenance, Utility and
Emergency.
B. Except in emergencies or when prior approval has been granted by the
Town and stated on the permit, at least one lane of traffic shall remain
open at all times with all openings covered by a plate or asphalt patch
at night. If the work requires a full street closure, the applicant shall
submit with the application a written explanation for the closure plus
the amount of time required for the street closure. Access to all private
driveways and at least one commercial entrance shall be provided at all
times, unless otherwise approved by the Town and stated on the permit.
§ 192-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-21
1:303
C. Failure by the permittee to provide for traffic safety shall be cause for
immediate suspension of operations. The work will not be allowed to
continue until the Town is satisfied that the proper traffic control is
established and the permittee is formally notified in writing.
§ 192-22. Guarantee of work.
A. The permittee shall guarantee and maintain his work for six months
from the completion of the restoration and replacement work. Within
this six-month period, upon notification from the Town of necessary
correction work, the permittee shall correct or cause to be corrected
all such work within 15 working days of receipt of the notification. The
Town shall determine the extent of restoration required and the method
of correction. Any and all work not completed within this fifteen-day
period may be completed by the Town at its discretion. The permittee
will reimburse the Town for the cost of such work, as invoiced by the
Town to the permittee.
B. In cases where weather does not permit prompt permanent repairs,
such as pavement repairs during the winter, the Town Manager shall
determine the final completion date. In such an event, adequate
temporary repairs shall be made and properly maintained until such time
that the permanent repairs can be made.
§ 192-23. Future development.
When the Town reconstructs or resurfaces any street, the Town shall first
serve written notice by certified mail of such improvements to all public
or private utility companies operating in the Town. Within 60 calendar
days from receipt of such notice, all notified utility companies shall notify
the Town of any intent to make scheduled repairs and replacement of
utility mains, service connections and/or laterals existing under the street.
Within 120 calendar days from receipt of such notice, all notified utility
companies shall complete or cause to be complete all necessary repairs and
replacement of utility mains, service connections and/or laterals existing
under the street. Notified utility companies shall also complete or cause to
be completed any anticipated new installations, under the street, required
for use within a two-year period thereafter.
§ 192-24. Prior notification for reconstruction or resurfacing.
A. When the Town intends to reconstruct or resurfaces any street, the Town
shall serve written notice by certified mail of such improvements to all
public or private utility companies operating in the Town.
B. Within 30 calendar days from receipt of such notice, all notified persons
shall notify the Town in writing that they will need to conduct repairs and
replacement of utility mains, service connections and/or laterals existing
under the affected street.
C. Within 90 calendar days from receipt of such notice, all notified persons
shall complete or cause to be complete all necessary repairs and
replacement of utility mains, service connections and/or laterals existing
under the street. Notified persons shall also complete or cause to be
§ 192-21 ELSMERE CODE § 192-24
1:304
completed any new installations under the street and designated
encroachment areas required for use within a two-year period thereafter.
§ 192-25. Fees.
A. A permit fee shall be paid to the Town's Code Enforcement Office prior to
issuance of a permit. The Town Manager shall have the right to waive fees
for contractors performing work under contract with the Town.
B. The permit fee shall be as outlined below:
Age of Pavement
Trenches1
(per square yard)
Borings2
(per boring)
Streets which have been paved
new up to one year
$50 $100
Streets which have been paved
for over one year but not over
two years
$45 $90
Streets which have been paved
for over two years but not over
three years
$40 $80
Streets which have been paved
for over three years but not over
four years
$35 $70
Streets which have been paved
for over four years but not over
five years
$30 $60
Streets which have been paved
for over five years
$25 $50
NOTES:
1 If trenching is approved in writing by the Town, the permit fee shall be
based on the number of square yards of pavement surface that are cut.
2 For borings, the permit fee shall be the number of individual borings
multiplied by the fee per boring stated in the chart above.
§ 192-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-25
1:305

ARTICLE V
Roadway Construction Standards
[Adopted 9-10-2009 by Ord. No. 49525]
§ 192-26. Permit required for roadway construction work.
Any work related to the installation, replacement, extension, repair,
maintenance and/or inspection of roadway, which will disturb or connect
to any part of the paved or unpaved portions of the Town's rights-of-way
shall require prior to the start of such work, a written permit from the Town
issued after approval by the Town of a permit application and payment to
the Town of applicable permit fees, including projects occurring on private
property which will tie into the Town's roadways or rights-of-way.
§ 192-27. Emergency work.
If any such work, as described in § 192-26 above, must be performed on
an emergency basis outside of normal Town business hours and prior to
obtaining the required permit, the contractor must so notify the Elsmere
Bureau of Police before starting such work and obtain a permit retroactively
on the first regular business day thereafter.
§ 192-28. Standards of work.
A. All work and materials relative to roadway repair and other restoration
work within the Town shall be of the best quality as specified by the
State of Delaware Department of Transportation's most recent Road
Design Manual or Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, until
such time as the Town of Elsmere adopts its own roadway construction
standards (once adopted, the Town's roadway construction standards
shall be attached hereto and made a part herein of this article26), and
shall be at all times subject to inspection by the Town.
B. The permittee shall provide reasonable and necessary facilities for such
inspection. Except in the case of emergencies, the permittee shall notify
the Town 48 hours prior to any work performed relative to the permit to
allow sufficient time to assign inspectors to inspect said work.
C. Failure to provide required notification may result in the Town requiring
the permittee to take apart or uncover portions of finished work at the
permittee's expense.
§ 192-29. General responsibilities.
A. The permittee for any roadway construction work covered by this article
shall be whatever company who has been awarded a contract for the
25.Editor's Note: Section 10 of this ordinance provided the following: "Conflicts. Ordinances
or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed, provided that any such
repeal shall not abate a right of action already accrued under any repealed ordinance.
Additionally, the provisions of any valid franchise agreement in full force and effect at the
time this ordinance is enacted and which is in conflict with this ordinance shall remain in
full force and effect until such time as the franchise agreement is renegotiated."
26.Editor's Note: At the time of the 2010 republication of the Code, such standards had not
been submitted to the Code publisher. Consult Town Clerk.
§ 192-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-29
1:307
roadway work, even if that company uses an authorized agent or
subcontractor to apply for the permits and/or perform work on behalf
of the company, as the permittee shall be responsible for all work
performed and compliance with all aspects of this article. The Town will
contact the permittee whenever adjustments or corrections in the work
are required, regardless of whether the work is actually performed by
the permittee or its subcontractors. A copy of the approved permit shall
be on the job site at all times.
B. The permittee shall be responsible for determining the location of all
existing utilities and shall contact Miss Utility as necessary. Any damage
to existing utilities or structures such as curbing, sidewalk, drainage
facilities, utility boxes, etc., shall be replaced and/or repaired by the
permittee or other responsible parties at no expense to the Town or
property owner. The Town shall determine the extent of restoration
required and the method of correction. Any and all work not completed
within a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 30 days, may be
completed by the Town. The permittee will reimburse the Town for the
cost of such work, as invoiced by the Town to the permittee. If weather
conditions prevent the completion of work within a reasonable time
frame, the Town may grant a time extension.
C. Inspection of work by the Town does not relieve the permittee of the
responsibility for the quality of all work and materials, safety or liability
for loss, damage or injury to persons or property. The permittee is
required to observe all local, state and federal (OSHA) safety codes. Any
omission or failure on the part of the Town to disapprove or reject any
defective work or materials shall not be construed to be acceptance of
any defective work or material.
D. The Town shall have the right to suspend work if the permittee does
not comply with this article, the State of Delaware Department of
Transportation's most recent Road Design Manual or Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction, or the Town of Elsmere roadway
construction standards, or any other codes, specifications, regulations or
policies of the Town. Work may not proceed until the Town is satisfied
that all problems have been adequately addressed and the permittee has
received written permission from the Town to proceed.
E. The permittee shall be responsible to maintain proper storm drainage
flows during the course of all work. Erosion and sediment controls
around work sites shall be in accordance with the Department of Natural
Resources Manual on "Erosion and Sediment Controls" and the New
Castle County Soil Conservation Service Regulations. The permittee
shall be responsible for all water damage and costs due to the
permittee's work.
F. The permittee shall keep the work area and surrounding area free from
accumulation of waste materials or rubbish caused by work under the
permit. At the completion of the work, the permittee shall remove from
the site all materials, rubbish, tools, equipment, machinery and all other
objects associated with said work. Streets shall be kept clean and free of
debris at all times. Dust-control measures shall be initiated as conditions
require. Upon failure of the permittee to keep the site of the work clean
§ 192-29 ELSMERE CODE § 192-29
1:308
to the satisfaction of the Town, the Town may, upon twenty-four-hour
notification to the permittee, remove any rubbish, materials, tools or
equipment as deemed necessary. The permittee will reimburse the Town
for the cost of such work, as invoiced by the Town to the permittee.
G. In case the work has not been completed before the date of expiration
as shown on the permit, which time shall be fixed when the permit and/
or time extension is granted, the Town may take steps to backfill the
trench and replace the street surface over the opening for which the
permit has been issued upon proper notification from the Town to the
permittee. The permittee will reimburse the Town for the cost of such
work, as invoiced by the Town to the permittee.
§ 192-30. General safety.
A. The permittee, when required by the Town, shall be responsible for
timely notification of intended work to all emergency response agencies
including the police and fire departments and all affected property
owners.
B. The permittee shall be responsible for pedestrian safety and keeping any
sidewalks clean, clear and protected.
C. All excavations or material from them shall have placed upon them
sufficient lights and barricades to identify them from all directions
during the day and after dark. If, for safety purposes, the Town deems it
necessary to install additional warning devices such as lights, barricades
or signs, the permittee shall be notified of the decision and shall receive
instructions on the installation. In case of emergencies, the Town may
install all additional warning devices deemed necessary. The permittee
will reimburse the Town for the cost of such work, as invoiced by the
Town to the permittee.
D. The Town Manager or his designee is authorized to make such other
rules and regulations for work performed by the permittee which he may
deem necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public
and its property, which rules and regulations shall be printed upon the
permit granted or forwarded from the Town Manager in writing from
time to time.
§ 192-31. Traffic safety.
A. Any permittee carrying out roadway construction work shall protect the
safety of the general public. This includes providing appropriate traffic
control within work areas, which meet the requirements of DelDOT
manual Traffic Controls for Street and Highway Maintenance, Utility and
Emergency.
B. Except in emergencies or when prior approval has been granted by the
Town and stated on the permit, at least one lane of traffic shall remain
open at all times with all openings covered by a plate or asphalt patch
at night. If the work requires a full street closure, the applicant shall
submit with the application a written explanation for the closure plus
the amount of time required for the street closure. Access to all private
driveways and at least one commercial entrance shall be provided at all
times, unless otherwise approved by the Town and stated on the permit.
§ 192-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-31
1:309
C. Failure by the permittee to provide for traffic safety shall be cause for
immediate suspension of operations. The work will not be allowed to
continue until the Town is satisfied that the proper traffic control is
established and the permittee is formally notified in writing.
§ 192-32. Prior notification for reconstruction or resurfacing.
A. When the Town intends to reconstruct or resurfaces any street, the Town
shall serve written notice by certified mail of such improvements to all
public or private utility companies operating in the Town.
B. Within 30 calendar days from receipt of such notice, all notified persons
shall notify the Town in writing that they will need to conduct repairs and
replacement of utility mains, service connections and/or laterals existing
under the affected street.
C. Within 90 calendar days from receipt of such notice, all notified persons
shall complete or cause to be complete all necessary repairs and
replacement of utility mains, service connections and/or laterals existing
under the street. Notified persons shall also complete or cause to be
completed any new installations under the street and designated
encroachment areas required for use within a two-year period thereafter.
§ 192-33. Fees.
A permit fee shall be paid to the Town's Code Enforcement Office prior to
issuance of a permit. The Town Manager shall have the right to waive any
fees he deems appropriate.
§ 192-31 ELSMERE CODE § 192-33
1:310
Chapter 196
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
§ 196-1. Title.
These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision and
Development Regulations" of the Town of Elsmere, Delaware.
§ 196-2. Authority. [Amended 5-30-1996 by Ord. No. 326]
By authority of the Home Rule Charter of the Town of Elsmere, the Council
of the Town of Elsmere, Delaware, hereafter referred to as "the Council,"
adopts the following regulations governing the subdivision of land within
the corporate limits of Elsmere, Delaware, and hereby exercises its
authority to review, approve and disapprove plans for the subdivision of
land within the corporate limits of Elsmere, Delaware. By the authority of
the Town of Elsmere Ordinance No. 99,27 the Planning Commission shall
exercise its authority to review plans for the subdivision of land and make
recommendations for approval or disapproval. The Town of Elsmere shall be
exempted from these regulations.
§ 196-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to assure adequate sites suitable for
residential, industrial and commercial development within the Town. Such
development should be coordinated with existing streets and structures to
ensure that adequate open space and efficient traffic flow are maintained.
These subdivision regulations are designed to protect and preserve the
health, safety and general welfare of all Elsmere residents.
§ 196-4. Scope.
A. This chapter shall apply to any lot or lots forming a part of a subdivision
created before or after the effective date of this chapter. This chapter
shall supersede all other ordinances or provisions of the law with which
it may be in conflict. This chapter, however, is not intended to impair
or interfere with private restrictions placed upon property by deed,
covenant or other private instrument, or with restrictive covenants
running with the land. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction
upon the land than is imposed or required by such existing provisions
of law, ordinances, contract, or deed, the provisions of this chapter shall
control.
B. If any part of this chapter is judged to be invalid by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such judgment will only apply to the part of the
ordinance declared to be invalid and will not affect the validity of the
remainder of the regulations.
C. This chapter will not apply to any action pending under the existing
regulations.
27.Editor's Note: See Ch. 38, Planning Commission.
§ 192-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-5
1:311
§ 196-5. Subdivision; compliance required.
A. No tract, parcel or lot of land shall be divided, redivided, subdivided
or resubdivided by recorded plat, separation of ownership or lease into
two or more tracts, parcels or lots, except in strict accordance with
all provisions of this chapter and the subdivision regulations adopted
hereunder.
B. No tract, parcel or lot of land shall be developed, and no construction
shall be undertaken thereon, directed toward the occupancy of such
land or the occupancy of any building, building structure or structures
thereon or on any parcel thereof by more than two families or more
than two businesses, professional, personal service or industrial
establishments, except in strict accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and the subdivision regulations adopted hereunder.
C. No public street, and no private street, alley or driveway intended to
be used by more than two families or by more than two businesses,
professional, personal service or industrial establishments or by
customers of such businesses, professional, personal service or
industrial establishments or by the public, and no sanitary sewer, water
main or storm drain shall be laid out, constructed, opened or used over,
through or under any tract, parcel or lot, except in strict accordance with
the provisions of this chapter and the subdivision regulations adopted
hereunder.
§ 196-6. Subdivision control.
A. No permit to erect, alter or repair any building upon land in a subdivision
may be issued and no building may be erected in a subdivision, unless
and until a subdivision plan has been approved and the required
agreements have been executed.
B. No work, grading, excavation, construction, erection or building shall be
commenced or done within any subdivision except in strict accordance
with provisions in this chapter and the subdivision regulations adopted
hereunder and pursuant to an approved subdivision plan and required
agreements; provided that this section shall not prevent the making of
test borings or engineering surveys.
C. Upon application and upon a showing that there has been full
compliance with the subdivision regulations, the Building Code, the
Zoning Ordinance28 and all other applicable ordinances and regulations
of the Town of Elsmere and the laws of the State of Delaware, the
Building Committee of the Town shall issue a certificate of occupancy to
the developer for any dwelling house, building or structure.
D. No dwelling house, building or structure located in any subdivision shall
be occupied or used, wholly or partially, until a certificate of occupancy
as provided above shall be issued. No land on which any dwelling house,
building or structure is located which is within a subdivision shall be
conveyed and no possession of such land or dwelling house, building or
structure shall be transferred until a certificate of occupancy as provided
above has been issued.
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 76, Building Construction, and Ch. 225, Zoning.
§ 196-5 ELSMERE CODE § 196-7
1:312
§ 196-7. Resubdivision and future resubdivision.
A. Resubdivision. Any change in the map of an approved or recorded
subdivision (including plans approved prior to the adoption of this
chapter) which affects street layout, areas dedicated for public use
or any lot line, shall be reviewed by the same procedure, rules and
regulations as for a subdivision.
B. Future resubdivision. Whenever a parcel of land is subdivided and the
subdivision plan shows one or more lots containing more than one
acre of land and there are indications that such lots will eventually be
resubdivided into small building sites, the Town Council may require
that such parcel of land allow for the future opening of streets and
the ultimate extension of adjacent streets. Easements providing for the
future opening and extension of such streets may be made a requirement
of the plan.
§ 196-8. Vacation of approved subdivision plan.
A. The owner of an approved subdivision or any part of an approved
subdivision may vacate said plan or any portion of said plan by
submitting to the Town Manager a written request stating:
(1) The reasons for vacation; and
(2) Metes and bounds description of said property to be vacated. The
written request must be accompanied by a copy of the approved and
recorded plan.
B. The request shall be acted upon by the Town Council upon
recommendation of the Subdivision Advisory Committee and Planning
Commission. The Town Council may reject any request it deems not to
be in the best interests of the public.
C. When the owners of several adjacent parcels wish to vacate recorded
plans, a joint written document may be submitted to the Town Manager.
§ 196-9. (Reserved)29
§ 196-10. Conditions of approval.
The Town Council reserves the right to place conditions upon the approval
of the subdivision of land.
§ 196-11. Waiver of subdivision regulations in special
circumstances.
A. The Town Manager, with approval of Town Council, may waive any
requirement of these regulations as they may pertain to any
development which, prior to annexation, had obtained subdivision
approval from New Castle County.
B. The Town Manager, with approval of the Town Council, may waive any
requirement of these regulations as they may pertain to any minor
subdivision for the purpose of creating a lot in which the Town of
29.Editor's Note: Former § 196-9, Schedule of fees, was repealed 9-14-2000 by Ord. No. 386.
See now Schedule A, Fees, at the end of Ch. 225, Zoning.
§ 196-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-11
1:313
Elsmere has or is intended to receive an ownership interest. [Added
8-8-1996 by Ord. No. 328]
§ 196-12. Liability.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as to create any liability to the
Town of Elsmere, its agents, servants and employees with respect to the
administration and endorsement of the regulations adopted hereunder.
§ 196-13. Amendments.
A. The Town Council may amend these subdivision regulations by
ordinance. Public hearings on all proposed amendments shall be held by
the Planning Commission and Town Council after having been advertised
in a newspaper of local circulation at least 14 days prior to the meeting
date. In the case of an unfavorable report by the Planning Commission,
such amendment shall not become effective except by a favorable vote
of 3/4 of the Town Council.
B. Any subdivision or land development plan that has been officially
accepted in writing for review at the time of the effective date of any
revision, modification or amendment shall continue to be reviewed under
previous regulations through recordation of a plan.
C. The Planning Commission shall review the regulations annually to
determine the advisability of recommending revisions or amendments in
light of changing standards and technological advances.
§ 196-14. Existing approved subdivisions.
The subdivision regulations in effect prior to the enactment of these
subdivision regulations shall be applicable to any final subdivision plan
approved by Council prior to the enactment of these regulations.
§ 196-15. Enforcement.
A. It shall be the duty of the Town Manager to enforce these regulations
and to bring to the attention of the Town Solicitor and Town Council any
violations or lack of compliance herewith.
B. No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or
structure located on a lot subdivided or sold in violation of the provisions
of these regulations.
§ 196-16. Violations; civil suits.
A. The subdivision of any lot or any parcel of land by the use of metes
and bounds description for the purpose of sale, transfer or lease with
the intent of evading these regulations shall not be permitted. All such
described subdivisions shall be subject to all of the requirements
contained in these regulations.
B. No owner or agent of the owner of any parcel of land located in a
proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell any such parcel before the
subdivision has been approved by the Town Council in accordance with
the provisions of these regulations and a plan filed with the New Castle
County Recorder of Deeds.
§ 196-11 ELSMERE CODE § 196-16
1:314
C. The Town Council or any owner of real estate affected by a violation of
this section may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, institute
injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate or otherwise correct such action.
§ 196-17. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-10-2015 by Ord. No.
600]
Any violation of these regulations shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by
a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 or by imprisonment
not to exceed six months, or by both fine and imprisonment. Any person
who shall violate these regulations shall be deemed guilty of a separate
offense for every day that the violation shall continue. Furthermore, any
person, partnership, corporation, etc., who, prior to entering into a public
works agreement to secure the necessary improvements, contracts to sell,
conveys, rents or leases any lots or dedicated or reserved areas which form
part of a subdivision, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to the
above penalties. Each parcel, plat or lot so disposed of shall be deemed a
separate violation of this chapter.
§ 196-18. Definitions.
A. For the purpose of these regulations, certain numbers, abbreviations,
terms and words used herein shall be used, interpreted and defined as
set forth in this section.
B. Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in the
present tense include the future tense; words used in the plural number
include the singular; the word "herein" means "in these regulations;" the
word "regulations" means "these regulations."
C. A "person" includes a corporation, a partnership and an incorporated
association of persons such as a club; "shall" is always mandatory; a
"building" includes a "structure;" a "building" or "structure" includes any
part thereof; "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall
be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be
used or occupied."
D. Words and terms defined.
ACCESSWAY — A right-of-way which provides common vehicular and
pedestrian access to a property or properties, extending not more than
400 feet from a street to a dead end.
ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISION — The adjustment of property lines or
straightening of boundaries; does not create a lot upon which building
can occur. (See § 196-21.)
ALLEY — A public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as
secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal
frontage is on some other street.
APPLICANT — The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his
representative. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the
premises.
§ 196-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-18
1:315
ARCHITECT — An architect registered by the Delaware State Board of
Examiners and Registration of Architects.
BLOCK — A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of
streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of
waterways or boundary lines of municipalities.
BUILDING — Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind and includes
any structure.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — A line extending between the two side lot
lines of a lot or parcel of land which is parallel to and a stated distance
from a street line.
CARTWAY (roadway traveling) — That portion of a street right-of-way
which is intended for use as a means of vehicular circulation.
COLLECTOR STREET — A street which serves as the connection from
minor streets to the arterial street system.
CONSTRUCTION IMPROVEMENTS PLAN — The maps or drawings
accompanying a subdivision plan and showing the specific location and
design of improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance
with the requirements of the Town Council as a condition of the approval
of the plat.
CROSSWALK — A right-of-way municipally or privately owned, 10 feet or
more in width, which cuts across a block in order to improve pedestrian
access to adjacent street or properties.
CUL-DE-SAC — A local street with only one outlet and having an
appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic
movement, including the turning of fire trucks.
DEVELOPER — The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his
representative. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the
premises.
DWELLING UNIT — Any structure or part thereof, designated to be
occupied as living quarters for one or more individuals customarily living
together as a single housekeeping unit and using certain rooms and
housekeeping facilities in common.
EASEMENT — Authorization by a property owner for the use by another
and for a specified purpose, of any designated part of his property.
ENGINEER — An individual technically qualified in the State of
Delaware and registered by the Delaware Association of Professional
Engineers; or in the case of a structure only, in lieu of an engineer,
an architect registered by the Delaware State Board of Examiners and
Registration of Architects.
FRONTAGE — That side of a lot abutting on a street or way ordinarily
regarded as the front of the lot. All sides of a corner lot abutting on a
street will be considered frontage.
§ 196-18 ELSMERE CODE § 196-18
1:316
IMPROVEMENTS — See "lot improvement" or "public improvement."
LANDSCAPE SCREENING — Any planting, structure, device, wall, fence
or combination of materials with a sufficient height above finished grade
so as to create a visual barrier or improve or enhance the natural
environment.
LOCAL STREET — A street used primarily as the principal means of
access to adjacent residential properties.
LOT — A tract, plot or portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land
intended as a unit for purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer
of ownership or for building development.
LOT, CORNER — A lot situated at the intersection of two streets.
LOT IMPROVEMENT — Any building, structure, place, work of art or
other object or improvement of the land on which they are situated
constituting a physical betterment of real property or any part of such
betterment. Certain lot improvements shall be properly bonded as
provided in these regulations.
MAIN THOROUGHFARE — A street which serves or is designated to
serve as a connection between uses which generate heavy traffic
volumes and/or between other arterial streets.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — The division of any parcel of land into six or
more lots upon which building can occur, with the following exceptions:
All subdivisions regardless of number or size of lots which create new
streets shall be classified as major subdivisions; all multifamily
developments of six or more families regardless of number or size of
lots shall be classified as major subdivisions; all commercial, business or
industrial developments regardless of the number or size of lots shall be
classified as major subdivisions, except where no new streets or other
public improvements are created.
MINIMUM LOT AREA — The area of a lot taken at its perimeter,
exclusive of any portion within a public or private street right-of-way.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — The division of a parcel of land into five or
fewer residential lots upon which building can occur (in accordance
with Chapter 225, Zoning) or the adjustment of property lines to permit
the expansion of an existing structure. The minor subdivision shall not
involve any new street or road. The division of a parcel of land for
commercial or industrial uses where no new streets or other public
improvements are involved.
MONUMENT — A stone or concrete boundary marker intended to fix the
physical location of property lines, having a flat top at least five inches
in diameter or four inches square and at least 36 inches in length.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING UNIT — A dwelling unit which is intended
for sale, lease or rental located in a residential building designed for or
occupied by three or more households.
§ 196-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-18
1:317
NONRESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION — A subdivision whose intended use
is other than residential, such as business, commercial or industrial.
OFF-SITE — Any premises not located within the perimeter of the
property to be subdivided, whether or not in the same ownership of the
applicant for subdivision approval.
OFFICIAL MAP — The map established by the Town Council pursuant to
law showing the streets, highways and parks and drainage systems and
setback lines theretofore laid out, adopted and established by law and
any amendments or additions thereto adopted by the Town Council or
additions thereto resulting from the approval of subdivision plats by the
Town Council and the subsequent filing of such approved plats.
OPEN SPACE, PRIVATE — A plot or area of land and/or water which
is not dedicated to public use, but is intended for active and/or passive
recreational use or other similar open uses, excluding areas used or
intended to be used for buildings, parking, loading and streets.
OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC — A plot or area of land and/or water which is
dedicated to public use by legal mapping and/or by any other lawful
procedure and which is intended for active and/or passive recreational
use or other similar open uses, excluding areas used or intended to be
used for buildings, parking, loading and streets.
ORDINANCE — Any legislative action, however denominated by the
Town of Elsmere, which has the force of law, including any amendment
or repeal of any ordinance.
OWNER — Any persons, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or
corporations or any other legal entity having legal title to or sufficient
proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided under these
regulations.
PARK AND RECREATION IMPROVEMENT FUND — A special fund
established by the Town Council to retain moneys contributed by
developers in accordance with the "money in lieu of land" provisions
of these regulations to purchase recreational lands within reasonable
proximity of the land to be subdivided so as to be of local use to the
future residents of the subdivision.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Town of
Elsmere established in accordance with Ordinance No. 99 (May 1969)30
to advise the Council on zoning and planning, in addition to other
matters.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT — Any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway,
sidewalk, pedestrianway, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot
improvement or other facility for which the Town of Elsmere may
ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation,
of which may affect an improvement for which Town responsibility is
established. All such improvements shall be properly bonded.
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 38, Planning Commission.
§ 196-18 ELSMERE CODE § 196-18
1:318
REGISTERED ENGINEER — An engineer properly registered in the
state.
REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR — A land surveyor properly licensed
and registered in the state.
RESERVE STRIP — A parcel of ground in separate ownership separating
a street from other adjacent properties or from other streets.
RESUBDIVISION — A change in a map of an approved or recorded
subdivision plan if such change affects any street layout on such map
or area reserved thereon for public use or any lot line; or it affects any
map or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations
controlling subdivisions.
REVERSE FRONTAGE LOTS — A lot extending between and having
frontage on two generally parallel streets, one major and one minor, with
vehicular access solely from the minor street.
REVERSE SUBDIVISION — The combining of an existing parcel of land
with one or more contiguous parcels of land in order to create one single
parcel.[Added 2-12-2015 by Ord. No. 590]
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied
by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or
gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees
or for another special use. The usage of the term "right-of-way" for
land platting purposes shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter
established and shown on an approved subdivision plan is to be separate
and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not
included within the dimensions of areas of such lots or parcels. Rightsof-
way intended for streets, crosswalks water mains, sanitary sewers,
storm drains, shade trees or any other use involving maintenance by
a public agency shall be dedicated to the public use by the developer
or owner of the approved subdivision on which such right-of-way is
established.
STREET, DEAD END — A street or a portion of a street with only one
vehicular-traffic outlet.
STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH — The distance between property lines
measured at right angles to the center line of the street.
SALES or LEASE — Any immediate or future transfer of ownership or
any possessory interest in land, including contract of sale, lease, devise,
intestate succession or transfer or an interest in a subdivision or part
thereof, whether by metes and bounds, deed, contract, plat, map, lease,
devise, intestate (not disposed of by will, having made no will) succession
or other written instrument.
SETBACK — The distance between a building and a street line and a
building and all surrounding property lines as established by the Zoning
Ordinance of the Town of Elsmere.31
§ 196-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-18
1:319
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
SUBDIVIDER — Any person who:
SUBDIVISION — Any land, vacant or improved, which is divided or
proposed to be divided into two or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots
or interests for the purpose of offer, sale, lease or development, either
on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans, terms and
conditions, including resubdivision. "Subdivision" includes the division
or development of residential and nonresidential zoned land, whether by
deed, metes and bounds description, devise, intestacy, lease, map plat
or other recorded instrument. (See "administrative subdivision," "minor
subdivision," and "major subdivision" and § 196-5 above.)
SUBDIVISION ADVISORY COMMITTEE — A committee comprising of
Town Manager, building officials, Town Engineer, Town Fire Marshal or
his designate and the Chief of Police or his designate and such members
of public, semipublic and private agencies, departments, corporations,
associations or groups having an interest in the subdivision plan review
process, coordinated by the Town Manager to review subdivision
proposals in accordance with these regulations.
SUBDIVISION AGENT — Any person who represents or acts for or on
behalf of a subdivider or developer, in selling, leasing or developing or
offering to sell, lease or develop any interest, lot, parcel, unit, site or
plat in a subdivision, except an attorney at law whose representation of
another person consists solely of rendering legal services.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — See "major subdivision."
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — See "minor subdivision."
TOWN COUNCIL — Council of the Town of Elsmere, Delaware, which is
the legislative body having the power to adopt ordinances.
Having an interest in land, causes it, directly or indirectly, to be
divided into a subdivision; or
(1)
Directly or indirectly sells, leases or develops or offers to sell, lease
or develop or advertises for sale, lease or development, any interest,
lot, parcel, site, unit or plat in a subdivision; or
(2)
Engages directly or through an agent in the business of selling,
leasing, developing or offering for sale, lease or development a
subdivision or any interest, lot, parcel, site, unit or plat in a
subdivision; and
(3)
Is directly or indirectly controlled by or under direct or indirect
common control with, any of the foregoing.
(4)
31.Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Zoning.
§ 196-18 ELSMERE CODE § 196-18
1:320
TREE — Any woody plant which has a trunk diameter of 2 1/2 to three
inches or more in diameter measured three feet above the ground level.
WORKDAYS — The number of days established in these regulations for
steps in the review and approval process for subdivision applications. All
workday limits shall be guidelines which may be modified by the Town
Manager upon reasonable cause. Workdays shall mean Monday through
Friday, not including days in which the Town municipal building offices
are closed.
§ 196-19. Records.
The Town Manager shall keep an accurate public record of its findings,
decisions and recommendations relative to all subdivision plans filed with it
for review and approval.
§ 196-20. Variances.
A. If the literal compliance with any mandatory provision of the regulations
contained in this chapter appears to the satisfaction of a majority of
the members of the Board of Adjustment present at a scheduled public
hearing, to be unreasonable and to cause undue hardship as it applies
to a property to be subdivided, the Board of Adjustment may grant
a variance to the subdivider of such property from such mandatory
provision, so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest
secured while permitting the reasonable utilization of the property;
provided, however, that such variation shall not have the effect of
nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter.
B. In granting variances, the Board of Adjustment may impose such
conditions as will, in its judgment, substantially secure the objectives of
the standards or requirement so varied.
C. Requests for variances from these regulations shall be submitted to the
Town Manager who shall contact the Board of Adjustment chairman to
fix a time and place to the Board for holding a public hearing on the
variance request. The Town Manager shall cause notice of the public
hearing to be published in the legal notices of the Wilmington News
Journal, at least 14 days before the date of the hearing. The notice shall
contain the time, date and place of the hearing and shall specify the
place and times at which information and maps relating to the proposed
variance may be examined.
D. Requests for variance of the subdivision and land development
regulations shall be subject to a nonrefundable filing fee per section, to
be due and payable to the Town at the time the request is submitted.
§ 196-21. Submission procedures and approval process;
administrative subdivision.
The adjustment of property lines or straightening of boundaries which
does not create additional building lots shall be approved and reviewed as
administrative subdivision under the procedures and regulations below:
A. Application and submission procedures.
§ 196-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-21
1:321
(1) The Town Manager will provide application forms and information
to applicants when requested regarding subdivision procedures. An
applicant for subdivision approval must provide the following:
(a) A completed application for subdivision approval.
(b) The name and address of the owner or owners of land to be
subdivided, the name and address of the subdivider if other than
the owner and the name of the land surveyor, if any.
(c) The names and addresses of all adjacent property owners.
(d) A reproducible drawing and 10 prints drawn to a scale of one
inch equals 50 feet, including the following information:
[1] The location of all roadways within 100 feet of the property
to be subdivided.
[2] The location of all buildings and accessory buildings on the
property being subdivided.
B. Review procedure.
(1) The Town Manager shall, within 10 working days, review the
proposed subdivision. Preliminary approval for the administrative
subdivision shall be made by the Town Manager if the proposed
subdivision will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or
general welfare of the Town or appear injurious to other property.
If the Town Manager disapproves the administrative subdivision, the
applicant may request a Planning Commission and Town Council
review of the proposal for final determination.
(2) Within three working days of preliminary approval of the
administrative subdivision, the Town Manager shall send notices
of the proposed subdivision to all adjacent property owners and
members of the Planning Commission and Town Council. The
applicant may fulfill the requirement of notification by supplying
the Town Manager with written statements from adjacent property
owners stating that they have reviewed the proposed subdivision
and have no objections. If such statements are not provided by
the applicant, the Town Manager shall proceed with notification.
Notices to adjacent property owners shall explain that they have
an opportunity to review the proposed subdivision in the Town of
Elsmere offices, to object in writing to the proposal and to request
a public hearing before the Planning Commission and Town Council
to review the proposal. Notices shall, in addition, be sent to adjacent
property owners if the Town Manager disapproves the subdivision
and the applicant requests a Planning Commission and Town Council
review.
(3) If no objections are forthcoming from adjacent property owners,
within 10 days, the Town Manager shall issue final approval of the
administrative subdivision.
(4) After the approval of an administrative subdivision, the Town
Secretary shall certify such approval on the subdivision plot plan
which shows distinctly the part to be recorded. The Town Manager
shall certify on the approved subdivision plot plan that said plans
and related plans comply with all requirements of the subdivision
regulations and deviations, if any, from the subdivision regulations
§ 196-21 ELSMERE CODE § 196-21
1:322
have been noted and qualified. Three copies of the plan shall be
signed and provided to the Town Solicitor for recordation and
certification. A copy of the approved plan shall be forwarded to the
applicant.
§ 196-22. Submission procedures and approval process; minor
subdivision.
All division of land into five or fewer residential lots upon which building
can occur or the adjustment of property lines to permit the expansion of an
existing structure shall be approved and reviewed as a minor subdivision
under the procedures and regulations below. Subdivisions of five lots or
fewer which involve any new street or road shall be reviewed and approved
as major subdivisions. All division of land into commercial or industrial lots
where no new streets or other public improvements are involved shall be
reviewed and approved as minor subdivisions.
A. Application and submission procedures.
(1) The Town Manager will provide application forms and will provide
the information to applicants when requested regarding subdivision
procedures. The applicant for subdivision must provide the
following:
(a) A completed application for subdivision approval.
(b) An affidavit of ownership which shows the book and page
number of each conveyance to the present owner as recorded in
the County Recorder of Deed's offices.
(c) A reproducible original and 10 copies of a subdivision plan drawn
to convenient scale (one inch equals 20 feet through one inch
equals 100 feet) and showing date, scale and North point. Each
sheet shall be numbered to show its relation to the total number
of sheets. The subdivision plan shall include the following
information:
[1] A title consisting of the name of the fee simple or equitable
owners (s) of the land to be subdivided, the name(s) and
address(es) of the subdivider(s) if different than the
owner(s) name and address of the Delaware registered
engineer, land surveyor or architect. The subdivision plan
shall bear the certificate, signature and seal of a Delaware
registered engineer, land surveyor or architect.
[2] A graphic and written scale along with date, including the
month, day and year that the original ground was
completed and the month, day and year that the original
drawing was revised.
[3] A location map drawn to the scale of one inch equals 800
feet indicating the location of the property and its
relationship to all streets and other property within 1,000
feet of the applicant's property.
[4] The total area of parcel in acres.
[5] The courses and distances of the boundary line survey on
all properties being subdivided.
§ 196-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-22
1:323
[6] The proposed name of the subdivision which shall not
duplicate the name of any other subdivision in the Town.
[7] The layout and dimensions of all proposed lots which will be
created by the subdivision.
[8] The names of all property owners of unsubdivided property
within 200 feet of the extreme limits of the subdivision as
their names appear in the tax records. In the event that lots
adjoin the land to be subdivided, the subdivision name and
lot number of the adjoining lot shall be shown. The zoning
classification governing the tract and adjoining properties
shall be shown.
[9] The location of all existing and proposed watercourses and
natural drainage flows and the location and size of storm
sewers and other related stormwater facilities which may
influence the design of the subdivision.
[10] The location of the open floodway district and floodway
fringe, if applicable.
[11] The location, widths and names of all existing roads upon
which the proposed subdivision will front and within 100
feet of the proposed subdivision.
[12] Contour lines at vertical intervals of two feet for land with
average natural slope of four feet or less and at intervals of
five feet for land with average natural slope exceeding 4%.
[13] Location of proposed landscape screening, if applicable.
[14] The general location of mature tree stands, if any.
[15] The location and size of existing and proposed waterlines
which serve the proposed subdivision.
[16] The location and size of existing and proposed sanitary
sewers which serve the proposed subdivision.
[17] Location of all proposed sidewalks.
[18] The dimensions and area of all property to be dedicated
or reserved for public open space use or to be dedicated
for use of all property owners in the subdivision and the
location, dimensions and purpose of any proposed
easements, if applicable.
[19] Proposed parking areas and number of parking spaces,
where applicable.
[20] The approximate location of proposed buildings and the
amount of land to be used for buildings expressed as a
percentage of total land area, if applicable. The location
of existing buildings and a description of their present or
intended use.
[21] The North point, the phrase "Minor Subdivision Plan" and
the phrase "Town of Elsmere, Christiana Hundred, New
Castle County, Delaware.
[22] Sediment and stormwater plans. [Added 6-8-2017 by Ord.
No. 629]
[a] Preparation of sediment and stormwater plans
according to standards set within the current Delaware
§ 196-22 ELSMERE CODE § 196-22
1:324
Sediment and Stormwater Regulations, including, at a
minimum, the following information:
[i] The use and maintenance of appropriate structural
and nonstructural sediment and erosion controls
and other BMPs to reduce polluted discharges to
the MS4 during the time when construction is
underway.
[ii] Specifications for construction site operators to
control wastes such as discarded construction or
building materials, concrete truck washout,
chemicals, litter, oil, and sanitation waste.
[iii] Description of the characteristics and limitations of
soil as indicated by the New Castle County Soils
Survey.
[iv] Description of the recharge capabilities of the site
and analysis of the proposed subdivision's impact
upon those recharge capabilities.
[v] Computation of pre- and post-development
stormwater runoff levels.
[vi] Any other substantial adverse environmental
effects.
[b] Plans and computations will be provided to the New
Castle Conservation District (NCCD) for review and
approval under agreement with the Town. NCCD will
ensure that BMPs are properly constructed and
installed according to requirements set forth according
to the Delaware Sediment and Stormwater Regulations.
NCCD will inspect construction sites and enforce
control measures, and will notify operators if federal
NPDES General Permit requirements are not being met
(i.e., weekly inspections), and provide enforcement if
necessary.
B. Review and approval process.
(1) Twenty-five copies and a reproducible original of the subdivision
plan shall be submitted by the applicant to the Town Manager. The
Town Manager shall, within three workdays, distribute subdivision
plan copies to the Building Committee and the Town Engineer and
Town Council. Within 15 working days of the receipt of the
subdivision plan, the Building Committee and Town Engineer shall
review, prepare and return written comments to the Town Manager.
(2) Upon receipt of departmental comments, the Town Manager shall
prepare a written report to the applicant indicating those
suggestions, concerns or problems pointed out by the Building
Committee and Town Engineer. This report shall be prepared within
five workdays and forwarded to the applicant. The applicant may
then revise or amend the subdivision plan as per Building Committee
and Town Engineer suggestions.
(3) If no concerns are raised by the Building Committee or Town
Engineer or if concerns are eliminated through applicant revisions in
§ 196-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-22
1:325
the subdivision plan, the Town Manager shall, within five workdays,
prepare a written report containing the recommendations
concerning the subdivision plan to the Planning Commission and
Town Council.
(4) The Planning Commission shall review the subdivision plan and
within 40 workdays, issue a recommendation to the Town Council
concerning the subdivision plan. If approved, the Town Solicitor
should prepare a subdivision agreement to be signed by the
applicant and the Town Manager upon approval by Town Council.
(5) Upon receipt of the Planning Commission report, Town Council shall
review the subdivision plan for final determination. The subdivision
plan and agreement shall be submitted to Town Council with a
resolution of approval. The resolution, plan and agreement shall be
approved, approved with conditions or disapproved by Town Council.
(6) After approval or approval with conditions, the Town Secretary shall
certify such approval on the subdivision plot plan which shows
distinctly the part to be recorded. The Town Manager shall certify
on the approved subdivision plot plan that said plans and related
plans comply with all requirements of the subdivision regulations
and deviations, if any, from the subdivision regulations have been
noted and qualified. Five copies of the plan shall be signed and
provided to the Town Secretary's for recordation and certification. A
copy of the approved plan shall be forwarded to the applicant.
(a) Following approval of the subdivision plan by Town Council, the
subdivider or developer shall prepare the necessary construction
improvements plans for approval by the Town in accordance with
§ 196-24 of these regulations. Approval of the subdivision plan
by Council shall indicate the Town's approval of the construction
improvement plans.
(b) If, however, the subdivision plan is not completed in full within
five years from the date of approval by Town Council, the
applicant is required to reapply for subdivision approval to the
Planning Commission beginning with Subsection B above.
(7) Within 15 working days after Council approval, all agreements,
easements and deeds of land concerning the subdivision plan shall
be executed and signed by the applicant and the Town Manager.
§ 196-23. Submission procedures and approval process; major
subdivisions.
A. Sketch plan.
(1) Submission procedures.
(a) The sketch of a proposed subdivision shall be clearly and legibly drawn to the following
scale:
One to 20 acres: one inch equals 50 feet
Twenty-one to 100 acres: one inch equals 100 feet
Above 100 acres: one inch equals 200 feet
(b) A reproducible original and 25 prints shall be submitted to the Town Manager.
§ 196-22 ELSMERE CODE § 196-23
1:326
(2) Required information. The sketch plan shall contain at least the following data, drawn to scale, but not necessarily showing precise dimensions:
(a) Approximate tract boundaries and existing and proposed zoning districts accurately
labeled.
(b) The phrase "sketch plan."
(c) Approximate total area in acres.
(d) North point, scale and date, including the month, day and year that the original was completed and the month, day and year that the original drawing was revised, each revision.
(e) Significant planimetric, topographic and physical features.
(f) Proposed general street and lot layout and proposed utility and drainage easements.
(g) Name and address of the owner and/or subdivider and registered civil engineer,
professional land surveyor or land planner, if any, responsible for the preparation sketch plan.
(h) A general location map.
(i) Existing street, utility and drainage easements within the tract and adjacent they have an effect on the development of the proposed subdivision (the information
regarding the area adjacent to the proposed subdivision may be obtained from available
existing records or other documents or from observation in the files if the property owner refuses permission to enter onto his land).
(j) The approximate location of all proposed structures, number of businesses or firms.
(k) The approximate location, size and capacity of all proposed off-street parking spaces.
(l) The estimated number of dwelling units.
(3) Review procedures.
(a) The Town Manager shall within three working days distribute sketch plan copies Building Committee and the Town Engineer. Within five workdays of the receipt sketch plan, the Building Committee and the Town Engineer will review and comment the Town Manager regarding the proposed sketch plan. Concerns, suggestions, requests
for additional information should be included in the departmental reviews.
(b) If the Building Committee or Town Engineer determines that a traffic impact will be necessary for future consideration, the request for a traffic impact study be submitted with the departmental comments on the sketch plan. The traffic study will comply with the provisions of Subsection B(1)(a)[6] below. If a the Committee or Town Engineer determines that a market analysis will be necessary future consideration, the request for a market analysis study should be submitted departmental comments on the sketch plan.
(c) Upon receipt of Building Committee or Town Engineer concerns, the Town Manager
shall prepare a written report to the applicant indicating those suggestions, concerns
or problems pointed out by the reviewing departments. This report shall be completed
and available to the applicant within 12 workdays following the submission of the plan by the developer.
B. Major subdivision application.
(1) Application and submission procedures.
(a) The Town Manager will provide application forms and will provide information applicant when requested regarding subdivision procedures. The applicant for must provide the following:
[1] A completed application for subdivision approval.
[2] An affidavit of ownership which shows the book and page number of each conveyance the present owner as recorded in the County Recorder of Deeds' offices.
§ 196-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-23
1:327
[3] Twenty-five copies of a subdivision plan drawn to a convenient scale (one inch 20 feet through one inch equals 100 feet) and showing date, scale and North Each sheet shall be numbered to show its relation to the total number of sheets. subdivision plan shall include the following information:
[a] A title consisting of the name of the fee simple or equitable owners(s) of the to be subdivided, the name(s) and address(es) of the subdivider(s) if different the owner(s) name and address of the Delaware registered engineer, land surveyor
or architect. The subdivision plan shall bear the certificate, signature and seal Delaware registered engineer, land surveyor or architect.
[b] A location map drawn to the scale of one inch equals 800 feet indicating the of the property and its relationship to all streets and other property within feet of the applicant's property.
[c] A graphic and written scale along with date, including the month, day and year the original drawing was completed and the month, day and year that the drawing was revised.
[d] The courses and distances of the boundary line survey on all properties subdivided. The total area of the parcel in acres.
[e] The proposed name of the subdivision which shall not duplicate the name other subdivision in the Town.
[f] The layout and approximate dimensions of all proposed lots which will be created the subdivision and approximate location of proposed buildings.
[g] The names of all property owners of unsubdivided property within 200 the extreme limits of the subdivision as their names appear in the tax records. the event that lots adjoin the land to be subdivided, the subdivision name number of the adjoining lot shall be shown. The zoning classification governing tract and adjoining properties shall be shown.
[h] Layout of proposed streets, their proposed names, rights-of-way and paving as well as right-of-way and paving widths for proposed alleys and easements ingress and egress. Except for continuations, street names shall not duplicate
existing street names in the Town.
[i] The location and size of all existing storm sewers, watercourses and drainage flows which may influence the design of the subdivision. The approximate
location of all proposed storm drainage facilities including, when applicable,
retention areas, sewer lines and drainage ditches.
[j] The location of the open floodway district and floodway fringe, if applicable.
[k] The location, widths and names of all existing roads upon which the proposed
subdivision will front and within 100 feet of the proposed subdivision.
[l] Contour lines at vertical intervals of two feet for land with average natural 4% or less and at intervals of five feet for land with average natural slope exceeding
4%.
[m] Location of proposed landscape screening, if applicable.
[n] The general location of mature tree stands, if any.
[o] The location and size of existing waterlines which might serve the proposed
subdivision; proposed connections with existing waterlines and including approximate location and approximate size of all proposed waterlines and facilities.
[p] The location and size of existing sanitary sewer lines; proposed connections existing sanitary sewer lines, including the approximate location and approximate
size of all proposed sanitary sewer lines and sanitary sewer facilities.
§ 196-23 ELSMERE CODE § 196-23
1:328
[q] Location of all proposed sidewalks.
[r] The approximate dimensions and area of all property proposed to be reserved for public open space use or to be dedicated for use of all property in the subdivision and the location, dimensions and purposes of any easements.
[s] The location of any proposed entrance/exit facilities which provide access subdivision to and from a public road.
[t] Proposed parking areas and number of parking spaces where applicable.
[u] Identification and boundaries of soils classifications as indicated by the County Soils Survey.
[v] The approximate total area of all land to be used for roads, open space lots expressed in percentage of total land areas.
[4] A demographic impact analysis to include, at a minimum, the following information:
[a] Projected population at the completion of each phase of project, if phased completion of project (for residential development).
[b] Projected population of school-age children (grades K through 12) using criteria developed by the local school district; location of schools serving [5] Sediment and stormwater plans. [Amended 6-8-2017 by Ord. No. 629]
[a] Preparation of sediment and stormwater plans according to standards set current Delaware Sediment and Stormwater Regulations, including, at the following information:
[i] The use and maintenance of appropriate structural and nonstructural and erosion controls and other BMPs to reduce polluted discharges during the time when construction is underway.
[ii] Specifications for construction site operators to control wastes discarded construction or building materials, concrete truck chemicals, litter, oil, and sanitation waste.
[iii] Description of the characteristics and limitations of soil as indicated Castle County Soils Survey.
[iv] Description of the recharge capabilities of the site and analysis of the subdivision's impact upon those recharge capabilities.
[v] Computation of pre- and post-development stormwater runoff levels.
[vi] Any other substantial adverse environmental effects.
[b] Plans and computations will be provided to the New Castle Conservation (NCCD) for review and approval under agreement with the Town. NCCD that BMPs are properly constructed and installed according to requirements forth according to the Delaware Sediment and Stormwater Regulations. inspect construction sites and enforce control measures, and will notify if federal NPDES General Permit requirements are not being met inspections), and provide enforcement if necessary.
[6] A traffic impact analysis may be required and, if required, shall include the information:
[a] A description of existing traffic volumes on the roads which will be impacted subdivision and a description of the present physical condition of affected Delaware Division of Highways shall be requested to determine and impact area.
[b] A traffic forecast which projects traffic volumes upon affected roadways the future with and without the completion of the subdivision.
§ 196-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-23
1:329
[7] A market analysis may be required and, if required, shall include a description proposed commercial/industrial development, including:
[a] Square footage of gross building areas and subareas proposed for commercial industrial development.
[b] Known and probable uses.
[c] Traffic configuration.
[d] Number of parking spaces required and provided.
[e] The present and/or projected market area and population proposed to be served.
[8] The applicant shall provide the following information to assist in the determination cost/revenue impact to the Town of the proposed development:
[a] The estimated market value and estimated completion date of the proposed
development. If the development is proposed for completion by sections, estimated market value and completion dates by section.
[b] Units per acre.
[c] Any special conditions which would affect Town costs or revenues.
(b) If the major plan submission substantially complies with Subsection A of this section form of the submission, the Town Manager shall acknowledge such compliance, in within five working days from the date of receipt and at the same time shall signify intention of the Subdivision Advisory Committee to review the plan.
(c) If the major plan submission does not substantially comply with Subsection A of this as to form of the submission, the Town Manager shall notify the subdivider, in writing, five working days from the date of receipt, of the specific nature of the noncompliance.
(d) Upon substantial compliance with Subsection A of this section, the preliminary major may be resubmitted in accordance with this section.
(e) An applicant shall be permitted to develop and record the subdivision plan in sections. submission of the subdivision plan and application, the applicant shall indicate, in any proposed sectional development intended, the sequence of such sectional development
and a proposed time schedule for such development.
(f) The completed application and supporting documentation shall be submitted directly Town Manager who, in turn, will submit the application and supporting documentation members of the Subdivision Advisory Committee and any other appropriate agencies as the Delaware Division of Highways, Soil Conservation Service and Delaware Geological
Survey, Inc.
(2) Review and approval process.
(a) Twenty-five copies and original of the subdivision plan shall be submitted to the Town Town Manager shall, within three workdays, distribute subdivision plan copies to the Subdivision Advisory Committee and shall develop a tentative review time schedule, a date for the Subdivision Advisory Committee meeting. Within 15 workdays of the subdivision plan, the departments shall review and prepare written comments for Advisory Committee meeting. The Town Manager shall transmit copies of the subdivision Town Council and the Planning Commission.
(b) The Subdivision Advisory Committee and the developer shall meet to discuss the subdivision Within five workdays after the meeting, the Subdivision Advisory Committee shall concerning revisions or modifications to the subdivision to the developer or submit recommendations to the planning commission.
(c) Within seven workdays of the receipt of the Subdivision Advisory Committee recommendations,
the Town Manager shall prepare a written report containing the recommendations subdivision plan. The report should contain revisions to be made by the developer at § 196-23 ELSMERE CODE § 196-23
1:330
the Subdivision Advisory Committee. Copies of this report shall be transmitted the Planning Commission and the Subdivision Advisory Committee.
(d) The Planning Commission shall review the subdivision plan and within 40 recommendation to Town Council containing its recommendations concerning If approved, the Town Solicitor should prepare a subdivision agreement to developer and the Town Manager upon approval by Town Council.
(e) Upon receipt by the Town Council of the Planning Commission recommendation, within a reasonable time, will consider the application at a public hearing. All such advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town not less than 10 days public hearing. Town Council, at its discretion, either prior or subsequent to may request an informal review with the applicant and/or the applicant's applicant's legal representative, regarding alterations, changes or modifications by Town Council.
(f) The subdivision plan and agreement shall be submitted to Town Council approval. The resolution, plan and agreement shall be approved, approved disapproved by Town Council.
(g) Approval shall indicate the Town's approval of the proposed subdivision subject the construction improvements plan.
(h) Following approval of the subdivision plan by Town Council, the subdivider prepare the necessary construction improvements plan for approval by the § 196-24 below.
(i) If the subdivision is to be developed in sections the applicant may complete improvements for each section individually.
(j) If, however, the subdivision plan is not completed in full within five years from by Town Council, the applicant is required to reapply for subdivision approval Subdivision Advisory Committee's review as described above for the uncompleted subdivision.
(k) Following the approval of the construction improvements plan by the Town, prepare a complete subdivision plan (with construction improvements plan) for (l) After approval of the subdivision plan and agreement by the Town Council, the certify such approval on the subdivision plot plan which shows distinctively the The Town Manager shall certify on the approved subdivision plot plan that said plans comply with all requirements of the subdivision regulations and deviations, subdivision regulations have been noted and qualified. The agreement shall be by the applicant and Town Manager and shall constitute a covenant running binding upon the parties to the agreement and their successors and assigns. shall sign the required certification or certifications, as the case may be, and according to Subsection B(2)(l)[1] or [2] as follows:
[1] For a subdivision plot plan approved by the Town Council to be recorded entirety:
It is hereby certified that this subdivision plot plan was granted “approval” Town of Elsmere, Delaware on (date) and accordingly, is eligible for recording Recorder of Deeds for New Castle County, Delaware.
Town Secretary
[2] For a subdivision plot plan approved to be recorded in sections, certification follows:
§ 196-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-23
1:331
It is hereby certified that the section or sections of this subdivision plot plan hereon as the part to be recorded were granted “approval” by the Council of the Delaware on (date) and, accordingly, is eligible for recording in the office of the for New Castle County, Delaware.
Town Secretary
(m) Notification in writing or action taken by Town Council will be transmitted to the applicant to the Town Manager.
§ 196-24. Submission procedures and approval process;
construction improvements plan.
A construction improvements plan shall be required upon approval of all
major subdivision plans by the Town Council before construction can begin
on a major subdivision site.
A. Submission procedures.
(1) Five complete sets of construction improvements plans shall be submitted to the
Town Manager and 15 street (horizontal) plans.
(2) The construction improvement plan shall include:
(a) Streets.
[1] Horizontal plan.
[a] Center line with bearings, distances and curve data and stations
corresponding to the profile.
[b] Right-of-way and curblines with radii at intersections.
[c] Beginning and end of proposed construction.
[d] Tie-ins by courses and distances to intersections of all public roads
with their names and widths.
[e] Location of all monuments with reference to permanent structures.
[f] Proposed and existing property lines and ownership of abutting
properties.
[g] Contour lines at intervals not to exceed five feet.
[h] Location, size and elevations of all drainage structures and public
utilities.
[i] The scale shall be at least one inch equals 50 feet.
[2] Profiles.
[a] Profile of existing ground surface along center line and also along
both right-of-way lines if required by the Town Manager.
[b] Proposed center line grade with percent of grade on tangents and
elevations at fifty-foot intervals, grade intersections and both ends of
curb radii.
[c] Vertical curve data including length, tangent elevations and
corrections with elevations at twenty-five-foot intervals for sharp
vertical curves.
[d] The scale shall be at least one inch equals five feet vertical and one
inch equals 50 feet horizontal.
[3] Cross section.
[a] Right-of-way width and location and width of paving.
[b] Type, thickness and crown of paving.
§ 196-23 ELSMERE CODE § 196-24
1:332
[c] Type and size of curb.
[d] Grading of sidewalk area.
[e] Typical location of sewers and utilities with sizes.
[f] The scale shall be one inch equals one foot vertical and one inch
equals 10 feet horizontal.
(b) Sanitary sewers and storm drains.
[1] Horizontal plan.
[a] Location and size of line with stations corresponding to the profile.
[b] Location and types of manholes or inlets with grades between and
elevation of flow line and top of each manhole or inlet.
[c] Property lines and ownership, with details of easements where
required.
[d] Beginning and end of proposed construction.
[e] Location of laterals, Y's, etc.
[f] Location of all other drainage facilities and public utilities.
[g] The scale shall be at least one inch equals 50 feet.
[2] Profile (sanitary sewers and storm drains).
[a] Profile of existing ground surface with elevations at top of manholes
or inlets at flow line.
[b] Profile of storm drain or sewer showing size of pipe, grade, cradle (if
any), manhole or inlet locations.
[c] The scale shall be at least one inch equals 50 feet horizontal and one
inch equals five feet vertical.
[d] Location of these and all other utilities at points of intersection.
(c) Water mains.
[1] Horizontal plan.
[a] Location and side of line with stations corresponding to profiles.
[b] Locations of valves, fittings, fire hydrants and other appurtenances.
[c] Property lines and ownership with details of easements where
required.
[d] Beginning and end of proposed construction.
[e] Location of service lines, etc.
[f] Location of all other drainage facilities and public utilities.
[g] Scale shall be at least one inch equals 50 feet.
[2] Profile.
[a] Profile of existing ground surface with elevations valves.
[b] Profile of water main showing size of pipe, cover, etc.
[c] The scale shall be at least one inch equals 50 feet horizontal and one
inch equals five feet vertical.
[d] Location of these and all other utilities at points of intersection.
(d) Bridges and other improvements. These plans shall contain sufficient
information to provide complete working plans for the proposed
construction.
(e) Certificate. The approved construction improvements plan shall contain the
following certificates:
[1] Registered professional engineer making the plan certifying to the
accuracy thereof.
[2] The applicant certifying his adoption of plan.
§ 196-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-24
1:333
[3] Signature of Town Manager to plan conforms to applicable Town
standards.
(f) Additional information to be shown:
[1] Title as required for the subdivision plan.
[2] Courses and distances for the legal description of all property lines
shown on the plan.
[3] Names of abutting owners.
[4] Names, locations, widths, center line courses, distances and curve data,
paving widths and curblines, right-of-way and curbline radii at
intersections of all existing plotted and approved streets, alleys, rights-ofway
and easements and parks and other public places or improvements
within the land being subdivided.
[5] Location, elevation, material and size of all monuments with references
to them.
[6] Layout and dimensions of lots with lot area to right-of-way line of streets.
[7] Location to include elevations and size of sanitary and storm sewers,
including manholes, inlets and building laterals.
B. Review and approval process.
(1) The Town Manager shall, within three workdays, distribute construction
improvements plans to the Town Engineer, Building Committee and other
departments as required.
(2) Each department shall review the construction improvements plan and submit
written comments to the Town Manager. To discuss problems identified through
departmental review, the Town Manager shall hold meetings with the developer
and department directors. This phase of the review and approval process shall
be completed in 30 workdays.
(3) When problems are resolved, all concerned department directors shall, within 10
workdays, certify that the construction improvements plan conforms with all city
requirements and specifications as well as the approved subdivision plan.
(4) If the construction improvements plan does not conform substantially to the
approved subdivision plan, it shall be referred to Town Council. Town Council
shall either not approve the construction improvements plan and return it to the
developer or approve the plan and forward it to the Town Manager.
(5) After approval by Town Council certification by department directors of the
construction improvements plan, the developer shall prepare a complete
subdivision plan for recordation.
(6) Prior to execution by the Town of the complete subdivision plan, all easements,
deeds, rights-of-way, bonds, etc. shall be provided by the developer to the Town
Manager.
(7) Town Manager and Town Secretary approved construction improvements plan
and complete subdivision plan and both are recorded as required.
(8) Following the completion in full of the construction improvements and following
appropriate notice to all property owners of record in the subdivision and prior to
their certification and acceptance by the Building Official, the Town may require
repairs or reconstruction to the construction improvements.
C. Standard conditions and procedures for construction improvements plan.
(1) Liability insurance. A liability insurance policy in the amount of $300,000/$500,000
per accident, providing full protection of the Town, its officials and employees against
all damages or claims for damages occurring directly or indirectly by reason of the
§ 196-24 ELSMERE CODE § 196-24
1:334
construction improvements, shall be filed with the Town Secretary before any begins in an approved subdivision.
(2) Compliance with regulations, codes, etc. Grading, excavation, construction, erection building shall begin only if in full compliance with these subdivision regulations, subdivision regulations appendices, the Town Building Code and Zoning Code,32 standard specifications and all other applicable standards and ordinances of the Town Elsmere and the laws of the State of Delaware.
(3) Notice of construction. The Town Manager and/or Building Official must be notified hours in advance of the commencement of any construction operation in order provision may be made for their proper inspection.
(4) Inspections. The Building Official shall coordinate inspection of required improvements
during construction. If the Building Official finds upon inspection that any of the required
improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the Town standard
specifications, the developer shall be responsible for correcting the improvements.
Wherever the cost of improvements is covered by a surety guaranty bond, the applicant
and the bonding company shall be severally and jointly liable for completing improvements according to specifications.
(5) Limited authority for minor alterations. The Town Manager and the Town Engineer have the authority to approve minor alterations of construction details as field conditions
may require. They shall have no authority to approve changes in boundaries of streets
and other areas to which title has been transferred or for which agreement has made to transfer to the Town.
(6) As-built plans. Upon completion of construction improvements, the developer provide the Public Works Director one set of reproducible as-built detailed plans. The plan shall give accurate dimensions locating all subsurface facilities and showing
all monuments.
(7) Release of liens. The developer shall, within 90 days after completion of the construction
improvements of the subdivision or approved sections, submit a release of liens Town Secretary with respect to the construction improvements.
(8) Completion deadline. All construction improvements shall be completed within two of the date of the recordation of the plan. The Town Manager may grant extensions request.
(9) Completion requirements. With the exception indicated below, no certificate occupancy of any dwelling house, building or structure within the subdivision shall issued by the Town until all work required by the construction improvements plan have been completed in strict accordance with the approved plans and specifications
and maintained in a condition acceptable to the Town, except that such certificates occupancy may be issued prior to the completion of blacktopping of streets, installing
sidewalks, monuments, as-built drawings and street lights (if applicable), which shall guaranteed through the posting of a bond in accordance with Subsection C(10), below.
(a) The following exception to the above requirement may be granted by the Official with the approval of the Town Manager:
32.Editor's Note: See Ch. 76, Building Construction, and Ch. 225, Zoning.
§ 196-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-24
1:335
A certificate of occupancy may be issued for a dwelling house, building or structure
within the subdivision if that portion of the construction improvements plan related
to that dwelling house, building or structure shall have been completed in strict
accordance with the approved plans and specifications and all required completion
bonds are posted for blacktopping of streets, installing sidewalks, monuments, as-drawings and street lights. Certificates of occupancy for no more than 50% of dwellings, buildings or structures permitted in the approved subdivision or section
of the subdivision shall be issued under this exception. If certificates of occupancy
are issued under this exception, a bond may be required in accord with Subsection
C(10) below, for any uncompleted work required in the construction improvements within the subdivision or section of the subdivision.
(10) Bonding. Before construction within a subdivision begins and prior to the issuance of
building permits, a surety guaranty bond or other security instrument acceptable to approved by the Town Solicitor shall be posted in the amount equal to 150% of the
estimated cost to the Town for work required in the construction improvements plan.
(11) Notification, certification, acceptance and guaranty of construction improvements.
Following the inspection and completion in full of the construction improvements, the
following shall occur:
(a) Appropriate notice to all property owners of record in the subdivision that the
construction improvements are under review by the city for certification as complete
and ready for use. Such notices shall explain that the property owners may provide
comments in writing to the Public Works Department and/or the Council
representative in the district within which the subdivision is located concerning the
construction improvements.
(b) Certification by the Town Manager that the construction improvements are complete
and ready for use according to approved plans and specifications.
(c) For a one-year period beginning on the date of certification by the Town Manager,
the developer shall guarantee to the satisfaction of the Town all facilities specified in
the construction improvements plan. The developer's surety guaranty bond or other
security instrument, required in § 196-24C(10), shall serve as this guaranty.
(d) Following the one-year guaranty period, the Town Secretary shall certify that all
terms and conditions of the agreement, including submission of a satisfactory
release of liens, have been met to the Town's satisfaction.
(e) Following the one-year guaranty period and certification by the Town Secretary, the
Town Manager shall authorize the release of bonds required in § 196-24C(10) of this
chapter.
(12) Streets on Official Map. After their acceptance by Council, the Town Manager shall
direct the incorporation of streets on the Official Town Map.
Chapter 199
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 171. Zoning — See Ch. 225.
§ 196-24 ELSMERE CODE § 196-24
1:336
§ 199-1. Adoption of Swimming Pool and Spa Code.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the Code Enforcement Office of the Town of Elsmere, being marked and
designated as the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2012 edition,
as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as
the Pool and Spa Code of the Town of Elsmere, for regulating and governing
the design, construction, alteration, movement, renovation, replacement,
repair and maintenance of swimming pools, spas, hot tubs, aquatic facilities
and related equipment as herein provided, providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Pool and Spa Code on
file in the office of the Code Enforcement Office are hereby referred to,
adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this legislation, with
the additions, insertions, deletions and changes prescribed in § 199-2 of this
chapter.
§ 199-2. Additions, insertions, deletions and changes to code.
The following sections are hereby revised:
A. In Chapter 1, Part 1, Section 101.1, insert "the Town of Elsmere"
where the code says [NAME OF JURSIDICTION].
B. In Chapter 1, Part 1, Section 102 Applicability, delete Section 102.2
Existing installations in its entirety.
C. In Chapter 1, Part 1, Section 105.6.2, delete the current wording in
its entirety and insert in its place the following; "The fee schedule shall
be established by the Town Manager and shall be amended as needed
and become attached as an appendix to this chapter."33
D. In Chapter 1, Part 1, Section 105.6.3(2), insert "50%" where the
code says [SPECIFY PERCENTAGE].
E. In Chapter 1, Part 1, Section 105.6.3(3), insert "50%" where the
code says [SPECIFY PERCENTAGE].
F. Chapter 1, Part 1, Section 107.4, insert "misdemeanor" where the
code says "[SPECIFY OFFENSE]."
G. In Chapter 1, Part 1, Section 107.4, insert "not less than $75 nor
more than $500" where the code says "not more than [AMOUNT]
dollars."
H. In Chapter 1, Part 1, Section 107.4, insert "30 days" where the code
says [NUMBER OF DAYS].
I. In Chapter 1, Part 1, Section 107.5, insert "$75" in place of the first
[AMOUNT] that appears in this subsection.
J. In Chapter 1, Part 1, Section 107.5, insert "$300" in place of the
second [AMOUNT] that appears in this subsection.
K. In Chapter 1, Part 2, Section 105, insert a new 105.1.1 to read as
follows:
33.Editor's Note: Said fee schedule is on file in the Town offices.
§ 196-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 199-2
1:337
All pools over 24 inches from ground to top of pool shall obtain a permit.
L. In Chapter 2, Section 202 Definitions, in the definition of "aquatic
vessel," replace "12 inches (305 mm)" with "24 inches (610 mm)."
M. In Chapter 3, Section 301: insert a new 301.2 to read as follows:
All aboveground pools are to be placed a minimum of five feet away from
the property line.
N. In Chapter 3, General Compliance, insert a new 303.5 to read as
follows:
All pools which are less than 24 inches from the ground to the top of the
pool shall be emptied when not occupied.
O. In Chapter 3, Section 305.5, delete 305.5 in its entirety and insert a
new 305.5 to read as follows:
Ground pools exceeding 24 inches from the ground to the top of pool
shall be required to have a barrier for the entire perimeter of the pool
and which also complies with Section 305.2.
P. In Chapter 3, Section 320, insert a new 320.4 to read as follows:
All discharge of pool water requires dechlorination prior to discharge.
Q. In Chapter 3, Section 320, insert new 320.5 to read as follows:
All discharge of pool water shall be discharged as to not create a
nuisance to neighboring properties.
§ 199-3. Repealer.
Section 303 of Chapter 3 of the International Property Maintenance Code,
2000 Edition, as published by the International Code Council and adopted
by Chapter 171 of the Code of the Town of Elsmere, Section E4107 of
Chapter 41 of the International Residential Code, 2000 Edition, as
published by the International Code Council and adopted by Chapter 171 of
the Code of the Town of Elsmere and all other ordinances or parts of laws
in conflict herewith, with the exception of § 190-7A(2)(a) of the Code of the
Town of Elsmere, are hereby repealed.
§ 199-4. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this legislation or in the Pool and Spa Code hereby adopted shall
be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or
any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired, or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited
in § 199-3 of this chapter, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of
any character be lost, impaired or affected by this legislation. The Town
of Elsmere hereby adopts the 2012 Edition of the International Swimming
Pool and Spa Code, regulating and governing the design, construction,
alteration, movement, renovation, replacement, repair and maintenance of
swimming pools, spas, hot tubs, aquatic facilities and related equipment in
the Town of Elsmere; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of
fees therefor; repealing Section 303 (Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs) of
§ 199-2 ELSMERE CODE § 199-4
1:338
the 2000 International Property Maintenance Code as adopted by Chapter
171, Article II, of the Code of the Town of Elsmere and all other ordinances
or parts of laws in conflict therewith.
Chapter 204
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Finance — See Ch. 29. Tax delinquent property — See Ch. 206.
§ 199-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 199-4
1:339

ARTICLE I
Penalty for Unpaid Tax Bills
[Adopted 9-4-1958 by Ord. No. 66; amended in its entirety
1-15-1981 by Ord. No. 152]
§ 204-1. Authorization to collect penalty.
On and after October 1, 1958, the Town Finance Director is authorized and
directed to add to each unpaid Town tax bill 6% of the total amount due.
§ 204-2. Additional penalty.
On or about each October 1 after October 1, 1958, the Town Finance
Director is authorized and directed to add to each unpaid Town tax bill the
sum of 6% of the total amount due and owing, including penalties assessed
in prior years.
§ 204-3. Penalty for tax bill in arrears.
The Town Finance Director is authorized and directed to add to each unpaid
Town tax bill an additional sum of 1% of the total amount due and owing for
each month that the tax bill is in arrears.
§ 204-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-3
1:341

ARTICLE II
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 8-8-1968 by Ord. No. 95]
§ 204-4. Definitions.
When used in this article, the following definitions apply:
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing whereby any real estate
within this state, or any interest therein, shall be quitclaimed, granted,
bargained, sold or otherwise conveyed to the grantee.[Amended
12-12-1968 by Ord. No. 97; 5-30-1996 by Ord. No. 326; 12-12-2013
by Ord. No. 573]
"Document" shall not include the following:
(1) Any will;
Any lease other than those described or defined in Subsection B of
this section below;
(2)
(3) Any mortgage;
Any conveyance between corporations operating housing projects
pursuant to Chapter 45 of Title 31 and the shareholders thereof;
(4)
Any conveyance between nonprofit industrial development
agencies and industrial corporations purchasing from them;
(5)
(6) Any conveyance to nonprofit industrial development agencies;
(7) Any conveyance between husband and wife;
Any conveyance between persons who were previously husband
and wife but who have since been divorced, provided that such
conveyance is made after the granting of the final decree in divorce
and the real estate or interest therein subject to such conveyance
was acquired by the husband and wife, or husband or wife, prior to
the granting of the final decree in divorce;
(8)
Any conveyance between parent and child or the spouse of such a
child;
(9)
Any conveyance:
To a trustee, nominee or straw party for the grantor as
beneficial owner;
(a)
For the beneficial ownership of a person other than the grantor
where, if such person were the grantee, no tax would be
imposed upon the conveyance pursuant to this chapter; or
(b)
From a trustee, nominee or straw party to the beneficial
owner;
(c)
(10)
A.
§ 204-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-4
1:343
Any conveyance between a parent corporation and a wholly owned
subsidiary corporation, provided that such conveyance is without
actual consideration;
(11)
(12)Correctional deeds without actual consideration;
Any conveyance to or from the United States or this state, or
to or from any of their instrumentalities, agencies or political
subdivisions and the University of Delaware;
(13)
Any conveyance to or from a corporation, or a partnership, where
the grantor or grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest
in the partnership in the same proportion as the grantor's or
grantee's interest in, or ownership of, the real estate being
conveyed; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply
to any distribution in liquidation or other conveyance resulting
from the partial or complete liquidation of a corporation, unless
the stock of the corporation being liquidated has been held by the
grantor or grantee for more than three years; provided, further,
this subsection shall not apply to any conveyance from a
partnership to its partners unless the partners' interest in the
partnership has been held for more than three years;
(14)
Any conveyance by the owner of previously occupied residential
premises to a builder of new residential premises when such
previously occupied residential premises are taken in trade by such
builder as a part of the consideration from the purchaser of new,
previously unoccupied premises;
(15)
Any conveyance to the lender holding a bona fide mortgage, which
is genuinely in default, either by a sheriff conducting a foreclosure
sale or by the mortgagor in lieu of foreclosure;
(16)
Any conveyance to a religious organization or other body or person
holding title to real estate for a religious organization, if such real
estate will not be used following such transfer by the grantee, or
by any privy of the grantee, for any commercial purpose; provided,
however, that only that portion of the tax which is attributable to
and payable by the religious organization or other body or person
holding title to real estate for a religious organization under 30 Del.
C. § 5402 shall be exempt;
(17)
Any conveyance to or from a volunteer fire company, organized
under the laws of this state; provided, however, that only that
portion of the tax which is attributable to and payable by the
volunteer fire company under 30 Del. C. § 5402 shall be exempt;
(18)
Any conveyance of a "manufactured home" as defined in Section
7003 of Title 25, provided that tax on said conveyance has been
paid under 30 Del. C. § 3002;
(19)
§ 204-4 ELSMERE CODE § 204-4
1:344
Any conveyance without consideration to an organization exempt
from tax under Section 501(c)(3) of the federal Internal Revenue
Code [26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)];
(20)
Any conveyance to a nonprofit conservation organization when the
property is purchased for open space preservation purposes;
(21)
Any conveyance to or from an organization exempt from tax under
§ 501(c)(3) of the federal Internal Revenue Code when the purpose
of said conveyance is to provide owner-occupied housing to lowand
moderate-income households by rehabilitating residential
properties and reselling said properties without profit;
(22)
(23)Any conveyance between siblings, half-siblings or stepsiblings.
The term "document" defined in Subsection A of this section shall
include the following:
Any writing purporting to transfer a title interest or possessory
interest for a term of more than five years in a condominium unit
or any unit properties subject to the Unit Property Act;
(1)
Any writing purporting to transfer a title interest or possessory
interest of any lessee or other person in possession of real estate
owned by the state or other political subdivision thereof;
(2)
Any writing purporting to assign or transfer a leasehold interest
or possessory interest in residential property under a lease for a
term of more than five years. For this purpose, the term "residential
property" means any structure or part of structure which is
intended for residential use and excluding any commercial unit
subject to tax under Paragraph (6) of Subsection (a) of § 2301 of
Title 30 of the Delaware Code, relating to commercial lessors.
(3)
B.
In determining the term of a lease under Subsection B above, it shall be
presumed for the purpose of computing the lease term that any rights
or options to renew or extend will be exercised.
C.
For purposes of the definition of "value" in the case of a document
described in Subsection B under which the consideration is based in
whole or in part on a percentage of the income or receipts to be
received in the future, actual consideration shall include the amounts
actually received under such percentage of income or receipts
provision; provided, however, and notwithstanding any other provisions
of this article, that the tax imposed by this article shall be due and
payable within 30 days after the date such amounts become due and
payable under the agreement.
D.
Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to the broker within the
preceding year as part of the consideration for the purchase of other
residential property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time
E.
§ 204-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-4
1:345
TAX COLLECTOR — The Tax Collector of the Town of Elsmere or any other
person appointed by Council as Deputy Tax Collector for the purposes of
this article. The remuneration of any Deputy Tax Collector or Tax Collectors
shall be fixed by Council at the time of the appointment of such Deputy Tax
Collector of Tax Collectors.[Amended 9-12-1968 by Ord. No. 96]
TRANSFER — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or presenting
for recording of any document whereby title to or interest in real property
located within the Town is transferred or conveyed, regardless of where the
document is executed, delivered or accepted.
VALUE — In the case of any document granting, bargaining, selling or
otherwise conveying any real estate or interest or leasehold interest
therein, the amount of the actual consideration thereof, including liens
or other encumbrances thereon and ground rents, or a commensurate
part of the liens or other encumbrances thereon and ground rents where
such liens or other encumbrances and ground rents also encumber or are
charged against other lands, tenements or hereditaments; provided that,
where such documents shall set forth a small or nominal consideration, the
"value" thereof shall be determined from the price set forth in, or actual
consideration for, the contract of sale or lease, or, in the case of a gift or
any other document without consideration, from the actual monetary worth
of the property granted, bargained, sold or otherwise conveyed, which, in
either event, shall not be less than the amount of the highest assessment of
such lands, tenements or hereditaments for local tax purposes.[Amended
5-30-1996 by Ord. No. 326]
§ 204-5. Taxable conduct. [Amended by Ord. No. 359]
Every person who makes, executes, issues or delivers any document, or in
whose behalf any document is made, executed, issued or delivered, shall
pay therefor and in respect thereof, or for and in respect of the vellum,
parchment or paper upon which such document is written or printed, a
tax at the rate of 1.5% of the value of the property represented by such
document, which tax shall be payable at the time of the making, execution,
issuance or delivery of such document; provided, however, that no more
than 1.5% tax shall be levied on any single transfer of property.34
§ 204-5.1. (Reserved)35
§ 204-6. Payment of tax.
of the transfer to the broker shall be given to the broker toward the
amount of the tax due upon the transfer. If the tax due upon the transfer
from the licensed real estate broker is greater than the credit given for
the prior transfer, the difference shall be paid, and if the credit allowed
is greater than the amount of the tax due, no refund shall be allowed.
34.Editor's Note: Former Subsections (2) and (3), which immediately followed this
subsection, were repealed 12-12-1968 by Ord. No. 97.
35.Editor's Note: Former § 204-5.1, First-time home buyer exemption, added 5-13-2010 by
Ord. No. 515, was repealed 2-9-2012 by Ord. No. 544.
§ 204-4 ELSMERE CODE § 204-6
1:346
A. The payment of the tax imposed by this article shall be evidenced by
the affixing of a documentary stamp or stamps to every document by
the person making, executing, issuing or delivering such document,
regardless of the situs of the actual making, executing, issuing or
delivering of such document.
B. Such stamps shall be affixed in such manner that their removal will
require the continued application of steam or water, and the person
using or affixing such stamps shall cause such stamps to be canceled in
such manner that they may not be used again, either:
(1) By writing or stamping or by causing to be written or stamped
thereon the initials of his name and the date upon which such stamps
are affixed or used; or
(2) By complying with such other method of cancellation as the Tax
Collector may prescribe.
C. Sheriff's sale. The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid and have
priority out of the proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before
any other obligation, claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale,
and of the writ upon which the sale is made, and the sheriff or other
officer conducting said sale shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the
first moneys paid to him in connection therewith, unless previously paid
by any party; provided, however, that any tax imposed by the State of
Delaware shall have priority over the tax improved under this article.
D. The value for determining the tax shall be the highest of the following:
(1) The bid price.
(2) The amount of the mortgage not in excess of the fair value of the real
estate.
(3) The estimated full value.
§ 204-7. Additional functions of Tax Collector.
In addition to the Tax Collector's other duties:
A. The Tax Collector shall prepare and furnish adhesive stamps of such
denominations and in such quantities as may be necessary for the
payment of the tax imposed and shall make provisions for the sale of
such stamps in such places as he may deem necessary.
B. The Tax Collector may by regulation provide for the evidence of the
payment of the tax to be shown on the document by means other than
the affixing of documentary stamps.
C. The Tax Collector is charged with the enforcement of this article and is
authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce
regulations relating to:
(1) The method to be used in affixing or canceling of stamps in
substitution for, or in addition to, the method and means provided in
this article.
(2) The denominations and sale of stamps.
(3) Any other matter or thing pertaining to the administration and
enforcement of this article.
§ 204-8. Recordation.
§ 204-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-8
1:347
A. No document shall be recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds
unless a documentary stamp or stamps shall have been affixed thereto
as provided in this article.
B. The affixation of stamps to a document upon which a tax is imposed by
this article, when lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds,
shall be an affirmation on the part of the transfer or transferors that the
true, full and complete value of the transaction if fully reflected in the
amount of the stamps affixed thereto.
C. Every document when lodged with or presented to the Recorder of
Deeds shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by an affidavit
executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete
value thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to
tax under this article.
§ 204-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-30-1996 by Ord. No.
326]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Make, execute, deliver, accept or present for recording or cause to
be made, executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording
any document without the full amount of tax thereon being duly paid;
(2) Make use of any documentary stamp to denote payment of the realty
transfer tax without canceling such stamp as required by § 204-6B or
as prescribed by the Tax Collector;
(3) Fail, neglect or refuse to comply with or violate the rules and
regulations prescribed, adopted and promulgated by the Tax
Collector under the provisions of this article;
(4) Fraudulently cut, tear or remove from a document any documentary
stamp or other evidence of payment of the realty transfer tax;
(5) Fraudulently affix to any document upon which tax is imposed by this
article any documentary stamp or other evidence of payment of the
realty transfer tax which has been removed from any other document
upon which tax is imposed by this article, or any documentary stamp
or other evidence of payment of the realty transfer tax of insufficient
value, or any forged or counterfeited stamp or other evidence of
payment of the realty transfer tax or any impression of any forged or
counterfeited stamp, die, plate or other article;
(6) Willfully remove or alter the cancellation marks of any documentary
stamp, or restore any such documentary stamp, with intent to use
or cause the same to be used after it has already been used, or
knowingly buy, sell, offer for sale, or give away any such altered or
restored stamp to any persons for use, or knowingly use the same;
(7) Knowingly have in his possession any altered or restored
documentary stamp which has been removed from any document
upon which tax is imposed by this article; provided that the
possession of such stamps shall be prima facie evidence of an intent
to violate the provisions of this clause;
§ 204-8 ELSMERE CODE § 204-9
1:348
(8) Knowingly or willfully prepare, keep, sell, offer for sale or have in his
possession any forged or counterfeited documentary stamps; or,
(9) Accept for recording in the office of any Recorder of Deeds any
document upon which the realty transfer tax is imposed, without the
proper documentary stamp or other evidence of payment of the tax
affixed thereto, as required by this article and as is indicated in such
document or accompanying affidavit.
B. Whoever violates this article shall be fined not more than $500 and
imprisoned for not more than one year, or both.
C. The Superior Court shall have jurisdiction over offenses under this
section.
§ 204-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-9
1:349

ARTICLE III
Senior Citizens and Disabled Tax Exemption
[Adopted 1-14-1992 by Ord. No. 281]
§ 204-10. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISABLED — A person who is unable to engage in any substantial gainful
activity by reason of any medically determinable physical or mental
impairment which can be expected to result in death or has lasted or can
be expected to last for a continuous period of not less than 12 months, or
blindness; and the term "blindness" means central visual acuity of 20/200
or less in the better eye with the use of a correcting lens. An eye which
is accompanied by a limitation in the fields of vision such that the widest
diameter of the visual field subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees
shall be considered for purposes of this definition as having a central visual
acuity of 20/200 or less.36
HOUSEHOLD INCOME — The income, as defined in the "income" definition
of this chapter, of each and every person residing in the residential property
for which the application has been made, regardless if they are related
or not, married or not, children or not, contributing to the household or
not.[Added 10-13-2004 by Ord. No. 434]
INCOME — All income from whatever source derived, including but not
limited to realized capital gains and, in their entirety, pension, annuity
and retirement benefits, as defined herein, for any tax year for which an
exemption is claimed, "income" shall be determined to be equal in amount
to the income received during the calendar year or the taxpayer's fiscal
year ended immediately preceding December 31 of the pretax year, but no
taxpayer shall use a fiscal-year basis unless he so elects to do and files his
federal income tax return on such basis. Specifically excluded from being
calculated as income shall be any income received as a benefit from the
Social Security Act, and disability benefits for those persons "disabled" as
well as any income received as a benefit from any railroad, police or fire
department pension plan and any pension income from the Federal Civil
Service Retirement System (CSRS) pension plan.[Amended 3-8-2007 by
Ord. No. 476; 5-10-2007 by Ord. No. 478]
PRETAX YEAR — The calendar year immediately preceding the tax year.
RESIDENT — One legally domiciled within the Town of Elsmere for a period
of three years immediately preceding December 31 of the pretax year. Mere
seasonal or temporary residence within the Town of Elsmere, of whatever
duration, shall not constitute domicile within the Town for the purposes
of this article. Absence from this Town for a period of 12 months shall be
36.Editor's Note: The definition of "family," which immediately followed this definition, was
repealed 10-13-2004 by Ord. No. 434.
§ 204-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-10
1:351
prima facie evidence of abandonment of domicile in this Town. The burden
of establishing legal domicile within the Town shall be upon the claimant.
SINGLE HOUSEHOLD INCOME — The income, as defined in the "income"
definition of this chapter, of a single person residing alone in the residential
property for which the application has been made.[Added 10-13-2004 by
Ord. No. 434]
TAX YEAR — The calendar year in which Town real estate tax is due and
payable.
§ 204-11. Qualifications; amount of exemption. [Amended 3-9-1995
by Ord. No. 318; Ord. No. 369; 5-10-2001 by Ord. No. 391;
10-13-2004 by Ord. No. 434; 8-11-2005 by Ord. No. 450; 1-14-2016
by Ord. No. 611]
Every person, a resident of the Town of Elsmere of the age of 65 or more
years, or disabled, having an income of not more than $24,500 per year
in single household income and an income of not more than $30,000 per
year in household income, and residing in a dwelling house owned by him
or her which is a constituent part of his real property, shall be entitled, for
proper claim being made therefor, to exemption from taxation on such real
property to assessed valuation not to exceed $32,428.50 in aggregate. No
such exemption shall be in addition to any other exemption to which said
person may be entitled, and no such exemption shall be permitted where
the property for which the exemption is being sought has property taxes
which, according to the records of the Town at the time of application or
certification of income for continuance of the exemption, are delinquent.
§ 204-12. Application for exemption. [Amended 3-9-1995 by Ord.
No. 318]
An application for exemption under this article shall be filed with the Town
Manager of the Town of Elsmere on or before April 15 of the tax year.
§ 204-13. Contents of application. [Amended 3-9-1995 by Ord. No.
318]
A. Every fact essential to support a claim for exemption under this article
shall exist on December 31 of the pretax year. Every application by a
claimant therefor shall establish that he was, on December 31 of the
pretax year, a resident of the Town of Elsmere for the period required,
the owner of a dwelling house which is a constituent part of the real
property for which the exemption is claimed and residing in said
dwelling house. Such application shall also establish that his income for
the yearly period as provided by this article qualifies under § 204-11
above.
B. Every applicant shall establish that he or she will be, on or before July 1
of the tax year, 65 years of age or more or disabled.
§ 204-10 ELSMERE CODE § 204-14
1:352
§ 204-14. Allowance of exemption.
If an application is approved by the Town Manager, he shall allow an
exemption from taxation against the assessed valuation of the real property
to the claimant in the amount of the claim approved by him.
§ 204-15. Continuance of exemption.
A claim having been filed with and allowed by the Town Manager shall
continue in force from year to year thereafter without the necessity for
further claim as long as the claimant shall be entitled to exemption under
this article, but the claimant shall be required yearly to establish his
income, and the Town Manager may at any time require the filing of a new
application or such proof as he shall deem necessary to establish the right
of the claimant to continuance of the exemption. It shall be the duty of
every claimant to inform the Town Manager of any change in his status or
property which may affect his right to continuance of the exemption.
§ 204-16. Tenants in common or joint tenants.
A. Where title to property on which an exemption is held by claimant and
another or others, either as tenants in common or as joint tenants, the
claimant shall not be allowed an exemption against his interest in said
property in excess of the assessed valuation of his proportionate share in
said property, which proportionate share, for the purposes of this article,
shall be deemed to be equal to that of each of the other tenants, unless it
is shown that the interests in question are not equal, in which event the
claimant's proportionate share shall be as shown.
B. Nothing in this article shall preclude more than one tenant, whether title
be held in common or joint tenancy, from claiming exemption against the
property so held, but no more than the equivalent of one full exemption
in regard to such property shall be allowed in any year, and in any case
in which the claimants cannot agree as to the apportionment thereof, the
exemption shall be apportioned between or among them in proportion
to their interest. Property held by husband and wife, as tenants by the
entirety, shall be deemed wholly owned by each tenant, but not more
than one exemption in regard to such property shall be allowed in any
year.
C. Right to claim exemption under this article shall extend to property the
title to which is held by a partnership to the extent of the claimant's
interest as a partner therein, and by a guardian, trustee, committee,
conservator or other fiduciary for any person who would otherwise be
entitled to claim exemption under this article, but not to property the
title to which is held by a corporation.
§ 204-17. Rules and regulations.
The Town Manager of the Town of Elsmere may promulgate such rules
and regulations and prescribe such forms as he shall deem necessary to
implement this article. He may, in his discretion, eliminate the necessity for
§ 204-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-17
1:353
sworn application, in which event all declarations shall be subject to the
penalties provided by law for perjury.
§ 204-18. Oath.
The Town Manager of the Town of Elsmere and his duly designated
assistants may take and administer the oath, where required, on any claim
for exemption under this article, and no charge shall be made for the taking
of any affidavit or the preparation of any form required by this article.
§ 204-19. Appeals.
The aggrieved taxpayer may appeal from the disposition of an exemption
claim under this article in the same manner as is provided for appeals from
assessments generally.
§ 204-20. Effective date.
The first tax year upon which this article shall apply shall be the calendar
year 1992 (fiscal year 1993), and shall apply to all qualified property owners
over age 65 years or disabled.
§ 204-17 ELSMERE CODE § 204-20
1:354
ARTICLE IV
Tax Payment Installment Plan
[Adopted 11-9-2006 by Ord. No. 474]
§ 204-21. Authority to enter into agreements.
The Town Manager is authorized to enter into agreements with respect to
any unpaid Town tax bill, including any penalties and interest, to provide
for the payment of the amounts due by installments. All such arrangements
shall be subject to the provisions of this Article IV.
§ 204-22. Terms.
Any tax payment installment agreement authorized by this article should
contain the following provisions:
A. The owner of the property from which taxes are due shall guarantee the
payment of the total amounts to be paid, including any attorneys' fees,
in the event of default;
B. In the event of default in the payment of any installment due under the
tax payment installment agreement, the total amount provided for in
that agreement, together with attorneys' fees in the amount of 10% of
the total amount due, shall become due immediately if the default is not
cured within 30 days of the date any installment is not paid on the date
it is due;
C. The amounts due shall include all penalties and interest up to the date
of the agreement and shall also include per-annum interest on the total
amount due, computed on the basis of the amortized amount outstanding
and at the rate provided by 6 Del. C. § 2301;
D. The installments shall be calculated so as to provide for full payment
of all amounts due within 36 months of the date of the tax payment
installment agreement; and
E. The installments shall be due and payable without any further notice
or demand by the Town of Elsmere on the dates provided for in the
agreement.
§ 204-23. Application fee. [Amended 3-8-2012 by Ord. No. 545]
A. Any person who applies for a tax payment installment agreement shall
be eligible to enter into such an agreement upon the payment of an
application fee of $100. Any person paying this fee who completes the
plan he or she entered into without failing to meet any of the terms
or conditions of that plan shall have the option to have his or her
application fee returned or to have his or her application fee applied
towards his or her final payments; and
B. The Town Manager may waive the payment of this fee at the time the
application is made; however, if the applicant fails to meet any of the
terms or conditions of that plan, the application fee shall be added to the
total amount due.
§ 204-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-24
1:355
§ 204-24. When effective.
This article shall be effective immediately upon adoption.
§ 204-24 ELSMERE CODE § 204-24
1:356
ARTICLE V
Collection of Fees for Delinquent Taxes
[Adopted 3-10-2005 by Ord. No. 444; amended in its entirety
2-9-2009 by Ord. No. 502]
§ 204-25. Fees and costs.
The Office of Finance shall assess and collect any and all fees and costs,
including but not limited to reasonable attorneys' fees, filing fees and court
costs, title search fees, and service-of-process charges that are incurred by
the Town of Elsmere in connection with the collection of any delinquent
taxes, whether incurred by filing a lien notice, compelling a monition sale,
or enforcing the Town's rights by another legal process.
§ 204-26. Fees shall constitute lien. [Amended 4-11-2013 by Ord.
No. 565]
All fees levied by the Town of Elsmere, including but not limited to charges
imposed for code violations, delinquent permit and licensing fees, vacant
property fees and charges for waste material removal or otherwise, as well
as those defined in § 204-25 of this chapter, shall be deemed to be tax liens
against a taxpayer’s property or properties pursuant to 25 Del. C. § 2901
and shall be collected in the same manner as other taxes due to the Town of
Elsmere.
§ 204-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-26
1:357

ARTICLE VI
Base Tax Credit
[Adopted 4-10-2014 by Ord. No. 576]
§ 204-27. Qualification for credit.
Any person(s) who qualifies to receive the Town's senior citizens and
disabled tax exemption and who meets additional qualifications shall also be
entitled to receive a base tax credit which will be a reduction in the amount
of the base tax those who qualify for the credit are charged.
§ 204-28. Amount of credit.
The amount of a base tax credit shall be as follows:
A. Those with a modified income which is between $0 and $20,000 will
receive a reduction in their base tax which is equal to 55% of the Town’s
base tax rate which shall be known as the “base tax credit.” [Amended
1-14-2016 by Ord. No. 611]
B. Those with a modified income which is between $20,001 and $38,000
will receive a reduction in their base tax which is equal to 30% of the
Town’s base tax rate which shall be known as the “base tax credit.”
[Amended 1-14-2016 by Ord. No. 611]
C. Those with a modified income which is more than $38,000.00 will not be
eligible to receive the base tax credit.
§ 204-29. Determining modified income.
Modified income for the purpose of qualifying for the base tax credit shall
be determined by considering all income from whatever source derived,
including but not limited to realized capital gains and, in their entirety,
pension, annuity and retirement benefits, as defined herein, for any tax year
for which an exemption is claimed, "income" shall be determined to be equal
in amount to the income received during the calendar year or the taxpayer's
fiscal year ended immediately preceding December 31 of the pretax year,
but no taxpayer shall use a fiscal-year basis unless he so elects to do so and
files his federal income tax return on such basis.
§ 204-30. Application.
Application for the base tax credit shall be made in addition to the
applicant's application for the Town's senior citizens and disabled tax
exemption and shall be filed with the Town Manager of the Town of Elsmere
on or before April 15 of the tax year.
§ 204-31. Continuance of credit.
Application for the base tax credit must be made annually so that income
may be confirmed.
§ 204-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-31
1:359

ARTICLE VII
Review of Income Levels and Discounts
[Adopted 1-14-2016 by Ord. No. 611]
§ 204-32. Re-evaluation.
The income levels and discounts offered by this chapter of the code shall be
re-evaluated every five years by the Mayor and Council with the first such
review to take place in January of the year 2021.
§ 204-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-32
1:361
Chapter 206
TAX-DELINQUENT PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensed businesses — See Ch. 131. Taxation — See Ch. 204.
§ 206-1. No permit or license for tax delinquent property.
Notwithstanding any other provision of the Code of the Town of Elsmere or
any ordinance thereof, no building permit, license, or authorization shall be
issued to any person who is the owner of record of any property for which
property taxes are then delinquent.
§ 206-2. Specific application. [Amended 9-18-2003 by Ord. No. 420]
Without limiting the scope of the general prohibition in § 206-1, this chapter
shall apply to bar issuance of any license or permit.
§ 206-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OWNER OF RECORD — Includes any person that is a holder of a twentyfive-
percent interest in any corporation, partnership or other entity which is
registered as the record owner of property within the Town of Elsmere.
PERSON — Includes any corporation, partnership or other entity in which
such an owner of record has a twenty-five-percent interest.
§ 206-4. Exemption. [Added 10-13-2016 by Ord. No. 619]
The prohibition against the issuance of permits or licenses contained in
§ 206-1 of this chapter shall not apply when the permit is made in an
attempt to improve the life or living conditions of a person with a physical
disability or who is handicapped.
Chapter 209
VACANT PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 76.
Nuisance properties — See Ch. 145.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 171.
Tax delinquent property — See Ch. 206.
§ 204-32 ELSMERE CODE § 206-4
1:362
ARTICLE I
Registration
[Adopted 8-12-2010 by Ord. No. 521]
§ 209-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article requiring the registration of all vacant buildings,
dwellings and structures, and the payment of registration fees is to assist
the Town, and particularly the Code Enforcement Department in protecting
the public health, safety and welfare, to monitor the number of vacant
buildings in the Town, to assess the effects of the condition of those
buildings on nearby businesses and the neighborhoods in which they are
located, particularly in light of fire safety hazards and unlawful, temporary
occupancy by transients, including illicit drug users and traffickers, and to
require of the owners of such vacant buildings their registration and the
payment of related fees, and to promote substantial efforts to rehabilitate
such vacant buildings. The provisions of this section are applicable to the
owners of such vacant buildings as set forth herein and are in addition to
and not in lieu of any and all other applicable provisions of the Code of the
Town of Elsmere, the health, sanitation, building and property codes, and
any other applicable provisions of the State of Delaware.
§ 209-2. Definitions.
Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words and phrases
shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them as follows:
BOARDED — A building or structure subject to the provisions of this section
shall be deemed to be "boarded" if in place of one or more exterior doors,
other than a storm door, or of one or more windows, there is a sheet or
sheets of plywood or other durable material covering the space intended for
such door or window.[Amended 11-11-2010 by Ord. No. 524]
EXTERIOR MAINTENANCE AND MAJOR SYSTEMS — The safe, lawful and
secure maintenance of the facade, windows, doors, roof, and other parts
of the exterior of the building and the maintenance of its major systems
consisting of the roof, the electrical and plumbing systems, the water supply
system, the sewer system, the sidewalk and driveway, of any secondary
building, dwelling or structure, if any.[Amended 11-11-2010 by Ord. No.
524]
OCCUPIED — Any building or structure shall be deemed to be occupied if
one or more persons actually conducts a lawful business or resides in all or
any part of the building as the licensed business-occupant, or as the legal
or equitable owner/occupant(s) or tenant(s) on a permanent, nontransient
basis, or any combination of the same; the regular receipt of delivery of
regular mail through the U.S. Postal Service; proof of continual telephone,
electric, gas, heating, water and sewer services; a valid Town business
license; or the most recent, federal, state, or income tax statements
indicating that the subject property is the official business or residence
§ 209-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-2
1:363
address of the person or business claiming occupancy; or proof of a
prerental inspection.
OPEN — A building or structure subject to the provisions of this section
shall be deemed to be "open" if any one or more exterior doors other
than a storm door is broken, open and/or closed but, without a properly
functioning lock to secure it, or if one or more windows is broken or not
capable of being locked and secured from intrusion, or any combination of
the same.
OWNER — An owner of the freehold of the premises or any lesser estate
therein, a mortgagee, a vendee-in-possession, assignee of rents, receiver,
executor, trustee, lessee, agent or any other person, firm or corporation that
is directly or indirectly in control of a building subject to the provisions of
this section.
VACANT — A building or structure shall be deemed to be vacant if no
person or persons actually currently conduct a lawfully licensed business,
or lawfully reside or live in any part of the building as the legal or equitable
owner(s) or tenant-occupant(s), or owner-occupants or tenant(s) on a
permanent, nontransient basis.
§ 209-3. Applicability; registration statement required; fees.
A. The requirements of this article shall be applicable to each owner of any
building, structure, dwelling or apartment that shall have been vacant
for more than 45 consecutive days and to each owner of a residential
property consisting of one or more vacant dwellings that shall have been
vacant for more than 45 consecutive days. [Amended 11-11-2010 by
Ord. No. 524]
B. Each such owner shall cause to be filed a notarized registration
statement, which shall include the street address and parcel number
of each such vacant building, the names and addresses of all owners,
as hereinafter described, and any other information deemed necessary
by the Town Manager. The registration fee as required by this article
section shall be billed by the Finance Department and shall be paid by
January 1 of each year. For purposes of this section, the following shall
also be applicable:
(1) If the owner is a corporation, the registration statement shall provide
the names and residence addresses of all officers and directors of the
corporation and shall be accompanied by a copy of the most recent
annual franchise tax report filed with the Secretary of State;
(2) If an estate, the name and business address of the executor of the
estate;
(3) If a trust, the name and address of all trustees, grantors, and
beneficiaries;
(4) If a partnership, the names and residence addresses of all partners
with an interest of 10% or greater;
(5) If any other form of unincorporated association, the names and
residence addresses of all principals with an interest of 10% or
greater;
§ 209-2 ELSMERE CODE § 209-3
1:364
(6) If an individual person, the name and residence address of that
individual person.
C. Local agent. If none of the persons listed, as above, is shown at an
address within the state, the registration statement also shall provide
the name and address of a person who resides within the state and
who is authorized to accept service of process on behalf of the owners
and who shall be designated as a responsible local party or agent,
both for purposes of notification in the event of an emergency affecting
the public health, safety or welfare and for purposes of service of any
and all notices or registration statements as herein authorized and in
connection herewith.
D. Registration shall be required for all vacant buildings, whether vacant
and secure, vacant and open, or vacant and boarded, and shall be
required whenever any building has remained vacant for 45 consecutive
days or more. In no instance shall the registration of a vacant building
and the payment of registration fees be construed to exonerate the
owner, agent, or responsible party from responsibility for compliance
with any other building code or housing code requirement. One
registration statement may be filed to include all vacant buildings of the
owner so registering. The owner of the vacant property as of November
15 of each calendar year shall be responsible for the payment of the
nonrefundable registration fee.
E. Notice. [Added 3-14-2013 by Ord. No. 56337]
(1) Additionally, upon every vacant property there shall be posted in
a prominent location not more than 10 feet from the front and, if
present, the rear entrances to the property, a notice which shall
contain a minimum of the following information:
(a) The name and address of the person(s) legally responsible for the
property.
(b) The name, address, and phone number of a local person or
company which is authorized by whoever has legal authority over
the property to address emergency situations which may occur
at the property and who can physically be at the property within
one hour of being notified of an emergency.
(2) The notice shall be no smaller than six inches by six inches and shall
be protected from the elements so that it will not fade or otherwise
become unreadable. At all times the person(s) legally responsible
for the property shall ensure that the information contained on the
notice is accurate and current.
F. Once each quarter the Finance Department shall bill 25% of the total
amount due in accordance with the schedule set forth in § 209-3F(1).
These billings shall occur on January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1 of
each year. The amount due at each billing shall be determined by the
length of time the property has been vacant at the time of that particular
quarterly billing. [Amended 10-8-2015 by Ord. No. 605]
(1) Two hundred and fifty dollars for properties that are vacant for more
than 45 days but less than one year.
37.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection E as Subsection F.
§ 209-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-3
1:365
(2) Five hundred dollars for properties that are vacant for at least one
year but less than two years.
(3) One thousand dollars for properties that are vacant for at least two
years but less than three years.
(4) Two thousand dollars for properties that are vacant for at least three
years but less than five years.
(5) Three thousand five hundred dollars for properties that are vacant
for at least five years but less than 10 years.
(6) Five thousand dollars for properties that are vacant for at least 10
years, plus an additional $500 for each year in excess of 10 years.
§ 209-4. Appeals.
The owner shall have the right to appeal the imposition of the registration
fees to the Town of Elsmere's Board of Adjustment.
§ 209-5. Waiver of registration fee.
A. A one-time waiver of the registration fee may be granted by the Town
Manager based upon an application by the owner if the owner:
(1) Demonstrates with satisfactory proof that he/she is in the process of
demolition, rehabilitation, or other substantial repair of the vacant
building; and
(2) Objectively demonstrates the anticipated length of time for the
demolition, rehabilitation, or other substantial repair of the vacant
building; or
(3) Provides satisfactory proof that he/she was actively attempting to
sell or lease the property during the vacancy period.
B. Two-year waiver. Upon application by the owner and satisfaction of
Subsection A(1), (2) or (3) above, the Town Manager may grant a twoyear
waiver of the registration fee if the owner meets the criteria for
non-profit organizations as defined by Section 501(C)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code.
§ 209-6. Delinquent registration fees.
After the owner is given notice of the amount of the registration fee due,
except for those owners that have properly perfected an appeal, and the
owner fails to pay the amount due, said amount shall constitute a debt due
and owing to the Town, and the Town may commence a civil action to collect
such the unpaid debt.
§ 209-7. Amendment of registration statement.
If the status of the registration information changes during the course of
any calendar year, it is the responsibility of the owner, responsible party,
or agent for same to contact the Code Enforcement Department in writing
within 30 days of the occurrence of such change and make it aware of the
information that has changed.
§ 209-3 ELSMERE CODE § 209-8
1:366
§ 209-8. Inspection of property required. [Added 11-11-2010 by
Ord. No. 524]
The owner of any vacant property shall insure that the property is inspected
at least weekly to ensure that the property is being maintained in a safe,
secure and code compliant condition. Should evidence be found that
indicates forced entry has been made to a vacant property, the police shall
be notified immediately.
§ 209-9. Exceptions. [Amended 11-11-2010 by Ord. No. 524]
This section shall not apply to:
A. Any building owned by the United States, the State of Delaware, New
Castle County, or the Town.
B. Apartment houses as defined by Chapter 182, § 182-1, of the Code of the
Town of Elsmere. [Added 10-10-2013 by Ord. No. 572]
§ 209-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-11-2010 by Ord.
No. 524]
The failure or refusal for any reason of any owner, or agent of an owner
acting on behalf of the owner, to register a vacant building, to secure and
maintain in a safe condition any vacant building, or to pay any fees required
to be paid pursuant to the provisions of this article, within 30 days after
they become due, shall constitute a violation punishable by a fine in the
amount of not less than $100 nor more than $500 for each failure or refusal
to register, or for each failure or refusal to pay a required vacant building
fee, as applicable. In such cases, whenever the minimum fine of $100 is
imposed, it shall not be subject to suspension or reduction for any reason.
§ 209-11. Relief. [Added 7-11-2013 by Ord. No. 567]
A. The owner of any property aggrieved by any part of this article may make
a request to the Town Manager for relief from that part of the article.
B. After hearing from the person(s) asking for the relief, the Town Manager
may grant the requested relief, grant a mutually agreed-to modification
to the article or deny the request.
§ 209-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-11
1:367

ARTICLE II
Mortgage Defaults, Foreclosures, Tax Liens and Transfers
[Adopted 8-13-2015 by Ord. No. 59938]
§ 209-12. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of the Mayor and Council to establish a process
to address the deterioration and blight of neighborhoods caused by an
increasing amount of abandoned properties and properties with defaulted
mortgages located within Elsmere, and to identify, regulate, limit and
reduce the number of these properties located within Elsmere. It is
Elsmere's further intent to establish a registration program for these
properties as a mechanism to protect neighborhoods from becoming
blighted due to the lack of adequate maintenance and security of registrable
property.
§ 209-13. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this article, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
ABANDONED PROPERTY —
ACCESSIBLE PROPERTY/STRUCTURE — A property that is accessible
through a compromised/breached gate, fence, wall, etc., or a structure that
is unsecured and/or breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior
space by unauthorized persons.
ANNUAL REGISTRATION — Twelve months from the date of the first action
that required registration, as determined by the Elsmere Code Enforcement
Properties that are accessible properties or have broken or severely
damaged windows, doors, walls, or roofs which create hazardous
conditions and encourage trespassing; or
A.
Properties that have one or more exterior doors (other than a storm
door) or one or more windows where there is a sheet or sheets of
plywood or other durable material covering the space intended for such
door or window; or
B.
Properties cited for a public nuisance pursuant to the Elsmere Code
Chapter 145; or
C.
Properties that endanger the public's health, safety, or welfare because
the properties or improvements thereon are dilapidated, deteriorated,
or violate minimum health and safety standards or lack maintenance as
required by the applicable codes.
D.
38.Editor's Note: This ordinance stated that registration and penalty fees outlined within may
be modified by a resolution passed and adopted by Elsmere Council. This ordinance also
stated that it is intended to work in conjunction with and not in conflict with Ch. 209, Art.
I. Should the provisions of the two be inconsistent, the more restrictive provision shall
apply.
§ 209-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-13
1:369
Department, or its designee, and every subsequent 12 months. The date of
the initial registration may be different than the date of the first action that
required registration.
APPLICABLE CODES — Include, but are not limited to, the Elsmere Zoning
Code, the Property Maintenance Code, and the state, county and Elsmere
building and fire codes.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any law enforcement officer, building official,
zoning inspector, code enforcement officer, fire inspector or building
inspector, or other person authorized by Elsmere to enforce the applicable
code(s).
FORECLOSURE — The legal process by which a mortgagee, or other
lienholder, terminates a property owner's equitable right of redemption to
obtain legal and equitable title to the real property pledged as security for a
debt or the real property subject to the lien. This definition shall include, but
is not limited to, public notice of default, a deed-in-lieu of foreclosure, sale
to the mortgagee or lienholder, certificate of title and all other processes,
activities and actions, by whatever name, associated with the described
process. The process is not concluded until the property obtained by the
mortgagee, lienholder, or their designee, by certificate of title, or any other
means, is sold to a nonrelated bona fide purchaser in an arm's length
transaction to satisfy the debt or lien.
LOCAL PROPERTY MANAGEMENT COMPANY — A property manager,
property maintenance company or similar entity responsible for the
maintenance and security of registrable real property within 20 driving
miles of Elsmere's limits. Upon review of credentials the Town Manager, or
his designee, may allow a nonlocal property manager to be listed.
MORTGAGEE — The creditor, including but not limited to trustees;
mortgage service companies; lenders in a mortgage agreement; any agent,
servant, or employee of the creditor; any successor in interest; or any
assignee of the creditor's rights, interests or obligations under the
mortgage agreement.
OWNER — Any person, legal entity or other party having any ownership
interest, whether legal or equitable, in real property. This term shall also
apply to any person, legal entity or agent responsible for the construction,
maintenance or operation of the property involved.
PROPERTY MANAGEMENT COMPANY — A local property manager,
property maintenance company or similar entity responsible for the
maintenance of registrable real property.
REAL PROPERTY — Any improved residential or commercial land,
buildings, leasehold improvements and anything affixed to the land, or
portion thereof identified by a property parcel identification number,
located in the limits of Elsmere.
REGISTRABLE PROPERTY — Any abandoned property (as defined in this
article) or real property located in Elsmere, whether vacant or occupied,
that is encumbered by a mortgage in default, is subject to an ongoing
§ 209-13 ELSMERE CODE § 209-13
1:370
foreclosure action by the mortgagee or trustee, is subject to an application
for a tax deed or pending tax lien sale, or has been the subject of a
foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a
mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred under
a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. The designation of a property as
"registrable" shall remain in place until such time as the property is no
longer abandoned or the foreclosure action has been dismissed and any
default on the mortgage has been cured.
VACANT — Any building or structure that is not legally occupied. Occupants
of properties subsequent to a foreclosure sale without a valid lease are
considered illegal occupants.
§ 209-14. Applicability.
These sections shall be considered cumulative and not superseding or
subject to any other law or provision for same, but rather be an additional
remedy available to Elsmere above and beyond any other state, county or
local provisions for same.
§ 209-15. Establishment of registry.
Elsmere or its designee shall establish a registry cataloging each
abandoned property or real property subject to foreclosure within Elsmere,
containing the information required by this article.
§ 209-16. Registration of defaulted mortgage real property and
abandoned property.
A. Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within
Elsmere shall perform an inspection of the property to determine
vacancy or occupancy, upon default by the mortgagor. Any owner of
any abandoned property shall perform an inspection of the property
to determine if it is classified as abandoned. The mortgagee or owner
of any abandoned property shall, within 10 days of the inspection,
register the property with the Elsmere Code Office or its designee, on
forms or other manner as directed, and indicate whether the property
is vacant or occupied. A separate registration is required for each
property, whether it is found to be abandoned or under foreclosure.
B. Registration pursuant to this section shall contain the name, direct
mailing address, a direct contact name, telephone number, and e-mail
address for the owner of abandoned property, mortgagee, and the
servicer, and the name and twenty-four-hour contact phone number of
the local property management company responsible for the security
and maintenance of the property.
C. Mortgagees or owners who have existing registrable property on the
effective date of this article have 30 calendar days from the effective
date to register the property with the Code Enforcement Department,
or its designee, on forms or other manner as directed, and indicate
whether the property is vacant or occupied. A separate registration
§ 209-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-16
1:371
is required for each property, whether it is abandoned or under
foreclosure.
D. If the mortgage on a registrable property is sold or transferred, the
new mortgagee is subject to all the terms of this article and within five
days of the transfer register the property and pay a registration fee in
accordance with this article. Any previous unpaid annual registration
fees are the responsibility of the new mortgagee or trustee and are due
and payable with their initial registration.
E. If the owner of a foreclosed or abandoned real property sells or
transfers the property to a non-arm's-length related person or entity,
the transferee is subject to all the terms of this article and within five
days of the transfer register the property and pay a registration fee in
accordance with this article. Any previous unpaid annual registration
fees are the responsibility of the new registrable property owner and
are due and payable with their initial registration.
F. As long as the property is registrable it shall be inspected by the
mortgagee, or designee, monthly. If an inspection shows a change in the
property's occupancy status the mortgagee shall, within 10 days of that
inspection, update the occupancy status of the property registration.
G. A nonrefundable annual registration fee established by resolution of
the Elsmere Council shall accompany each registration pursuant to this
article.
H. All registration fees must be paid directly from the mortgagee, trustee,
servicer, or owner. Third-party registration fees are not allowed without
the consent of Elsmere and/or its authorized designee.
I. Properties subject to this article shall remain under the annual
registration requirement, and the inspection, security and maintenance
standards of this article as long as they are registrable.
J. Until the mortgage or lien on the property in question is satisfied,
or legally discharged, the desire to no longer pursue foreclosure, the
filing of a dismissal of lis pendens and/or summary of final judgment
and/or certificate of title, voluntary or otherwise, does not exempt any
mortgagee holding the defaulted mortgage from all the requirements of
this article as long as the borrower is in default.
K. Any person or legal entity that has registered a property under this
article must report any change of information contained in the
registration within 10 days of the change.
L. Failure of the mortgagee or owner of abandoned property to properly
register or to modify the registration form from time to time to reflect a
change of circumstances as required by this article is a violation of the
article and shall be subject to enforcement and any resulting monetary
penalties.
M. Pursuant to any administrative or judicial finding and determination
that any property is in violation of this article, Elsmere may take the
necessary action to ensure compliance with and place a lien on the
property for the cost of the work performed to benefit the property and
bring it into compliance.
§ 209-17. Maintenance requirements.
§ 209-16 ELSMERE CODE § 209-17
1:372
A. Properties subject to this article shall be kept free of weeds, overgrown
brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any
accumulation of newspaper circulars, flyers, notices, except those
required by federal, state or local law, discarded personal items
including, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small
appliances, printed material or any other items that give the appearance
that the property is abandoned.
B. The property shall be maintained free of graffiti or similar markings by
removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the
color of the exterior structure.
C. Front, side, and rear yards, including landscaping, shall be maintained
in accordance with the applicable code(s) at the time registration was
required.
D. Yard maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, grass, ground
covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock
or bark or artificial turf/sod designed specifically for residential
installation. Acceptable maintenance of yards and/or landscape shall not
include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt or similar material.
E. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, watering, irrigation,
cutting and mowing of required ground cover or landscape and removal
of all trimmings.
F. Pools and spas shall be maintained so the water remains free and clear
of pollutants and debris, have pool covers and security fencing and shall
comply with the regulations set forth in the applicable code(s).
G. Failure of the mortgagee and/or owner to properly maintain the property
may result in a violation of the applicable code(s) and issuance of a
citation or notice of violation in accordance with the applicable code
of Elsmere. Pursuant to a finding and determination by Elsmere's code
enforcement officer, magistrate or a court of competent jurisdiction,
Elsmere may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with this
article.
H. In addition to the above, the property is required to be maintained in
accordance with the applicable code(s) of Elsmere.
§ 209-18. Security requirements.
A. Properties subject to these sections shall be maintained in a secure
manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons.
B. A "secure manner" shall include, but not be limited to, the closure and
locking of windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that
may allow a child or animal to access the interior of the property or
structure. Broken windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size
that may allow a child to access the interior of the property or structure
must be repaired. Broken windows shall be secured by reglazing of the
window.
C. If a property is registrable, a local property manager shall be designated
by the mortgagee or owner to perform the work necessary to bring the
property into compliance with the applicable code(s), and the property
manager must perform regular inspections to verify compliance with the
requirements of this article, and any other applicable laws.
§ 209-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-19
1:373
§ 209-19. Public nuisance.
All abandoned property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, the
abatement of which is hereby declared to be necessary for the health,
welfare and safety of the residents of Elsmere.
§ 209-20. Inspections for violations.
Adherence to this article does not relieve any person, legal entity or agent
from any other obligations set forth in any applicable code(s), which may
apply to the property.
§ 209-21. Additional authority.
A. If the enforcement officer has reason to believe that a property subject
to the provisions of this article is posing a serious threat to the public
health, safety and welfare, the code enforcement officer may temporarily
secure the property at the expense of the mortgagee and/or owner, and
may bring the violations before the magistrate as soon as possible to
address the conditions of the property.
B. The code enforcement officer or magistrate shall have the authority to
require the mortgagee or owner affected by this article to implement
additional maintenance and/or security measures including, but not
limited to, securing any and all doors, windows or other openings,
employment of an on-site security guard or other measures as may be
reasonably required to help prevent further decline of the property.
C. If there is a finding that the condition of the property is posing a
serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare, then the code
enforcement officer may have Elsmere abate the violations and charge
the mortgagee or trustee or owner with the cost of the abatement.
D. If the owner or mortgagee does not reimburse Elsmere for the cost
of temporarily securing the property, or of any abatement directed by
the code enforcement officer or magistrate, within 30 days of Elsmere
sending the owners, mortgagee or trustee the invoice, then Elsmere may
lien the property with such cost, along with an administrative fee as
determined in Elsmere's fee ordinance, to recover the administrative
personnel services. In addition to filing a lien, Elsmere can pursue
financial penalties against the mortgagee.
§ 209-22. Opposing, obstructing enforcement officer; penalty.
Whoever opposes, obstructs or resists any enforcement officer or any
person authorized by the enforcement office in the discharge of duties as
provided in this article shall be punishable as provided in the applicable
code(s) or a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 209-23. Immunity of enforcement officer.
Any enforcement officer or any person authorized by Elsmere to enforce the
sections here within shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for
§ 209-19 ELSMERE CODE § 209-23
1:374
reasonable, good faith entry upon real property while in the discharge of
duties imposed by this article.
§ 209-24. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Enforcement. The requirements of this article may be enforced as
follows:
(1) By citation for civil penalties pursuant or to appear in Justice of the
Peace Court;
(2) By an action for injunctive relief, civil penalties, or both, through a
court of competent jurisdiction;
(3) By exercise of Elsmere's powers of eminent domain, or by
condemnation and demolition, or by the nuisance abatement
process;
(4) By revocation or temporary suspension of necessary permits and/or
certificates or occupancy and/or licenses; and
(5) By any other process permitted at law or equity, such as but not
limited to those set forth in § 204-26 of the Code of the Town of
Elsmere. The use of one enforcement process or theory does not
preclude Elsmere from seeking the same, different, or additional
relief through other enforcement methods.
B. Separate offenses. A violation of this article shall constitute a separate
offense for each day it shall continue or recur. Each condition which
exists in violation of this article is a separate violation.
(1) Each day a property remains unregistered when required to be
registered by this article is a separate offense for each day it shall
continue or recur.
(2) Each day a property is not inspected as required by this article is a
separate offense.
(3) Each day a property is not secured as required by this article is a
separate offense.
(4) Each day a condition violating the Town's minimum housing codes
or property maintenance codes exists on a property subject to
registration under this article is a separate offense.
C. Persons responsible for violations. The owner, mortgagee, trustee or
servicer, as those terms are defined in this article, and their duly
authorized officers, employees or agents employed in connection
therewith who have assisted in the commission of the violation or failed
to perform as required by the article, shall be guilty of the violation.
D. The Town Manager shall have the authority to waive the assessment of
any penalty or to delay the implementation of any fines, fees or penalties
due under this chapter of the Code when he finds what he determines to
be valid reason(s) to do so. [Added 3-9-2017 by Ord. No. 623]
§ 209-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-24
1:375
Chapter 211
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 215. Off-highway vehicles — See Ch. 219.
§ 211-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED VEHICLE — Any vehicle which is either:
A. Inoperable.
B. Dismantled.
C. Wrecked.
Not displaying a valid license/registration plate, not displaying an
inspection sticker or is displaying an inspection sticker which has been
expired for more than 30 calendar days. [Amended 5-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 594]
D.
Missing major components:
(1) Engine.
(2) Transmission.
(3) Tires.
(4) Any exterior lights.
(5) Any body panels (i.e., hood, doors, fenders, etc.).
E.
F. Inoperable in the manner for which it is designed.
Situated on private property or has been placed upon any state or
public highway or roadway within the corporate limits of the Town of
Elsmere for a period in excess of 24 hours without being removed.
Vehicles otherwise meeting this definition of an abandoned vehicle
and are stored in a garage or fully enclosed structure shall not be
considered an abandoned vehicle for the purpose of this chapter.
G.
Any vehicle which has been parked upon a public roadway without
moving for a period of 10 business days after notice has been properly
posted upon the vehicle by the Code Enforcement Officer or a police
officer, in accordance with § 211-2B of this chapter. [Added 3-26-1998
by Ord. No. 354]
H.
§ 209-24 ELSMERE CODE § 211-1
1:376
GARAGE — A shelter or repair shop for automotive vehicles.
HARDSHIP — Something that causes or entails suffering or privation
through no fault of the effected party.
SERVICE STATION — A retail station for servicing motor vehicles,
especially with gasoline and oil.
STATE HIGHWAY, PUBLIC HIGHWAY or ROADWAY — Any portion of the
highway or roadway located within the right-of-way lines or, in the case of
limited-access highway, the denial of access lines, including shoulders and
median strip.
§ 211-2. Enforcement; removal of abandoned vehicles. [Amended
3-26-1998 by Ord. No. 354]
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer or a
police officer of the Town of Elsmere.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer or a police officer shall post a notice on
an abandoned vehicle (as defined in § 211-1), in a conspicuous place on
the vehicle, which states that the vehicle be removed by a stated date
and time (the date and time will not be less than 24 hours following
the posting of the notice). If the vehicle is not removed within the time
period designated by the notice, the abandoned vehicle shall be removed
by a towing service to a storage area designated by the Department of
Public Safety and will be subject to disposal in accordance with law. Such
notice shall also set forth verbatim § 4403 of Title 21 of the Delaware
Code. [Amended 9-18-2003 by Ord. No. 420]
C. In the event that a vehicle is abandoned on private property without
the consent of the owner or occupant and a complaint is filed with the
Code Enforcement Officer or a police officer by the property owner or
occupant, the vehicle may be removed by the Code Enforcement Officer
or a police officer in the manner provided in this chapter, except that the
posting of a notice required in § 211-2B may be omitted.
D. In the event that a vehicle is abandoned on private property, private
right-of-way, alleyway or easement with the consent of, or is owned
by, the owner or occupant of the private property, private right-of-way,
alleyway or easement where the vehicle is located, the Code
Enforcement Officer or a police officer will follow this procedure:
(1) Request and verify ownership of the abandoned vehicle from the
property owner.
A vehicle shall have been removed from a public roadway for the
purpose of this chapter when it has been: [Added 3-26-1998 by Ord.
No. 354; amended 6-11-2009 by Ord. No. 507]
(1) Moved outside of the corporate limits of the Town of Elsmere; or
(2) Brought into compliance with this chapter; or
(3) Moved to a licensed repair shop.
I.
§ 211-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-2
1:377
(2) Notify the owner of the abandoned vehicle by certified mail to the
last known address of owner, or by personal notice that the vehicle
must be removed within five days from the date of mailing or notice.
(3) If the owner cannot be located or the vehicle is not removed within
five days of notice, the Code Enforcement Officer or a police officer
may post a notice at some conspicuous place on the vehicle as stated
in § 211-2B.
(4) This subsection shall not apply to automobile graveyards as defined
in § 1202(b)(2) of Title 17 of the Delaware Code, nor to any vehicle
for which a permit has been issued by the Town Manager.
E. In the event that a vehicle is abandoned or parked within a private rightof-
way, alleyway or easement in such a manner as to impede the flow of
traffic or cause a safety hazard, and/or a complaint is filed with Code
Enforcement Officer or a police officer by a property owner, occupant or
other person within a right-of-passage across the right-of-way, the Code
Enforcement Officer or a police officer may proceed with the removal of
the abandoned or parked vehicle as stated in § 211-2B, except that the
posting required may be omitted.
F. Any person having his or her vehicle posted as abandoned by any police
officer or the Code Enforcement Officer for a violation of § 211-1H of
this Code shall have an opportunity to provide proof that the vehicle is
operational. [Added 3-26-1998 by Ord. No 354]
(1) The owner of a vehicle, which has received such notice, shall adhere
to the following procedure:
(a) The owner must contact the officer posting such notice upon his
or her vehicle within 10 business days of the posting and request
to meet with the officer.
(b) When the officer and the owner meet, the owner must be able to
start the vehicle and prove to the officer's satisfaction that the
vehicle is operational.
(2) If the officer agrees that the vehicle is operational, the notice of
intent to tow shall be voided by the officer and the complaint shall be
cleared and a report concerning the officer's actions shall be written.
§ 211-3. Immunity of police officer, Code Enforcement Officer or
garagemen.
The Code Enforcement Officer, any police officer or their agent, or any
person towing or storing a vehicle shall not be liable for criminal
prosecution or responsible for any personal injury, loss or destruction of
any real or personal property which occurs in the course of the removal or
storage of any vehicle taken into custody under this chapter.
§ 211-4. Vehicles left in the possession of a garage and/or service
station; limitations.
Any vehicle left in the possession of a garage or service station for the
purpose of being repaired shall not be considered as an abandoned vehicle
under this chapter. No garage or service station owner shall maintain more
than five such vehicles within a thirty-day period, which can be extended
§ 211-2 ELSMERE CODE § 211-4
1:378
due to hardship, unless he complies with § 1206 of Title 17 of the Delaware
Code, relating to the screening of junkyards.
§ 211-5. Procedure for permits authorizing storage of vehicles on
private property.
Any resident of the Town of Elsmere will be permitted to store one vehicle
on his or her property that by definition would be considered an abandoned
vehicle by this chapter, provided he or she complies with the requirements
of this section:
A. Eligibility. A resident is eligible to apply for a permit to store a vehicle on
private property should any of the following criteria be met:
(1) The vehicle is a "classic" or "historic" car defined as being:
(a) A vehicle manufactured 20 or more years ago.
(b) A vehicle eligible for membership in a national organization
sponsoring preservation of unique vehicles.
(2) The vehicle is currently undergoing repairs or renovations that are
anticipated to bring the vehicle to a condition sufficient to remove it
from the "abandoned vehicle" definition within a period of 30 days or
less.
(3) Cases of documented and severe hardship.
B. Applications. A letter requesting a vehicle storage permit must be
submitted to the Town Manager, 11 Poplar Avenue, stating, in writing:
(1) The name and address of vehicle owner.
(2) A description of the vehicle and copy of vehicle registration.
(3) The exact storage location of the vehicle on the property.
(4) The reason vehicle is to be stored.
(5) The requested length of time the vehicle will be stored.
(6) Any other information deemed necessary by the Town Manager or
Code Enforcement Officer or a police officer. [Amended 3-26-1998
by Ord. No. 354]
C. Processing. The Town Manager will review the application with the Code
Enforcement Officer or a police officer, the Police Chief and send notice
of the request to all property owners within 200 feet of the property
where the vehicle is being stored. The applicant will be notified by mail
if the request is denied. [Amended 3-26-1998 by Ord. No. 354]
D. Approval of a permit. When the application is approved, the Town
Manager will issue a permit for storage of a vehicle on private property
that will state the following:
(1) The name and address of vehicle owner.
(2) A description of vehicle.
(3) The exact storage location of the vehicle on the property.
(4) The permit expiration date.
(5) Any other conditions or information deemed necessary by the Town
Manager or Code Enforcement Officer or a police officer. [Amended
3-26-1998 by Ord. No. 354]
(6) Copies of the permit will be given to the applicant, Code
Enforcement Officer or a police officer, Chief of Police and the Town
Manager's office. [Amended 3-26-1998 by Ord. No. 354]
§ 211-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-5
1:379
E. Length of time for the permit. The Town Manger shall determine how
long the permit shall be issued for; however, the following rules shall
apply:
(1) No permit for an "historic" or "classic" vehicle shall be issued for a
period of longer than one year. These permits shall be renewable one
time upon reapplication.
(2) No permit for a vehicle undergoing repairs or renovations shall be
issued for a period to exceed 30 days. These permits shall not be
renewable.
(3) No permit based on hardship shall be issued for a period to exceed
one year. These permits are not renewable.
F. Expiration of permit. A permit will expire as of the date marked on the
permit and/or may be revoked at any time if, in the opinion of the Town
Manager, the conditions are not met as stated on the permit. When the
permit expires, an applicant must reapply for another permit as stated
in § 211-5E of this chapter, if allowable.
G. Cost of permit. Vehicle storage permits will cost $50 a month and shall
be paid to the Town of Elsmere before the permit is issued. The cost of
the permit is not refundable. This permit fee may be abated or reduced
at the discretion of the Town Manager in cases of documented financial
hardship. [Amended 9-18-2003 by Ord. No. 420]
§ 211-6. Hazardous vehicles.
In the event a motor vehicle is left unattended upon a roadway, highway or
private property within the corporate limits of the Town of Elsmere and is
determined to be a safety hazard by the Code Enforcement Officer or any
police officer, an attempt shall be made to contact the owner or occupant of
the vehicle. If the owner or occupant cannot be reached within 30 minutes
and/or the owner or occupant refuses to move the vehicle or make it safe,
the vehicle shall be removed and impounded immediately.
§ 211-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-20-2002 by Ord. No.
404; 9-10-2015 by Ord. No. 600]
Any person that willfully or voluntarily abandons a vehicle within the
corporate limits of the Town of Elsmere, upon the private property of
another without his consent, shall be fined no less than $100 nor more than
$200.
§ 211-8. Redemption of impounded vehicles.
Before the owner or his agent (hereafter, "owner") shall be permitted to
remove a vehicle which has been impounded in accordance with this
chapter, the following steps shall be taken:
A. The owner shall pay to the Town of Elsmere and/or the appropriate court
any and all fines owed for the violations for which the vehicle was towed
as well as any other fines for any other parking violations which the
vehicle owner may owe.
§ 211-5 ELSMERE CODE § 211-8
1:380
B. The owner shall provide the Elsmere Bureau of Police with proof of
ownership of the vehicle.
C. The owner will then be issued a vehicle release form.
D. The owner will then present the impound yard with the official release
form. The owner will then pay to the impound operator all towing and
storage charges due.
E. The impound yard owner shall then release the vehicle to the owner.
§ 211-9. Vehicle owner prima facie responsible.
If any vehicle is found within the corporate limits of the Town of Elsmere
to be in violation of this chapter and is unattended at the time the violation
is discovered and the identity of the operator is not apparent, the person
in whose name such vehicle is registered as the owner shall be held prima
facie responsible for such violation.
§ 211-10. Payment under protest; hearing.
In the event that the fine on or the violations for which the vehicle was
towed is paid under protest, the offender shall be entitled to a hearing
before a Justice of the Peace Court.
Chapter 215
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Handicapped parking — See Ch. 116.
Parades and special events — Ch. 148.
Parking of certain vehicles — See Ch. 152.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 211.
Off-highway vehicles — See Ch. 219.
§ 211-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-10
1:381

ARTICLE I
Adoption of State Laws
[Adopted 3-2-1983 by Ord. No. 181]
§ 215-1. Adoption by reference.
All traffic regulations and offenses, as now or hereafter set forth in the
Motor Vehicle Laws of the State of Delaware, are hereby adopted as the
laws pertaining to the operation of motor vehicles within the limits of the
Town of Elsmere, excluding Subchapter X of Chapter 41 and Chapters 44,
68 and 70 of Title 21 of the Delaware Code.
§ 215-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-1
1:383

ARTICLE II
Stopping, Standing and Parking; Tow-Away Zones; Fire Lanes
[Adopted 8-13-1981 by Ord. No. 163]
§ 215-2. Stopping, standing or parking.
A. No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle whether
attended or unattended upon any highway or roadway outside of a
business or residence district except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or where it is necessary for public utility vehicles to
temporarily stop along the highway or roadway to make alterations in
or repairs to utility facilities so long as proper traffic control devices are
posted or where it is in compliance with the directions of a police officer
or traffic control device.
B. Whenever any officer authorized to make arrests under this article
finds a vehicle standing upon the highway or roadway in violation of
provisions of Subsection A of this section, he may move such vehicle or
require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move same
to a position off the highway.
C. Any officer authorized to make arrests under this article is hereby
authorized to remove or cause to be removed any unattended vehicle
illegally left standing upon any highway, roadway, bridge causeway in
any tunnel in such a position or under such circumstances as to obstruct
the normal movement of traffic.
D. Subsections A and B of this section shall not apply to the driver of any
vehicle which is disabled while on the roadway in such a manner and
to such an extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily
leaving such vehicle in such position, including emergency vehicles.
E. No commercial or construction vehicle over 3/4 ton in weight shall be
parked in any residential zone except: [Added 12-12-1996 by Ord. No.
333; amended 2-8-2001 by Ord. No. 389]
(1) When making deliveries within the residential zone;
(2) When in actual use by a contractor performing work within the
residential zone; or
(3) Within an enclosed garage.
§ 215-3. Violations and penalties.
A. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places and
shall be subject to the following fines: [Amended 3-9-1995 by Ord. No.
320; 5-30-1996 by Ord. No. 326; 9-18-2003 by Ord. No. 420]
(1) On a sidewalk: $25.
(2) In front of or within five feet of a public or private driveway
entrance of a private or public garage, place or building to which
vehicular access is necessary: $25.
(3) Within an intersection: $25.
(4) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant: $25.
(5) On a crosswalk: $25.
(6) Within 20 feet of a crosswalk: $25.
§ 215-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-3
1:385
(7) Park within 15 feet of a courtesy mailbox: $25.
(8) Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign
or traffic control signal: $25.
(9) Between a safety zone or island and the adjacent curb or within 30
feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety
zone or island, unless the State Highway Department or Council of
the Town of Elsmere indicates a different length by traffic control
devices: $25.
(10) Within 50 feet of the nearest rail or railroad crossing, unless the
State Highway Department or the Council of the Town of Elsmere
indicates a different length by signs or markings: $25.
(11) Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on
the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within
75 feet of the entrance when properly designated by traffic control
devices: $25.
(12) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic: $25.
(13) Upon the roadway of any highway when it is practical to stop, stand
or park off the roadway: $25.
(14) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked on the
shoulder or at the edge or curb of a highway or roadway (double
parking): $25.
(15) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway,
roadway or within a highway tunnel: $25.
(16) At any place where such parking, standing or stopping obstructs
the free passage of other traffic: $25.
(17) At any place where official traffic control devices prohibit or restrict
stopping, standing or parking: $25.
(18) Wherever a curb is marked yellow or a yellow line is placed at the
edge of a roadway or shoulder: $25.
(19) In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including
crossovers: $25.
(20) Making other than emergency repairs to a motor vehicle on a
roadway: $25.
(21) Parking in an area so designated by appropriate traffic control
devices as a bus stop: $25.
(22) Parking in an area so designated by appropriate traffic control
devices as a tow-away zone: $75.
(23) Stopping, standing or parking in a properly designated fire zone as
defined in § 215-13: $115.
(24) On any grass or unimproved area throughout the Town which has
not been specifically designated, by an appropriate traffic control
device, as a parking area, including but not limited to any grass or
unimproved area in front of any residence, apartment building or
business: $25. [Amended 10-12-2006 by Ord. No. 470]
(25) Commercial construction vehicles within a residential zone in
violation of § 215-2E: $100. [Added 12-12-1996 by Ord. No. 333;
amended 2-8-2001 by Ord. No. 389]
§ 215-3 ELSMERE CODE § 215-3
1:386
B. Subsection A of this section shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle
which is disabled while on the roadway in such a manner and to such
an extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving
such vehicle in such position, including emergency vehicles.
§ 215-4. Additional parking regulations; violations and penalties.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle stopped or
parked upon a two-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked with the
right-hand wheels parallel to and within 12 inches of the right-hand curb
or outside edge of the shoulder.
B. Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a one-way roadway shall be so
stopped or parked parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway, in the
direction of authorized traffic movement, with its right-hand wheels
within 12 inches of the right-hand curb or outside edge of the shoulder
or its left wheels within 12 inches of the left hand curb or outside edge
of the shoulder.
C. The Council of the Town of Elsmere may, by resolution, following a
traffic survey by the Elsmere Public Safety Department, permit angle
parking on any highway or roadway within its jurisdiction; provided,
however, that the highway or roadway is of sufficient width to permit
angle parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic on
the roadway.
D. Angle parking shall not be permitted on a federal-aid or state highway
unless the State Department of Transportation has determined that
the highway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking without
interfering with the free movement of traffic on the roadway.
E. The Council of the Town of Elsmere may, by resolution, following a
traffic survey by the Elsmere Public Safety Department, place signs
prohibiting or restricting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles
on any highway or roadway where, in its opinion, such stopping,
standing or parking is dangerous to those using the highways, or where
the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would unduly interfere with
the free movement of traffic thereon. Such prohibitions or restrictions
may be declared to be effective either part or all of the time and
differing limits may be established for different times of the day, for
different types of vehicles, for different weather conditions and when
other significant factors differ.
F. No person shall park a vehicle in any area conspicuously marked as a
loading zone.
G. Whenever a handicapped person, or a person on behalf of a handicapped
person, operates a vehicle for which a special plate has been issued
pursuant to Title 21, § 2134 of the Delaware Motor Vehicle Code, that
person shall be permitted to park 90 minutes longer than the legal
parking period permitted by ordinance or resolution without penalty,
unless the vehicle is parked in a fire lane or in an area prohibiting
parking in order to accommodate heavy traffic during morning,
afternoon or evening hours or so as clearly to be a traffic hazard.
§ 215-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-4
1:387
H. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle other than a vehicle of the
handicapped designated as a handicapped parking zone and
conspicuously marked as such.
I. It shall be unlawful to stop or park a vehicle which is in violation of 21
Del. C. § 2102 upon any highway or roadway within the Town of Elsmere.
Information obtained by the Town of Elsmere pursuant to § 182-2D(7),
or any other probable cause shall establish a prima facie case against
the owner of the vehicle. [Added 6-8-2006 by Ord. No. 466]
J. Whoever violates this section, with the exceptions of Subsections H and
I, shall be fined $25. Anyone violating Subsection H of this section shall
be fined $100. Anyone violating Subsection I of this section shall be fined
$50. [Amended 3-9-1995 by Ord. No. 320; 9-18-2003 by Ord. No.
420; 6-8-2006 by Ord. No. 466]
§ 215-5. Summons for unattended vehicle; owner liable.
A. A summons in appropriate form may be attached to an unattended
vehicle found in violation of any of the provisions of this article by any
police officer authorized to arrest for violations of this article, in lieu of
arrest of the operator of such vehicle.
B. If any vehicle found by such police officer to be in violation of any of
the provisions of this article is unattended at the time the violation is
discovered and the identity of the operator is not otherwise apparent,
the person in whose name such vehicle is registered as the owner shall
be held prima facie responsible for such violation.
C. It shall be permissible for an owner or operator to mail such summons
and the appropriate fine directly to the Town of Elsmere instead of
appearing before a court for trial of the charge. [Amended 3-9-1995
by Ord. No. 320]
D. Court costs shall not be assessed if a fine is paid pursuant to this section.
The Town shall mail a receipt indicating the payment of a fine pursuant
to this section if the person paying such fine makes a written request
for a receipt and encloses a self-addressed envelope with proper postage
affixed therein. [Amended 3-9-1995 by Ord. No. 320]
§ 215-6. Failure to answer summons; violations and penalties.
A. Whoever fails to answer any summons issued in accordance with the
provisions of this article, after notice thereof served personally or
securely fastened to the motor vehicle of which such person is the owner
or operator, shall be subject to arrest. Such violator shall be fined for
the first offense $25, including court costs, and a sum of money equal in
amount to the fine which was imposed for the original offense charged.
[Amended 9-18-2003 by Ord. No. 420]
B. Whenever a vehicle is found that has accumulated 10 unpaid parking
summonses or which has accumulated unpaid parking violations fines
which total $200 or more, said motor vehicle may be towed and
impounded until such time as all fines are paid or property disposed of.
The owner of any vehicle which is towed and impounded in accordance
with this section shall be liable for all costs associated with such towing
and storage. [Added 3-9-1995 by Ord. No. 320]
§ 215-4 ELSMERE CODE § 215-7
1:388
§ 215-7. Authority to tow and impound.
A. Whenever any vehicle of any kind or character shall be found on any
street, highway, alley or roadway within the Town, wrecked, abandoned
or parked in violation of any law of the state or the provisions of this
article or other ordinance of the Town or any resolution of the Council
of the Town of Elsmere now or hereinafter in force or shall be seized for
any violation thereof, such vehicle shall be removed by authority of the
Elsmere Public Safety Department to an official pound; provided that if
the owner or person for the time being in charge thereof is present and
shall express a willingness and intention to immediately remove such
vehicle before it is actually being towed, the vehicle shall be released to
the owner or person in charge who shall be required to pay as called for
in this article.
B. The provisions of this article shall apply to those streets, highways, alleys
or roadways on which there have been posted official "No Parking — Tow
Away" or "No Stopping — Tow Away" or like signs or as to those portions
of streets and highways officially designated as bus stops, tow-away
zones, fire lanes or to vehicles double parked.39
§ 215-8. Agreements for official pounds and towing services.
A. The Chief of Police is hereby empowered, authorized and directed to
arrange with the owners or operators of garages or parking areas for
their use as an official pound in which vehicles impounded, as provided
by this article, shall store, for which the owners or operators shall enter
into an agreement with the Town on the amount of fees to be received by
the owner or operator for the storage of the impounded vehicles, and the
furnishing of a bond and insurance, the amount of each to be approved
by the Town Solicitor, to protect the Town from all claims for damages,
injuries or bodily harm resulting from the impounding or storage of the
vehicles.
B. The Chief of Police is hereby directed, authorized and empowered to
arrange with the owners or operators of vehicle towing services for
removing vehicles under the authority of the Public Safety Department
of the authorized pounds with tow trucks so as to cause no damage to
the vehicles being towed, for which the owners or operators shall enter
into an agreement with the Town on the amount of fees to be received by
the owner or operator for this service and the furnishing of a bond and
insurance, the amount for each to be approved by the Town Solicitor, to
protect the Town from all claims for damages or injuries resulting from
the towing service.
§ 215-9. Removal of vehicles; towing notice; issuing summons;
fines. [Amended 3-9-1995 by Ord. No. 320]
A. Police officers of the Elsmere Public Safety Department and all sworn
Code Enforcement Officials of the Town of Elsmere shall be the only
39.Editor's Note: Former Subsection (c), which immediately followed this subsection and
dealt with abandoned vehicles, was repealed 1-12-1993 by Ord. No. 290. See now Ch. 211,
Abandoned Vehicles.
§ 215-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-9
1:389
persons authorized to direct the removal of any vehicle pursuant to the
provisions of this article.
B. Any vehicle parked in violation of a tow-away area, so designated and
marked conspicuously, or in violation of the provisions of § 215-7B may
be removed immediately by a police officer or sworn Code Enforcement
Official of the Town of Elsmere.40
C. Such police officer or Code Enforcement Official authorized to remove
vehicle pursuant to provisions of this article shall be present at the time
of removal and shall securely affix a towing notice form in a prominent
place on such vehicle, such form to bear the license number and state
of registration of the vehicle, the date, time, place and nature of the
violation and the name and identifying badge number of the person
directing the removal of the vehicle.
D. Whenever any vehicle may be subject to being towed away and/or
impounded under the provisions of this article, the persons authorized to
so tow and/or impound such vehicle shall be authorized to affix to such
a vehicle a violation summons. Any owner or agent receiving a summons
as provided in this subsection shall be subject to a fine of $25. This fine
shall not relieve the owner or agent from liability for any fine or penalty
that may be imposed for violations for which the vehicle was towed away
and/or impounded.41 [Amended 9-18-2003 by Ord. No. 420]
§ 215-10. Report of impounding by police officer; notice to owner of
vehicle.
The person directing the removal of any vehicle under the provisions of this
article shall as soon as possible thereafter make a report thereof to the
Public Safety Department, giving the registration number, year and name of
state on the license plate thereof, together with the location of the point to
which the vehicle has been removed and the reason for its removal. Within
five days from the removal of any vehicle, provided that the vehicle has
not been released from the pound, the officer who caused the vehicle to be
removed shall send the owner, by registered mail, a notice that the same
has been impounded, designating the place from which such vehicle was
removed, and the reason for its removal and impounding, and the location
of the pound in which it is impounded.
§ 215-11. Redemption of impounded vehicles.
Before the owner or his agent (hereinafter "owner") shall be permitted to
remove an impounded vehicle from any pound provided for by this article,
the following steps shall be taken:
A. The owner shall pay to the Town of Elsmere any fines due and owing
for the violations for which the vehicle was towed, as well as any other
40.Editor's Note: Former Subsection (c), which immediately followed this subsection and
which dealt with abandoned vehicles, was repealed 1-12-1993 by Ord. No. 290. See now
Ch. 211, Abandoned Vehicles.
41.Editor's Note: Former Subsection (f), which immediately followed this subsection and
dealt with abandoned vehicles, was repealed 1-12-1993 by Ord. No. 290. See Ch. 211,
Abandoned vehicles.
§ 215-9 ELSMERE CODE § 215-11
1:390
fines for any other parking violations which the vehicle owner may owe
to the Town. Upon payment of these fines, the Elsmere Public Safety
Department will provide a receipt. [Amended 3-9-1995 by Ord. No.
320]
B. The owner shall present proof of ownership of the vehicle to the Elsmere
Public Safety Department. The owner will then be issued a release-ofvehicle
form.
C. The owner shall then deliver to the official pound the release-of-vehicle
form, and he shall also pay to the pound operator all towing and storage
charges. The towing and storage charges shall not exceed the amounts
agreed upon between the pound operator and the Town in the current
contract for towing charges. A printed statement of the charges which
the pound operator is permitted to charge under contract can be
obtained through the Elsmere Public Safety Department. A statement of
charges shall also be prominently posted in a public area at the pound.42
§ 215-12. Designation of fire lane.
The Council of the Town of Elsmere, through resolution of said body, may
establish and properly designate areas to be known as "fire lanes" where it
deems necessary to effectively locate, access and extinguish a fire or like
emergency around a building or property.
§ 215-13. Stopping, standing or parking in fire lanes; violations and
penalties.
A. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any place which as been
designated and properly identified as a fire lane pursuant to Regulation
17 of the State Fire Marshal Code or in an area designated for a
fire hydrant or standpipe connection, except in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or traffic control device.
B. Any person authorized to make arrests for violations of this article
is hereby authorized to remove or cause to be removed, pursuant to
provisions of §§ 215-7 through 215-11, and stored at the owner's
expense, any unattended vehicle left standing wholly or partially within
a fire lane or any unattended vehicle left standing in a location so as to
cause an obstruction to the accessibility to a fire lane, fire hydrant or
standpipe connection.
C. The Elsmere Public Safety Department, the State Fire Marshal and his
deputies shall be authorized to enforce this article. Any fire officer in
charge of firemen of a fire company responding to, operating at or
returning from a fire, service call or other emergency shall be authorized
to enforce this article.
D. This article shall apply within the limits of the Town of Elsmere.
E. Anyone violating this article shall be fined $50. This fine shall not relieve
the owner or agent from liability for towing and storing charges which
may have resulted from the towing and/or impoundment of said vehicle
for violation of this article. [Amended 9-18-2003 by Ord. No. 420]
42.Editor's Note: Former Subsection (b), which immediately followed this subsection and
dealt with charges paid under protest, was deleted 5-30-1996 by Ord. No. 326.
§ 215-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-14
1:391
§ 215-14. Immunity for enforcement; exception. [Amended 3-9-1995
by Ord. No. 320]
No law enforcement officer, fire officer in charge of this delegate or fire
marshal or his deputy or Code Enforcement Official of the Town of Elsmere
enforcing this article, and no one who removes a vehicle from a prohibited
area as described in this article or stores such a vehicle, having been
directed to remove or store such vehicle by a person authorized to enforce
this article, shall be liable for criminal prosecution for any conduct directly
relating to the enforcement of this article or liable to any person for
negligence, resulting in the injury to or loss or destruction of any real or
personal property if such negligence arises out of the enforcement of this
article; provided, however, that such persons shall be liable for loss or
destruction of any real or personal property caused by acts or omissions
amounting to gross negligence or willful wanton misconduct.
§ 215-15. Vehicle owner prima facie responsible.
If any vehicle found by a person authorized to enforce this article to be in
violation of this article is unattended at the time the violation is discovered
and the identity of the operator is not apparent, the person in whose name
such vehicle is registered as owner shall be held prima facie responsible for
such violation.
§ 215-14 ELSMERE CODE § 215-15
1:392
ARTICLE III
Skateboards, Skates and Roller Blades
[Adopted 9-13-2001 by Ord. No. 394]
§ 215-16. Limitations on skateboards and similar devices.
The use of skateboards, in-line skates, roller blades, and in-line scooters is
prohibited at all times upon the sidewalks, streets, alleyways, paved lots,
tennis courts and basketball courts in the following areas in the Town of
Elsmere:
A. On Sanders Road, from its intersection with Kirkwood Highway, north to
its intersection with Rigdon Road, including the intersections.
B. On New Road, from its intersection with Gamble Avenue, west to the
point where it becomes Kirkwood Highway and continuing west on
Kirkwood Highway to the point where it intersects with Walnut Avenue,
including the intersections.
C. Within all Town parklands, including the sidewalk that abuts any
parkland, except in those areas designated for such activities.
D. On the Forest Avenue Bridge itself, and for 50 feet north and south of the
bridge.
E. On Rodman Road, north of Kirkwood Highway, from the point where
it intersects with New Road, continuing north, to the point where it
intersects with Elsmere Boulevard.
F. On Rodman Road, south of Kirkwood Highway, from the point where
it intersects with New Road, continuing south to the point where it
becomes the City of Wilmington.
G. In each of the alleyways that run behind the area that is described in
Subsection F of this section.
§ 215-17. Erection of obstacles.
It shall be illegal for any person to erect, place or maintain any item
specifically designed for or used for the purpose of a test-of-skill-type
obstacle for skaters, such as ramps, hills, rails, steps, etc., in the areas in
which skating is prohibited by this article.
§ 215-18. Violations and penalties.
Upon conviction for a violation of any of the provisions of this article, a
person shall be fined $25 for a first offense, $50 for a second offense, and
$100 for a third or subsequent offense.
§ 215-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-18
1:393

ARTICLE IV
Traffic Signal Violation Monitoring Program
[Adopted 1-13-2005 by Ord. No. 442]
§ 215-19. Red traffic signals.
Vehicular traffic facing the red traffic signal shall stop before crossing
the stop limit, whether marked by sign or painted line, or if none, before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none,
then before entering the intersection and shall remain standing until an
indication to proceed is shown.
§ 215-20. Monitoring program authorized; penalties upon finding of
violation.
A failure to stop for a red traffic signal may be recorded by a traffic
light signal violation monitoring system in accordance with a program or
authorization approved by the Town Council, pursuant to the provisions
of § 4101(d) of Title 21 of the Delaware Code. The administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this section shall be done in accordance
with the provisions of § 4101(d) of Title 21 of the Delaware Code, which
shall prevail in the event of any conflict with the provisions of this section.
A. The owner or operator of a vehicle which has failed to comply with a
traffic light signal, as evidenced by information obtained by a traffic
light signal violation monitoring system, shall be liable for a civil or
administrative monetary assessment of $75; provided, however, if the
civil or administrative assessment is not paid within 14 days an
additional assessment of $10 shall be added to the original assessment;
which additional assessment shall be increased to $20 if the assessment
is not paid within 45 days; and shall be increased to $30 if the
assessment is not paid within 90 days. Court costs or similar
administrative fees not to exceed $30 may also be assessed if the owner
requests a hearing to contest the violation, and is ultimately found to be
in violation or fails to pay or contest the violation in a timely manner.
B. A violation for which a civil or administrative assessment is imposed
pursuant to this section shall not be classified as a criminal offense.
Judgments pursuant to this section shall not be deemed a conviction of
the owner and shall not be made part of the motor vehicle operating
record of the person upon whom such liability is imposed.
§ 215-21. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OWNER — The registered owner of such vehicle on record with the Division
of Motor Vehicles; provided, however, that in the event that the owner is a
vehicle leasing company licensed to do business in this state, the "owner"
for purposes of this article shall mean the person shown on the records of
the Division of Motor Vehicles to be the lessee of such vehicle. Vehicle rental
§ 215-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-21
1:395
companies are excluded from the definition of "owner" for purposes of this
article only.
TRAFFIC LIGHT SIGNAL VIOLATION MONITORING SYSTEM — A vehicle
sensor installed to work in conjunction with a traffic light that automatically
produces two or more photographs, two or more microphotographs, a
videotape, or other recorded images of each vehicle at the time it is used or
operated in violation of this article.
§ 215-22. Summons and notice of violation.
A summons for a violation of this article may be executed by mailing by first
class mail a copy thereof to the address of the owner of the vehicle as shown
on the records of the Division of Motor Vehicles of this or any other state.
Collection actions, including default judgment and execution, may proceed
based upon jurisdiction obtained through the mailing by first class mail of a
summons and subsequent court notices pursuant to this subsection.
A. Every initial mailing shall include:
(1) The name and address of the owner of the vehicle;
(2) The registration number of the motor vehicle involved in the
violation;
(3) Violation charges;
(4) The location where the violation occurred;
(5) The date and time of the violation;
(6) Copies of two or more photographs, of microphotographs or other
recorded images, taken as proof of the violation;
(7) The amount of the civil assessment imposed and the date by which
the civil assessment should be paid;
(8) Information advising the summonsed person of the matter, time and
place by which liability as alleged in the notice may be contested,
and warning that the failure to pay the civil assessment or to contest
liability in a timely manner is an admission of liability and may result
in a judgment being entered against the summonsed person and/or
the denial of the registration or the renewal of the registration of any
of the owner's vehicles; and
(9) Notice of the summonsed person's ability to rebut the presumption
that he or she was the operator of the vehicle at the time of the
alleged violation and the means for rebutting such presumption.
B. All subsequent mailing of court notices, summons, and payment requests
shall include all the information listed in Subsection A.
§ 215-23. Payment by voluntary assessment.
Persons electing to pay by voluntary assessment shall make payments to
the entity designated on the summons for payment. The payment must be
received within 14 days of the date the assessment is sent by regular mail
to the person subject to the assessment and shall be increased by any
additional amounts due under § 215-20.
§ 215-21 ELSMERE CODE § 215-24
1:396
§ 215-24. Procedures to contest violation.
A person receiving the summons pursuant to this article may request a
hearing to contest the violation by notifying, in writing, the entity
designated on the summons within 20 days of the date. Upon receipt of
a timely request for a hearing a civil hearing shall be scheduled and the
defendant notified of the hearing date by first class mail. A civil hearing
shall be held by the Justice of the Peace Court. The hearing may be informal
and shall be held in accordance with Justice of the Peace Court rules. Costs
for such hearing shall not be assessed against the prevailing party.
§ 215-25. Failure to pay or successfully contest violation.
If the owner fails to pay the civil assessment, to respond to the summons
within the time period specified on the summons, and/or to successfully
contest the civil assessment resulting from the violation, Nestor Traffic
Systems or the current red light camera vendor under contract with the
Delaware Department of Transportation shall notify the Division of Motor
Vehicles of such facts.
§ 215-26. Proof of violation.
Proof of a violation of this article shall be evidenced by information obtained
from a traffic signal violation monitoring system authorized pursuant to this
article. A citation based upon inspection of photographs, microphotographs,
videotape or other recorded images produced by a traffic light signal
violation monitoring system shall constitute prima facie evidence of the
facts contained therein, if the citation thereof is approved by a police
officer of the Elsmere Bureau of Police, or by an employee of an entity
designated by the Town of Elsmere to administer records under this article.
Any photographs, microphotographs, videotape or other recorded images
evidencing such a violation shall be available for inspection in any
proceeding to adjudicate the liability for such violation pursuant to
regulation, ordinance or other law adopted pursuant to this article.
§ 215-27. Presumption.
A. The owner of any vehicle found to be in violation of this article shall
be held prima facie responsible for such violation in the same manner
provided for under § 7003 of Title 21 of the Delaware Code, unless
the owner can furnish evidence that the vehicle was, at the time of
the violation, in the care, custody or control of another person. Such
presumption shall be rebutted if the owner:
(1) Furnishes an affidavit by regular mail to the entity indicated on the
summons that he or she was not the operator of the vehicle at the
time of the alleged violation and provides the name and address of
the person or company who leased, rented or otherwise had the care,
custody or control of the vehicle, or attaches a certified copy of a
police report showing that the vehicle or license plate(s) thereof had
been reported to the police as stolen prior to the time of the alleged
violation of this article; or
§ 215-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-27
1:397
(2) Provides proof at the hearing to contest the violation that he or she
was not the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation
or that he or she failed to comply with the traffic signal either in
order to yield the right-of-way to an emergency vehicle or as part of
a funeral procession.
B. Notwithstanding any other provision in this section, if the motor vehicle
which is found by the traffic light signal violation monitoring system to
have failed to comply with a traffic light signal is commercially licensed,
then the owner of that vehicle shall be sent notice of the date, time and
location of the violation with two photographs thereof. Within 10 days
of the receipt of said notice, the owner of the vehicle shall provide the
law enforcement agency through Nestor Traffic Systems or the current
red light camera vendor under contract with the Delaware Department
of Transportation with the name and address of the driver of the vehicle
at the date, time and location of the violation and, within the same
time period, shall provide the driver of the vehicle with the photographs
of the violation. After receipt by Elsmere Bureau of Police through
Nestor Traffic System or the current red light camera vendor under
contract with the Delaware Department of Transportation of the name
and address of the driver of the vehicle at the time of the violation, the
driver of the vehicle shall be prima facie responsible for such violation in
the same manner as provided under § 7003 of Title 21 of the Delaware
Code and shall be subject to the provisions of this section. Failure of the
owner of the vehicle found to be in violation of § 215-20 to provide the
name and address of the driver at the time of the violation within the
period prescribed shall cause the owner to be held responsible as set
forth in § 215-22.
§ 215-28. Severability.
It is declared to be the intention of the Town of Elsmere that the sections,
subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and words of this article are
severable. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or word
is declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the lawful judgment
or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, its unconstitutionality
or invalidity shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining sections,
subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and words of this article, since
the sections or parts of sections would have been enacted by the Town
Council without and irrespective of any unconstitutional or otherwise
invalid section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or word being
incorporated into this article.
§ 215-27 ELSMERE CODE § 215-28
1:398
ARTICLE V
Use of Cellular Telephones While Operating Motor Vehicles
[Adopted 10-8-2009 by Ord. No. 511]
§ 215-29. Definitions.
As used in this article, the words and phrases herein defined shall have the
following meaning, unless the context otherwise requires:
HANDS-FREE ACCESSORY — An attachment, add-on, built-in feature, or
addition to a mobile telephone.
MOBILE TELEPHONE — A cellular, analog, wireless, or digital telephone
capable of sending or receiving telephone messages without an access line
for service.
USE — Talking, placing, or receiving a call, or attempting to place or
receive a call, or texting or attempting to send a text, or e-mail on a mobile
telephone or other electronic devices.
§ 215-30. Restricted use of mobile telephone.
A. No person shall use a mobile telephone while operating a moving motor
vehicle or while riding a bicycle within the corporate limits of the Town
of Elsmere unless the telephone or device is equipped with a hands-free
accessory.
B. The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following:
(1) Emergency use of a mobile telephone, including calls to the 911
center, a hospital, an ambulance service provider, a fire department,
a law enforcement agency, or a first-aid squad; and
(2) Use of a mobile telephone by law enforcement and emergency
personnel or by a driver of an authorized emergency vehicle acting
within the scope of their official duties.
§ 215-31. Violations and penalties.
Upon conviction for a violation of the provisions of this article, a person
shall be fined $50.
§ 215-32. Effective date.
The provisions of this article shall be deemed effective on January 1, 2010.
§ 215-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-32
1:399

ARTICLE VI
Enforcement
[Adopted 8-12-2010 by Ord. No. 518]
§ 215-33. Enforcement officers.
Any police officer and the Code Enforcement Officers of the Town of
Elsmere shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter with
the exception of Article IV of this chapter, which shall only be enforced by
sworn police officers of the Elsmere Bureau of Police.
§ 215-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-33
1:401
Chapter 219
VEHICLES, OFF-HIGHWAY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 215.
§ 219-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLE or OHV — A motor-driven off-road vehicle capable
of cross-country travel without benefit of a road or trail, on or immediately
over land, snow, ice, marsh, swampland or other natural terrain. It includes
but is not limited to a competition vehicle that is specifically designated
by its manufacturer as being intended solely for use during a special or
competitive event, and which is exclusively so used, a multiwheel drive or
low-pressure tire vehicle, a motorcycle or related two-wheel vehicle, an
amphibious machine, a ground effect air-cushion vehicle or other means
of transportation deriving motive power from a source other than muscle
or wind. "OHV" does not include a farm vehicle being used for farming, a
vehicle used for military, fire, emergency, public works or law enforcement
purposes, or construction or logging vehicle used in performance of its
common function, or a registered aircraft.
OHV OPERATOR — Includes every person who is in actual physical control
of an off-highway vehicle.
ORGANIZED OR SPECIAL EVENT — Any competition involving motor
vehicles as defined above that is conducted with the permission of the
Council of the Town of Elsmere having jurisdiction over the area concerned.
§ 219-2. Operation of OHV's.
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to
operate an OHV upon any property within the limits of the Town of Elsmere.
§ 219-3. Exclusions.
An OHV may be operated on property located in the Town only for a special
event of limited duration, conducted according to a prearranged schedule
and with the permission of the Council of the Town of Elsmere.
§ 219-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-18-2003 by Ord. No.
420]
Any person in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be fined not
less than $50 nor more than $300.
§ 215-33 ELSMERE CODE § 219-4
1:402
Chapter 225
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 38.
Building construction — See Ch. 76.
Notification of lessees in floodplains — See
Ch. 103.
Satellite dish antennas — See Ch. 184.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
196.
§ 219-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-4
1:403

ARTICLE I
Purpose; Scope; Interpretation; Short Title; Definitions
§ 225-1. Purpose.
These regulations were made in accordance with a Comprehensive Plan
and were designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety
from fire, panic and other dangers; to promote health and the general
welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of
land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate
provisions of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other
public requirements. These regulations were made with reasonable
consideration as to the characters of the district and its peculiar suitability
for particular uses and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and
encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the municipality.
§ 225-2. Scope.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, the use of all land and
every building or portion of a building erected, altered with respect to
height and area, added to or relocated and every use within a building or
use accessory thereto, in the Town of Elsmere shall be in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter. Any existing building or structure and any
existing use of a building or land not in conformity with the regulations
herein prescribed shall be regarded as nonconforming but may be
continued, extended or changed subject to the special regulations herein
provided with respect to nonconforming buildings or uses.43
§ 225-3. Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions
of this chapter impose greater restrictions than those of any law, other
ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall be controlling.
Where the provisions of any law, other ordinance or regulation impose
greater restrictions than this chapter, the provisions of such law, other
ordinance or regulation shall be controlling, provided that in all cases
arising within the Floodplain District the laws and ordinances concerning
land use and control and other measures designed to reduce flood losses
shall take precedence over any conflicting law, ordinance or code.
§ 225-4. Short title.
These regulations and the accompanying map shall be known and may be
cited as the "Town of Elsmere Zoning Ordinance."
43.Editor's Note: See Art. VI, Nonconforming Uses.
§ 225-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-5
1:405
§ 225-5. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be
construed throughout this chapter to have the meanings herein indicated:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building subordinate to the main building on
a lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to those of the main
building.
ACCESSORY USE — A use subordinate to the main use of land or of a
building on a lot and customarily incidental thereto.
ACRE — An area of land which includes 43,560 square feet.
ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE — A commercial
establishment which as its primary business purpose offers for sale or rental
for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CENTER — An enclosed building used for
presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to specified anatomical areas (as
defined below) for observation by patrons therein.
ALTERATIONS — As applied to a building or a structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts in the existing facilities or an
enlargement whether by extension of a side or by increasing in height or by
moves from one location or position to another.
BASE FLOOD (ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD) — The flood having a onepercent
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — A story partly underground and having more than 1/2 of its
clear ceiling height above the average level of the adjoining ground.
BASEMENT (DEFINE FOR FLOODPLAIN) — In the Floodplain District, any
area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all
sides.
BILLBOARD — Any sign used to identify or advertise the product made or
the activity being pursued by any individual business, service, commercial
or industrial enterprise and for the purpose of apprising the public of the
location of such enterprise and/or the type of activity in which it is engaged.
BLEMISH — A noticeable imperfection that impairs appearance.[Added
3-13-2008 by Ord. No. 488]
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — The officially established Board of Adjustment
of the Town of Elsmere.
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or photographs,
films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video reproductions, slides or
other visual representations which depict or describe specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas; or
A.
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in
connection with specified sexual activities.
B.
§ 225-5 ELSMERE CODE § 225-5
1:406
BUFFER ZONE — A zone lying between two others, designed to separate
the two. The buffer zone shall have no other use.
BUILDING —
BUILDING AREA — The aggregate of the maximum horizontal cross-section
areas, excluding cornices, eaves and gutters, of all buildings on a lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical dimension measured from the average
elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of the building to the highest
point of the ceiling of the top story of a flat roof, to the deckline of a mansard
roof and to the average height between the plate and ridge of a gable, hip
or gambrel roof.
BUILDING LINE — The line parallel to the street line at a distance
therefrom equal to the depth of the front yard required for the district in
which the lot is located, except that in the case of a rear lot, the building
line shall be located to the rear of the rear property line of the front lot, not
less than the depth of the required front yard.
BUILDING, PRIMARY — A buildings or buildings, in which is conducted the
main or principal use of the lot on which said building is situated.
BUSINESS OFFICE — A business establishment which does not offer a
product or merchandise for sale to the public but offers a service to the
public. However, personal services, such as barber- and beauty shops and
repair shops, such as radio and television repair shops, are not to be
included within the definition of business services.
CAMPER TRAILER — A folding structure, mounted on wheels and designed
for travel, recreation and vacation use.
CELLAR — A story partly underground and having more than 1/2 of its clear
ceiling height below the average level of the adjoining ground.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A certificate issued by the Building
Official upon completion of construction, alteration or change in occupancy
of a building. Said certificate shall acknowledge compliance with all
requirements of this chapter, such adjustment thereto granted by the Board
of Adjustment and that the building was constructed in accordance with the
"Building" shall be defined as follows:
(1) DETACHED — A building which has no party walls.
SEMIDETACHED — A building which has one party wall in common
with an adjacent building.
(2)
ATTACHED — A building which has two party walls in common with
adjacent buildings.
(3)
A.
For the purposes of this chapter, this definition shall also include tents,
lunch wagons, trailers, mobile homes, camp cars or other structures on
wheels.
B.
C. See "structure."
§ 225-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-5
1:407
plans and specifications filed with the Building Official and meets all other
applicable Town regulations.
CHURCH — A building or group of buildings, including customary
secondary buildings, designed or intended for public worship. For the
purpose of this chapter, the word "church" shall include chapels,
congregations, cathedrals, temples and similar designations as well as
rectories, parish houses, convents and such accessory uses.
CURB LEVEL — The officially established grade of the curb in front of the
midpoint of the lot or, in the absence of an officially established curb level,
the mean level of any existing curb or of the lot at the street line.
DECK — An exterior floor system supported on at least two opposing
sides by an adjoining structure and/or posts, piers, or other independent
supports, which is located in other than a front yard, and is not enclosed or
covered.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
DISPLAY — To locate an item in such a manner that, without obtaining
assistance from an employee of the business establishment, it is available
to the general public for handling and inspection; or the cover or outside
package on the item is visible to members of the general public.
DWELLING —
ELECTRIC SUBSTATION — An assemblage of equipment for purposes other
than generation or utilization, through which electric energy in bulk is
passed for the purposes of switching or modifying its characteristics to
meet the needs of the general public, provided that in residence districts
an electric substation shall not include rotating equipment, storage of
materials, trucks or repair facilities or housing of repair crews.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before December 31, 1976.
FAMILY — One or more persons, related by blood or marriage, occupying a
dwelling unit and living as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit.
SINGLE-FAMILY—A building, on a lot, designed and occupied
exclusively as a residence for one family.
A.
TWO-FAMILY—A building, on a lot, designed and occupied exclusively
as a residence for two families.
B.
MULTIPLE— A building, on a lot, designed and occupied exclusively as
a residence for three or more families.
C.
§ 225-5 ELSMERE CODE § 225-5
1:408
FARM BUILDING — Any building used for storing agricultural equipment or
farm produce, housing livestock and poultry and processing dairy products.
The term "farm building" shall not include dwellings.
FLOOD or FLOODING —
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land area that must be reserved to discharge the base flood without
increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot at
any point.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the horizontal areas of the floor or
floors of a building which are enclosed and usable for human occupancy.
Said areas shall be measured from the inside face of exterior walls or from
the center line of walls separating two dwelling units. Said areas shall not
include areas below the average level of the adjoining ground, garage space
or accessory building space.
FRONT LINE — A line parallel to the street, tangent only to the furthermost
projection of the building's facade.
GARDEN APARTMENT DEVELOPMENT — A building or group of buildings
designed to accommodate more than one dwelling unit within a single
structure and which is designed so that the group of dwelling units utilize
such common facilities as pedestrian walks, parking and garage areas, open
space, recreation areas and utility and service facilities.
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
(2)
Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are approximately caused by
flooding as defined herein and are akin to a river of liquid and
flowing mud on the surfaces of earth which is carried by a current
of water and deposited along the path of the current.
(3)
A.
The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other
body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves
or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly
caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm or by an unanticipated force of nature,
such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge or by some similarly
unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined
herein.
B.
§ 225-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-5
1:409
GOLF COURSE — An area of 50 or more contiguous acres containing a
full-size golf links, at least nine holes totaling a minimum of 2,700 yards
from tee to green, together with such necessary and usual accessory uses
as a clubhouse, caretakers' dwellings, dining and refreshment facilities and
other such uses, provided that the operation of such facilities is incidental
and subordinate to the operation of a golf course.
HARMFUL TO MINORS — The quality of any description or representation,
in whatever form, of nudity, sexual contact, sexual excitement or
sadomasochistic abuse which predominantly appeals to the prurient,
shameful or morbid interest of minors; is patently offensive to prevailing
standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable
material for minors and is, when taken as a whole, lacking in serious
literary, artistic, political or scientific value for any reasonable minor.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation or profession which:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
Is carried on in a dwelling unit, building or other structure accessory to
a dwelling unit;
A.
B. Is carried on by a member of the family residing in the dwelling unit;
Is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for
residential purposes; and
C.
D. Conforms to the following additional conditions:
§ 225-5 ELSMERE CODE § 225-5
1:410
JUNKYARD — Any area and/or structure used or intended to be used for
the conducting and operating of the business of selling, buying, storing or
trading in used or discarded metal, glass, paper, cordage or any used or
disabled fixtures, vehicles or equipment of any kind.
LOT — A parcel of land on which a main building and any accessory
buildings are or may be placed, together with the required open spaces. The
area of a lot which abuts a street shall be measured to the street line only.
In the case of a rear lot, the computed area of a lot shall not include the
accessway from the front lot line to the street.
LOT, CORNER — A parcel of land at the junction of and fronting on two or
more intersecting streets.
LOT COVERAGE — [Amended 9-11-2014 by Ord. No. 583]
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured
between the points on the side lot lines at which they are intersected by
The occupation or profession shall be carried on wholly within
the principal building or within a building or structure accessory
thereto and already existing on the premises.
(1)
Not more than one person outside the immediate family is
employed.
(2)
There is no exterior evidence of the home occupation other than a
nameplate sign that conforms to the Sign Ordinance.44
(3)
No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare
shall be produced.
(4)
The percentage of a total lot or parcel that is:
Occupied by a structure, accessory structure, parking area,
driveway, walkway, or roadway; or
(1)
Covered with gravel, stone, shell, impermeable decking, a paver,
pavement, or any man-made material; or
(2)
The ground area covered or occupied by a stairway or impermeable
deck, even when the deck is not directly touching the ground
surface; or
(3)
Any decking material that is not attached to a dwelling is
considered lot coverage.
(4)
A.
Lot coverage does not include:
A fence or wall that is less than eight inches in width that has not
been constructed with footer;
(1)
(2) A deck with gaps of at least 1/8 inch to allow water to pass freely.
B.
44.Editor's Note: See Art. VII, Sign Regulations.
§ 225-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-5
1:411
the rear line of the required front yard area, said line being the required
setback line.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — Any structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
For floodplain management purposes, the term "manufactured home" also
includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on
a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the
term "manufactured home" does not include park trailers, travel trailers
and other similar vehicles.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — Any parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide.
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — A building or use which
is designed or intended to be used for the storage, servicing, repair,
maintenance or cleaning of motor vehicles or other automotive equipment.
NET LOT AREA — The area of a lot remaining after deduction of all
easements (streets, accessways, sidewalks, etc.).
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction as
herein defined commenced on or after December 31, 1976, and includes
subsequent improvements to such structure.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots in which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after December 31, 1976.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR USE or NONCONFORMING LOT —
The lawful use of a building or structure or the lawful use of any land, as
existing and lawful at the time of the enactment of a zoning regulation or,
in the case of a change of regulations, then at the time of such change, may
be continued although such use does not conform to the provisions of such
regulations or change, and such use may be extended throughout the same
building, provided that no structural alteration of such building is proposed
or made for the purpose of such extension.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD or BASE FLOOD — The flood having a onepercent
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
§ 225-5 ELSMERE CODE § 225-5
1:412
OPEN SPACE — An unoccupied space open to the sky on the same lot with
a principal and/or accessory building.
PARKING SPACE — An open space or a garage, on a lot, used for parking
motor vehicles, the area of which is not less than 200 square feet and to
which there is access from a street or alley.
PERSON — Any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership,
association or other entity, including state and local governments and
agencies.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — A development of 40 contiguous acres,
which provides housing at varying densities and of various types and
necessary commercial, recreational and community facilities.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Town of
Elsmere.
PRIMARY USE — The main or principal activity taking place or intended to
take place in a building or on a lot.
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — Where at least 51% of the actual cash
value of a structure, less ground land, is above ground.
PRIVATE GARAGE — An accessory building used for the storage of any
number of motor vehicles owned and used by the owner or tenant of the
premises and for the storage of not more than two motor vehicles owned
and used by persons other than the owner or tenant of the premises.
PUBLIC GARAGE — A building, not a private garage, used for the storage,
repair or servicing of motor vehicles of any type of ownership.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than a designated height.
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY, GROSS — The total number of dwelling units
which may be or are developed on an area of land, before requirements for
public access and required open spaces are provided.
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal
use.
D.
§ 225-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-5
1:413
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY, NET — The resulting number of dwelling units
which may be or are developed on a site or lot after public access and
required open spaces are provided.
RESIDENTIAL PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — A professional office when
conducted on residential property and shall be limited to those of the
practice of medicine, law, dentistry, architecture and engineering. The
conduct of such profession shall permit the employment of not more than
one employee and shall be limited to 1/4 of the total floor area of the
buildings.
RESTAURANT — Any establishment, however designated, at which food is
sold for consumption on the premises to patrons seated within an enclosed
building. However, a snack bar at a public or a community playground,
playfield, park or swimming club operated solely by the agency or group
operating the recreational facilities and for the sole use of the patrons of
the facility shall not be deemed to be a restaurant.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN — An establishment where patrons are served
soft drinks, ice cream and other food products for consumption outside
the confines of the principal building or in automobiles parked on the
premises, regardless of whether or not, in addition thereto, seats or other
accommodations are provided for the patrons.
ROOM — As applied to garden apartment developments, a "room" shall
be defined as a living room, dining room, kitchen and/or bedroom. A
kitchenette, which does not include space for eating, and a dining area of
which one full wall is open into a living room shall be counted as 1/2 room.
A bathroom shall not count as a room.
SIGN — Any device, structure or object for visual communication that is
used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of
others, but not including any flag, badge or insignia of any public, quasipublic,
civic, charitable or religious groups.
SIGN AREA — The area defined by the edge or frame of a sign. Where there
is no geometric edge of frame of the sign, the area shall be defined by a
projected, enclosed, four-sided (straight sides) geometric shape which most
closely outlines said sign.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION — Any sign which shall be used to advertise and
identify the business conducted on the premises on which the sign is
located.
SINGLE AND SEPARATE OWNERSHIP — The ownership of a lot by one or
more persons, partnerships or corporations, which ownership is separate
and distinct from that of any adjoining lot.
SITE PLAN — A plan of a lot or subdivision on which is shown topography,
location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures, roads, rightsof-
way, boundaries, all essential dimensions and bearings and any other
information deemed necessary by the Planning Commission in unusual or
special cases.
§ 225-5 ELSMERE CODE § 225-5
1:414
SPECIAL EXCEPTION USE — A use which by virtue of its own peculiar
characteristics may be permitted in particular areas only after review,
public hearing and approval by the Board of Adjustment.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — An area having special flood hazard and
shown on a Flood Insurance Rate Map as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, AH, VO,
V1-30, VE, V, M, or E.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES and SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS
— Defined as those terms are defined in Title 24 of the Delaware Code,
§ 1602(17) and (18).
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L.
97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building
permit was issued, provided that the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of
the permit date. The "actual start" means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work
beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home
on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation
of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does
it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure.
START OF CONSTRUCTION (DEFINED FOR FLOODPLAIN) — For other
than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal
Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes substantial improvements
and means the date the building permit was issued, provided that the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.
The "actual start" means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on site, such as pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond
the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation such
as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footing,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the "actual start" of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other part of a building whether or
not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STORE — An establishment located in a permanent structure where goods
are regularly offered for sale.
§ 225-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-5
1:415
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the next floor above it or, if there is no floor above it,
then the space between any floor and the ceiling next above it. A split-level
story shall be considered a second story only if its floor level is six feet or
more above the floor of the level next below it.
STORY, HALF — That portion of a building under a gable, hip or gambrel
roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not
more than two feet above the floor of such half-story. A basement shall also
be included as a half-story.
STREAM BED — The limits of the land area covered by the waters in a
stream under conditions of an average twenty-five-year storm.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between a lot and the outside boundary
of a public street, road or highway legally open or officially plotted by the
Town or between a lot and a private street, road or way over which the
owners or tenants of two or more lots held in single and separate ownership
have the right-of-way.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on or in the ground or attachment to something having location on
or in the ground.
STRUCTURE (DEFINE FOR FLOODPLAIN) — In the Floodplain District, a
walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is
primarily above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair
is started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored,
before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, substantial
improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
The term does not, however, include either any project for improvement
of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or
safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living
conditions or any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a State of Delaware Inventory of Historic Places.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE — A swimming pool operated as a secondary
use to a residential dwelling unit or units and located on an individual
residential lot.
TOWNHOUSE — A building designed and occupied exclusively as a
residence for one family and one of a group of three or more attached
dwellings, placed side-by-side, separated by party walls, each containing
§ 225-5 ELSMERE CODE § 225-5
1:416
one or two stories and each having separate front and rear or side entrances
from the outside.
TRAILER CAMP — A lot or premises used for occupancy by two or more
trailers or any other vehicles used for living or sleeping purpose.
TRAVEL TRAILER and RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicular, portable
structure built on a chassis, designed as a temporary dwelling for travel,
recreation and vacation, having a body width not exceeding eight feet and
its body length not exceeding 29 feet.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed,
arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by the Board of Adjustment from the terms
of this chapter of floodplain management regulations.
YARD —
ZONING PERMIT — A permit stating that the purpose for which a building
or land is to be used is in conformity with the uses permitted and all other
requirements under this chapter for the zone in which it is located or is
to be located or as such requirements may be modified by the Board of
Adjustment.
FRONT — The required open space, extending along the street line
or, in the case of a rear lot, extending along the building setback line,
throughout the full width of the lot, exclusive of overhanging eaves,
gutters, cornices or steps.
A.
REAR — The required open space, extending along the rear line of the
lot throughout the full width of the lot, exclusive of overhanging eaves,
gutters, cornices or steps.
B.
SIDE — The required open space, extending along the side line of the
lot throughout the full depth of the lot, exclusive of overhanging eaves,
gutters, cornices or steps.
C.
§ 225-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-5
1:417

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 225-6. Applicability of regulations.
No building shall hereafter be erected and no existing building shall be
moved, structurally altered, rebuilt, added to or enlarged, nor shall any
land be used for any purpose other than those included among the uses
listed as permitted uses in each zone by this chapter and meeting the
requirements set forth in the appended Schedule;45 nor shall any open
space contiguous to any building be encroached upon or reduced in any
manner, except in conformity to the area and bulk requirements, off-street
parking requirements and all other regulations designated in the Schedule
and this chapter for the zone district in which such building or space is
located. In the event of any such unlawful encroachment or reduction, such
building or use shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter, and the
certificate of occupancy shall become void.
§ 225-7. Preservation of natural features.
A. No structure shall be built within 50 feet of a stream bed which carries
water on an average of six months of the year or on land which is subject
to periodic overflow of a stream.
B. No persons, firm or corporation shall strip, excavate or otherwise
remove topsoil for sale or other use other than on the premises from
which taken, except in connection with the construction or alteration of a
building on such premises and excavating or grading incidental thereto.
C. Existing natural features such as trees, brooks, drainage channels and
views shall be retained. Whenever such features interfere with the
proposed use of the property, the Town Manager may authorize their
removal or relocation, provided that there will be, in his opinion, no
substantial adverse effect upon other property values in the area and an
alternate is not feasible.
§ 225-8. Regulations applicable to all zones; prohibited uses.
A. No lot shall have erected upon it more than one principal residential
building. No yard or other open space provided about any building for
the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be
considered to provide a yard or open space for any other building.
B. Every principal building shall be built upon a lot with frontage upon a
public street improved to meet the Town's requirements or for which
such improvements have been insured by the posting of a performance
guaranty pursuant to Chapter 196, Subdivision and Land Development,
unless relief has been granted by the Board of Adjustment.
C. At the intersection of two or more streets, no hedge, fence or wall (other
than a single post or tree) which is higher than two feet above curb
level, nor any obstruction to vision, shall be permitted in the triangular
45.Editor's Note: The Schedule of Lot, Yard and Building Regulations is included at the end
of this chapter.
§ 225-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-8
1:419
area formed by the intersecting street lines and a line joining each 30
feet distant from said intersection along said street line.
D. All yards facing on a public street shall be considered front yards and
shall conform to the minimum front yard requirement for the zone
in which located. Corner lots shall provide the minimum front yard
requirements for the respective zone for both intersecting streets, for
both principal and accessory buildings.
E. Where a building lot has frontage on a street which the Comprehensive
Plan or the Official Map of the Town indicates is proposed for right-ofway
widening, the required front yard area shall be measured from such
proposed right-of-way line.
F. No front yard shall be used for open storage of boats, trailers, vehicles
or equipment except for passenger automobile parking on driveways. All
open storage areas in other yard areas shall be suitably screened from
view from a public street.
G. Business establishments or uses shall not display goods for sale
purposes, nor shall coin-operated vending machines of any type be
installed in any location which would infringe upon the required yard
areas specified in this chapter.
H. All yards, open space, off-street parking and required landscaping shall
be contained within the zone in which the use is permitted.
I. No commercial or construction vehicle classified as a "medium- or
heavy-duty vehicle," in Appendix A to this Chapter46 shall be parked
between sunset of one day and sunrise of the next day (overnight) in
any district other than a "GI" General Industrial District. [Amended
8-14-2014 by Ord. No. 581]
J. A secondary building attached to a primary building shall comply in
all respects with the rear requirements of this chapter for the primary
building. Detached accessory buildings shall be located to the rear
of the front building line of the primary building and shall otherwise
conform with all other building line requirements, except that the
minimum rear requirement in R-1 and R-2 Districts shall be five feet,
and except that all lots which run from street to street in R-1 and R-2
Districts shall maintain a minimum rear requirement of 20 feet.
K. For the purpose of regulating the locations of accessory buildings on
corner lots and on lots extending through between two parallel streets,
all portions of a corner lot or a through lot which fronts on a public
street shall be subject to the front yard requirements of the zone district
in which said corner lot or through lot is located.
L. When a new lot is formed so as to include within its boundaries any
part of a former lot on which there is an existing building or use, the
subdivision must be carried out in such a manner as will not infringe
upon any of the provisions of this chapter either with respect to any
existing structures or use and any proposed structures or use.
M. Off-street parking facilities shall adhere to the following:
(1) Off-street parking space shall be provided as further specified in
this chapter47 and shall be furnished with necessary passageways
46.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 225-8 ELSMERE CODE § 225-8
1:420
and driveways. All such space shall be deemed to be required space
on the lot on which it is situated and shall not be encroached
upon or reduced in any manner. All parking areas, passageways
and driveways (except when provided in connection with one-family
residences) shall be surfaced with a dustless, durable, all-weather
pavement, clearly marked for car spaces, and shall be adequately
drained, all subject to the approval of the Town Manager.
(2) None of the off-street parking facilities as required in this chapter
shall be required for any existing building or use, unless said
building or use shall be enlarged, in which case the provisions of this
chapter shall apply both to the existing and the enlarged portion of
the building or use.
(3) No off-street parking space shall be located within a required front
yard area in any zone. For the purpose of this requirement,
residential driveways shall not be considered parking spaces.
(4) All parking areas and appurtenant passageways and driveways
serving business and industrial uses shall be illuminated adequately
during the hours between sunset and sunrise when the use is in
operation. Adequate shielding shall be provided to protect adjacent
residential zones from the glare of such illumination and from that
of automobile headlights.
(5) Off-street parking areas located in commercial and industrial zones
and which provide parking for 20 or more vehicles shall be planted
with two-inch-caliper nursery-grown shade trees of a species
approved by the Town Manager as suitable for the intended purpose
and located throughout the parking area not less than 60 feet on
center in both directions.
N. The limitations of signs as set forth for the various zones by this chapter
shall not apply to any sign or direction device erected by the federal,
state, county or local government or agency thereof.
O. The limitations of sign area as set forth by this chapter for the business
and industrial zones shall not apply to parking lot markers, directional
signs, entrances and exit signs and other such signs which are erected
on the premises, provided that such signs do not exceed two square feet
in area on any one side and do not contain any advertising of the use on
the premises.
P. Except in an R-1 Residential District, fences may be erected, altered or
reconstructed to a height not to exceed four feet above ground level
when located in the front yard area or to a height of six feet above
ground level if located elsewhere on the lot, and they shall not be built
to admit less than 50% air and light in the front and side portions of
the lot only. All rear yard fences must contain a gate that is a minimum
of three feet wide. In an R-1 Residential District, the same restrictions
shall apply, except that a fence in the rear and side portions of the lot
may admit less than 50% air and light.
Q. Prohibited uses. Any use not specifically permitted in the zoning district
established by this chapter is hereby specifically prohibited from that
47.Editor's Note: See § 225-10, Off-street parking and loading regulations.
§ 225-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-8
1:421
district, and further provided that the following uses and activities shall
be specifically prohibited in any zone in the Town of Elsmere:
(1) All billboards, signboards, advertising signs or devices not expressly
related to the business being conducted on the premises or
otherwise specifically permitted by this chapter.
(2) Automobile wrecking yards, junkyards or the sorting and baling of
scrap metal, paper, rags or other scrap material.
(3) Coin-operated vending machines where they are not in an enclosed
building, except within the HD District.
(4) The parking, storing or keeping of a dismantled, inoperative or
discarded motor vehicle or any parts thereof, unless within an
enclosed building.
(5) Adult entertainment centers, adult bookstores and/or adult video
stores shall not be permitted within 500 feet of any property used
solely for residential purposes. No massage parlor, adult
entertainment center, adult bookstore and/or adult video store shall
be permitted within 1,500 feet of each other. No massage parlor,
adult entertainment establishment or adult video store shall be
permitted within 2,800 feet of any church or school. [Amended
6-11-2015 by Ord. No. 595]
(6) Businesses engaging in, carrying on or practicing the vocation or
calling of clairvoyancy, palmistry, mesmerism, astrology, fortunetelling,
character reading, exhibitions or sittings of like character;
and businesses engaging in, carrying on or practicing the art of
tattooing; and businesses engaging in or carrying on the sale of drug
paraphernalia as defined in Title 16 of the Delaware State Codes,
§ 4701(13).
R. Decks 10 feet by 12 feet or smaller in size and which do not exceed 20%
of the rear yard area shall not be calculated as lot coverage. [Added
6-8-2006 by Ord. No. 465]
S. Effective February 1, 2008, any newly constructed buildings of 25,000
square feet of gross floor area or more as defined in Chapter 26, Title
9, § 2616, of the Delaware Code, shall be designed, constructed and/or
equipped in accordance with the provisions set forth in Chapter 26, Title
9, § 2616, of the Delaware Code. [Added 11-8-2007 by Ord. No. 485]
T. Exterior building, accessory building or dwelling color. [Added
7-10-2008 by Ord. No. 493]
(1) All exterior surfaces of all buildings, accessory buildings or
dwellings, excluding roofs, shall be properly maintained and
protected from the elements by paint or other protective coating
applied in a workmanlike fashion. Painted or protective coatings
shall be uniform in color without blemishes throughout the exterior
and shall be in accordance with the color palette of the Town of
Elsmere adopted by resolution. Trim paint shall be uniform in color
and in accordance with the adopted color palette of the Town of
Elsmere without blemishes.
(2) The owner of any of any building, accessory building or dwelling
affected by this subsection of the Code may apply to the Board
of Adjustments for a variance from this regulation. The variance
§ 225-8 ELSMERE CODE § 225-8
1:422
procedure shall be the same as those established or followed for all
variance requests. However, for a variance requested pursuant to
this subsection which is the first such request for a variance to this
subsection by the current owner of the property, the normal fees
charged for a variance request shall be waived.
(3) The exterior of any building, accessory building or dwelling which is
to be painted or repainted shall be compatible with the official color
palette of the Town of Elsmere.
(4) If any building, accessory building or dwelling is secured for more
than 30 days, except in the case of a natural disaster, the boards,
panels or other means of securing structural openings shall be
painted to match the exterior color of the building, accessory
building or dwelling.
(5) In the case of any property subject to this subsection for which a
variance has not been obtained, at the time the property is painted
or other protective coating applied, the property shall be made to
conform to the provisions of this subsection. It is the intent of this
subsection that a property that is nonconforming shall not continue
as nonconforming after it is painted or other coating applied.
U. Surfaces of roads and parking, storage and repair areas. [Added
5-10-2012 by Ord. No. 54948]
(1) At any place within the Town where vehicles travel, or are to be
stored, repaired or otherwise parked, the surface upon which they
are placed shall be constructed of concrete, asphalt or paving stone
designed for vehicle traffic or storage.
(2) An applicant proposing to use a material other than those described
in Subsection U(1) of this section may apply to the Planning
Commission for approval to use a material other than those listed in
Subsection U(1) of this section.
(3) This subsection shall not apply to places owned or operated by the
Town of Elsmere.
§ 225-9. Site plan review by Planning Commission.
A. Purpose. In order to assure the harmonious development of all areas
of the Town of Elsmere in accordance with the intended appearance
of each neighborhood as established by the Comprehensive Plan, to
assure that maximum care is exercised to preserve and enhance existing
natural features, to preclude the creation of traffic flow or traffic safety
problems, to conserve the general value of property within the Town,
to maximize efforts to assure each property owner the right to safe
and comfortable enjoyment of his property, to ensure compliance with
the Town's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
permit, reduction or treatment of impervious surfaces and to take into
account floodplain management programs in effect in the Town and in
neighboring areas. A plan for every use, increase in lot coverage or
48.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that "existing residential parking spaces
located in areas designated as R-2 zoned districts which are not in compliance with this
ordinance shall be exempted from the provisions of § 225-8U until such time as the area is
improved or changed from its current condition."
§ 225-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-9
1:423
structure proposed within the municipality shall be reviewed by the
Planning Commission prior to the issuance of any permit, including but
not limited to applications for new or replacement water supply systems
and/or sanitary sewage systems and/or on-site waste disposal systems.
[Amended 4-12-2018 by Ord. No. 634]
B. The below-listed items need not be reviewed by the Planning
Commission prior to the issuance of a zoning certificate or a permit,
provided that in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer the request
meets all other requirements of the Code, decreases or maintains the
current total of impervious surfaces or includes a stormwater treatment
plan and that no variance or special exception would be needed and in
the opinion of the Building Official the request will not have a negative
impact on harmonious development within the Town of Elsmere.
[Amended 5-12-2011 by Ord. No. 531; 4-12-2018 by Ord. No. 634]
(1) The replacement of any existing structure, so long as the
replacement will not increase the size or change the general design
of the existing structure.
(2) A fence compliant with all requirements of this code and which is not
located in a floodway or flood-fringe area.
(3) An accessory structure which is compliant with all requirements of
this code and which is not located in a flood-way or flood-fringe area.
(4) The commercial use of a building or structure that had been being
used for commercial purposes, so long as the proposed use is not
substantially different from the prior usage and that the proposed
use is not expected to substantially increase the amount of traffic
experienced by the existing or past tenants.
(5) Paved areas such as sidewalks, driveways and patios compliant with
all other requirements of this code and which are not located in a
floodway or flood-fringe area.
(6) An aboveground swimming pool.
(7) Decks constructed at the grade level, which do not exceed 36 inches
in height (to the top of the highest floor boards) and which do not
violate any other provisions of this code. This exception does not
apply to construction proposed within a floodway or flood-fringe
area.
(8) Residential additions to one- and two-family dwellings which comply
with all provisions of this code and which are not located in a
floodway or flood-fringe area.
C. Procedure. After application for a zoning permit for the construction
of any use of or structure and after determination by the Building
Official that no variance or special exception from the terms of this
chapter will be required as a prerequisite to issuance of such permit,
the owner, builder or his or her agent shalt submit three copies of the
site plan for the entire parcel to be developed, architectural drawings
and specifications to include all elevations of proposed buildings, the
location of all buildings proposed upon the parcel, the location and
type of buffering, screening and landscaping proposed, the size, location
and arrangement of all off-street parking areas, driveways and loading
areas, the size, location and types of signs proposed accessory to the
§ 225-9 ELSMERE CODE § 225-9
1:424
building or use, a review by the New Castle Conservation District for
Stormwater and Sediment Control and such other information as may
be required to permit consideration of the items listed above. Such
plans shall be true and accurate, drawn at an appropriate scale and
certified by a registered architect or professional engineer licensed in
the State of Delaware; however, this requirement may be waived at the
discretion of the Building Official or the Chief Code Enforcement Officer.
The Building Official shall refer one copy of such plans to each of the
Planning Commissioners for review and recommendations. [Amended
5-12-2011 by Ord. No. 531; 4-12-2018 by Ord. No. 634]
(1) In the event that a variance or special exception to the terms of this
chapter is required, including a special exception use permit, the
owner, builder or his or her agent shall be required to meet the terms
of this section only after the Board of Adjustment has approved the
granting of the variance or special exception use. The decision of the
Board of Adjustment shall modify the terms and requirements of this
chapter for any such particular matter, and the Planning Commission
shall work within the context of only the specific relief or exception
so granted.
(2) The Planning Commission shall determine, in its review, that the
proposed site plan and structures will compare favorably with the
community standards, other neighborhood improvements and the
properly intended and planned appearance throughout any street
or neighborhood. In making such determination, the Planning
Commission shall consider:
(a) The height, bulk and area of buildings.
(b) The setback distances from all property lines and spacing of
buildings on the site.
(c) The size, location and type of signs.
(d) The size, location, construction and proposed improvement of all
buffer strips, screening and areas to be landscaped.
(e) The size, location and arrangement of all off-street parking areas
and loading areas.
(f) The relation of the proposed development to the existing
buildings and structures in the general vicinity and area.
(g) The lighting of buildings, signs and grounds.
(h) All provisions of this chapter not mentioned specifically above
and the relationship of the proposed project to the health, safety
and general welfare of the public and specifically the
relationship of the proposed development to the Comprehensive
Plan of the Town.
D. Action by Planning Commission. [Amended 2-11-2010 by Ord. No.
514]
(1) Whenever the Planning Commission is either required or requested
to review a petition or other issue, the Commission shall attempt to
issue its approval, disapproval or recommendations to such petition
or issue within 45 days of the date of the Planning Commission
meeting where the issue was first discussed by the Commission.
§ 225-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-9
1:425
(2) In the event the Commission issues a disapproval or
recommendation for denial, the reasons for the disapproval or
recommended denial shall be clearly stated in writing.
(3) The Commission may amend or place conditions upon any approval
when it believes they are necessary to carry out the intent of this
chapter or to protect the health, safety or welfare of the community.
In the event the Commission issues an approval or recommendation
for approval, it shall detail any modifications or conditions its
approval was conditioned upon.
(4) Where this Code requires the approval of a petition, application,
variance or special exception use permit that is contingent upon the
existence of a hardship, the Commission shall detail the facts or
circumstances which it believes established or proved the existence
of such a hardship in any approval or recommendation for approval.
(5) Should the Commission find that it is unable to issue an approval
or recommendation for approval because in its opinion it does not
have sufficient information to do so, the Commission shall have the
following options:
(a) The Commission may deny the petition or application or issue a
recommendation for denial and clearly state that the denial is
based upon insufficient information being provided.
(b) The Commission may forward the petition or application with
no recommendation but a statement that no recommendation
was reached because the Commission received insufficient
information in order to reach an informed decision.
(c) The Commission may advise the applicant of the additional
information it will require prior to issuing a decision. The item
shall then be placed on the agenda of the next regularly
scheduled or a special meeting of the Commission.
(d) The petition or application shall not progress until the conclusion
of the next regularly scheduled or special meeting of the
Commission.
(e) Should the Commission not meet or should the Commission not
reach a decision at their next regularly scheduled or special
meeting, the petition or application shall be considered to have
been approved by the Commission.
§ 225-10. Off-street parking and loading regulations.
A. General off-street parking provisions.
(1) Off-street parking spaces, open-air or indoor, shall be provided with
all new construction or the creation of new uses as specified in this
chapter, on the same lot as the use which they are intended to serve,
and shall be furnished with necessary passageways and driveways.
All such space shall be deemed to be the required space on the lot on
which the use it serves is situated and shall not be encroached upon
or reduced in any manner. Insofar as possible, the provisions of offstreet
parking, in accordance with the standards of this section, shall
accompany any rebuilding, reconstruction, alteration or remodeling
of any building or premises. All parking areas, passageways and
§ 225-9 ELSMERE CODE § 225-10
1:426
driveways shall be clearly marked for car spaces, except when
provided in connection with family detached or semidetached
dwelling units and shall be adequately drained and subject to
approval of the Town Manager.
(2) The collective provision of off-street parking areas by two or more
buildings or uses located on adjacent lots is limited, provided that
the total of such facilities shall not be less than the sum required
of the various buildings or uses computed separately, and further
provided that the land upon which the collective facilities are located
is owned by one or more of the collective users.
(3) All parking areas and appurtenant passageways and driveways
serving commercial and industrial uses shall be illuminated
adequately during the hours between sunset and sunrise when the
use is in operation. Adequate shielding shall be provided by
commercial and industrial uses to protect adjacent residential zones
from the glare of such illumination and from that of automobile
headlights.
(4) When the computation of the number of required parking spaces
results in a fraction, such fractions shall be resolved to the next
highest whole number.
(5) A site plan shall be filed with the zoning permit application where
off-street parking facilities are required or permitted, under the
provisions of this chapter in connection with the use or uses for
which application is being made. Surfacing, landscaping, the
location and design of entrances, exits, marking and lighting shall
be subject to the approval of the Planning Commission to ensure
adequate relation to traffic safety and protection of the adjacent
residence area.
(6) Indented parking, i.e., creating parking spaces by indenting the
curbline or right-of-way line of a street or by traversing said curbline
or right-of-way line, except for access to a clearly defined parking lot
is hereby prohibited.
(7) A parking space shall be held to be an area 20 feet long and 10 feet
wide, exclusive of aisle space, unless the use is a commercial parking
lot and full-time attendant parking is provided, in which case the
parking spaces served by the attendants may be 18 feet long and
eight feet wide.
B. Parking areas in residential districts.
(1) The establishment of any off-street parking area having a capacity of
four or more automobiles shall be subject to the issuance of a zoning
permit, and, further, subject to the following, it shall:
(a) Have a buffer strip at least 15 feet wide between it and any
adjacent residential lot.
(b) Be attractively landscaped and screened from neighboring
residential lots.
(c) Not extend into any required front yard areas, except for the
driveways.
(d) Be used solely for the periodic parking of private passenger
vehicles (noncommercial vehicles).
§ 225-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-10
1:427
(2) Not more than one boat or one recreation vehicle or one utility
trailer may be parked in the rear yard of a lot containing a singlefamily
detached or semidetached dwelling, provided that the
accessory building yard requirements are observed.
(3) No recreational vehicle or utility trailer shall be allowed in front or
side yards. No boat shall be allowed in a front yard.
C. Parking areas in commercial and industrial districts.
(1) Off-street parking areas shall be effectively screened from any
residence zone or district.
(2) Parking areas may be located in any yard area, but shall not be closer
than 15 feet to any street line or property line. Further, not more
than 10 parking spaces shall be placed within a front yard of any
lot in the HD or GI District having the minimum required frontage.
For each 20 feet of width in excess of the required minimum width,
one additional parking space may be placed in the front yard. In the
CC Community Commercial District, all parking may be provided in
the front yard. Buffer zone requirements shall not be superseded by
these regulations.
(3) Curb cuts used as a means of ingress or egress for nonresidential
off-street parking areas shall be not less than 20 feet nor more than
30 feet in width. No curb cut shall be located closer than 75 feet
to the intersection of two public streets measured by extending the
curblines to the point of intersection. Only one such curb cut shall
be permitted for lots of less than 100 feet in width. One additional
curb cut shall be permitted for each additional 100 feet of frontage
or fraction thereof.
(4) Off-street parking areas which provide parking for 20 or more
vehicles shall be provided with shade trees of a type approved by the
Planning Commission. The shade trees shall be located in a planned
manner within the parking lot area in quantity equal to one shade
tree for every 10 parking spaces.
(5) All open parking areas which are located at grade or at roof level
(not above two floors) shall be screened from the view of adjoining
residence districts, including such districts situated across a street.
Such screening shall be maintained in good condition at all times,
may be interrupted by normal entrances and exits and shall have no
signs hung or attached thereto, except customary traffic directional
and control signs.
D. Parking requirements. The number of off-street parking spaces to be
provided for each use and establishment shall be calculated, in
accordance with the standards prescribed by Subsection E, schedule of
minimum parking requirements, in accordance with the following rules
of application:
(1) Parking or storage space may be provided within a building or
elsewhere on the premises or on other premises of the same class
or district applicable to the primary structure which is being served
and within 1,000 feet of an entrance to the building or other
establishment to be served, and, except when otherwise indicated by
§ 225-10 ELSMERE CODE § 225-10
1:428
the terms of this chapter, required yard space other than front yards
may be used for such purposes.
(2) Where a building contains a number of uses or activities, the
required off-street parking shall be the aggregate sum of that which
would be required for each use individually.
E. Schedule of minimum parking requirements.
(1) This schedule is organized to provide minimum parking standards
within four classes of uses and activities: residential, commercial,
industrial and miscellaneous.
(a) Residential.
[1] One-family dwellings (detached and attached): two spaces
for each dwelling unit.
[2] Garden apartments: two spaces for each unit.
(b) Commercial.
[1] General rule: one space for each 200 square feet of total
floor area devoted to such functions, plus one space for
each employee on the largest work shift if it is a "customeroriented"
use.
[2] Restaurants and similar establishments: one space for each
table or booth plus one space for each employee on the
largest working shift.
[3] Professional offices: one space for each 100 square feet of
total floor area devoted to such functions.
[4] Business offices: one space for each 75 square feet of total
floor area devoted to such functions.
[5] Wholesale trade establishments: one space for each
employee on the largest work shift plus not fewer than four
spaces for visitors for each 10,000 square feet of total floor
area.
(c) Industrial.
[1] General rule: one space for each 250 square feet of total
floor area devoted to assembly or manufacturing functions
and one space for each 75 square feet of total floor area
devoted to administrative office functions or two spaces for
each employee of the total of the two largest work shifts,
whichever is the greater.
[2] Warehouses: one space for each employee on the largest
work shift plus not fewer than four spaces for visitors for
each 10,000 square feet of total floor area.
(d) Miscellaneous.
[1] Churches and similar establishments: see § 225-28B(5).
[2] Theaters, auditoriums and other places of public assembly:
one space for each three seats.
[3] Amusement facilities (recreations): one space for each 100
square feet of total floor area or one space for each four
persons using the facilities at the projected peak hour of use.
A bowling alley shall provide six spaces for each bowling
lane.
§ 225-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-10
1:429
[4] Schools: one space per staff member plus three for each
administrative office. High schools shall provide student
parking at the rate of five spaces per classroom.
[5] Public building: one space for each 200 square feet of total
floor area.
[6] Private recreation: one space for each five members.
[7] Clubhouses (and lodges, etc.): one for each five members.
F. Off-street loading and unloading space. On the same premises with
every building or part thereof hereafter erected to be occupied for the
purpose of manufacturing, storage warehouse, retail store, wholesale
store, market, hotel, hospital or other use similarly involving largevolume
receipt of or distribution of materials or merchandise by motor
vehicle, there shall be provided and maintained adequate space for
loading and unloading services, so placed and arranged as not to
interfere with public use of the sidewalks, street or alley. There shall
be not less than one such loading and unloading space for every 20,000
square feet of building floor area or fraction thereof, in excess of 6,000
square feet, used for any of the above-mentioned purposes. To satisfy the
above requirement, a loading and unloading space shall be not less than
10 feet by 60 feet within the property lines and have a height clearance
of not less than 14 feet.
§ 225-11. (Reserved)49
49.Editor's Note: Former § 225-11, Permit requirements, was repealed 11-13-2014 by Ord.
No. 586.
§ 225-10 ELSMERE CODE § 225-11
1:430
ARTICLE III
Zone Regulations
§ 225-12. Establishment of zones.
For the purpose of this chapter, the Town of Elsmere is hereby divided into
the following zoning districts:
R-1 Residential District
R-2 Residential District
R-GA Garden Apartment District
CC Community Commercial District
HD Highway Development District
GI General Industrial District
FP Floodplain District
§ 225-13. Zoning Map.
A. The boundaries of all zone districts shall be shown on a map attached
to and made a part of this chapter and titled "Zoning Map, Town of
Elsmere." Said map and explanation and references thereon are hereby
incorporated into and declared to be a part of this chapter.50
B. No proposed ordinance to amend the zoning classification for a parcel
of land, or any portion thereof, shall be considered by the Town Council
within two years after any of the following actions with respect to such
parcel: [Added 7-11-2013 by Ord. No. 568]
(1) Any prior action which changed the zoning classification; or
(2) A prior rejection of an application to amend the zoning classification.
C. The Building Official shall determine whether or not any proposed
amendment to the Zoning Map is subject to the two-year time restriction
set forth in Subsection B of this section. If the Building Official finds that
the time restriction does apply, no further processing of the application
to amend the Zoning Map shall occur unless the Town Council shall, by
resolution and after public hearing, determine that with respect to such
parcel there is a reasonable basis to believe there has been a substantial
change in the circumstances or conditions affecting the property or in
the proposed use or plans for the use after the time of the prior action
referred to in Subsection B of this section which would justify the change
of zoning classification for such parcel, provided that a determination
with respect to such change shall not be made more than once within the
two-year period specified in Subsection B of this section. A two-thirds
vote of all members of the Town Council shall be required to approve
a resolution approving an action which would reduce the two-year time
restriction. [Added 7-11-2013 by Ord. No. 568]
50.Editor's Note: The current Zoning Map, along with a Table of Zoning Map amendments, is
included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 225-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-13
1:431
D. The provisions of Subsection B of this section shall not apply to zoning
changes initiated by the Town of Elsmere. [Added 7-11-2013 by Ord.
No. 568]
§ 225-14. Zone boundaries.
A. Zone boundary lines are intended to follow the center line of streets,
railroad rights-of-way, streams and recorded property lines, except
where indicated otherwise by dimension or other notation on the Zoning
Map of the Town of Elsmere.
B. Where zone boundaries are not fixed by dimension or other notation and
where they approximately follow property lines or other natural features
and do not scale more than 25 feet distant therefrom, such property
line or natural feature shall be deemed to be the location of the zone
boundary.
C. In unsubdivided land, where the zone boundary divides a property and
the location of such boundary is not fixed by dimension or other notation
on the Zoning Map, then the location of such boundary shall be obtained
through the use of the graphic scale, and the Building Official shall so
use the scale.
D. Where a district boundary line divides a lot held in single and separate
ownership at the effective date of this chapter, the use regulations
applicable to the less restricted district shall extend over the portion of
the lot in the more restricted district a distance of not more than 50 feet
beyond the boundary line.
§ 225-15. Schedule of regulations.51
The Schedule of Lot, Yard and Building Regulations, included as Table
I, sets forth the regulations of this chapter with respect to minimum lot
size, yard dimensions, maximum lot coverage, maximum height and number
of stories and minimum floor area for each of the various zones. Unless
modified elsewhere in this chapter, such standards shall be deemed to be
the minimum (or maximum) permitted in each of the zones.
A. In an R-2 Zone, where the original structure as completed by the initial
builder, prior to the date of adoption of this chapter, exceeds the
maximum lot coverage of 30%, that lot shall be entitled to an additional
lot coverage of 10%, not to exceed a total lot coverage of 40%, subject to
all other pertinent zoning and building regulations.
(1) Such addition must be 50% open on all sides, without roof.
(2) This subsection shall pertain only to those homes addressed off of
Dover, Cypress, Sycamore and Maple Avenues.
§ 225-16. R-1 Residential District.
The following regulations apply in the R-1 Residential District:
A. Permitted primary uses.
(1) One-family dwellings.
51.Editor's Note: The Schedule of Lot, Yard and Building Regulations is included at the end
of this chapter.
§ 225-13 ELSMERE CODE § 225-16
1:432
(2) Municipal parks, playgrounds, buildings and uses deemed
appropriate and necessary by the Town Council of the Town of
Elsmere.
(3) Golf courses.
(4) Two-family dwellings, provided that such a structure was regularly
used as a two-family dwelling prior to the enactment of this chapter.
[Added 7-13-2006 by Ord. No. 468]
B. Permitted secondary uses.
(1) Private garages not in excess of 750 square feet of building area.
(2) Customary residential storage building not in excess of 100 square
feet of building area.
(3) Shelters for domestic pets not in excess of 50 square feet of building
area, exclusive of runs.
(4) Other customary residential secondary structures such as private
swimming pools, fireplaces, trellises, post lights and the like.
(5) Signs, subject to the restrictions of Article VII.
(6) Home occupations that comply with Town of Elsmere § 131-32.
[Added 3-10-2016 by Ord. No. 612]
C. Permitted special exception uses.
(1) Public utility uses.
(2) Public and private schools.
(3) Convalescent homes or sanitariums.
(4) Clubs or lodges organized for fraternal or social purposes, provided
that the chief activity shall not be one which is customarily carried
on as a business, and provided that the buildings and services shall
be for the use of members and their guests only.
(5) Planned unit developments, at a gross density not to exceed 2.5
dwelling units per acre.
(6) Cluster residential development.
(7) Churches and similar places of worship, including rectories, parish
houses and convents which are located on the same lot.
(8) Customary and conventional farming operations, including the
raising of livestock, poultry, vegetables, flowers and horticultural
materials, other than as a commercial greenhouse.
(9) Home occupations not in compliance with Town of Elsmere § 131-34.
[Amended 3-10-2016 by Ord. No. 612]
D. Other provisions and requirements.
(1) Churches and similar permitted uses shall have a minimum lot area
of two acres.
(2) At least 50%, but no more than 75%, of the permissible dwelling
units within a planned unit development shall be single-family
detached dwellings. No more than 30% of the permissible dwelling
units shall be townhouses, and no more than 30% of the permissible
units shall be apartments.
§ 225-17. R-2 Residential District.
The following regulations apply in the R-2 Residential District:
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Any two-family semidetached dwellings.
§ 225-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-17
1:433
(2) Any primary use enumerated in § 225-16A.
B. Permitted secondary uses.
(1) Any secondary use enumerated in § 225-16B.
C. Permitted special exception uses.
(1) Any special exception use enumerated in § 225-16C.
(2) Planned unit developments, in accordance with § 225-28F.
(3) Cluster residential developments.
(4) Townhouses in accordance with § 225-28F(4)(b)[1] and [2].
D. Other provisions and requirements.
(1) Same as enumerated in § 225-16D.
(2) At least 10%, but no more than 25%, of the permissible dwelling
units for a planned unit development shall be single-family detached
dwellings. No more than 50% of the permissible dwelling units shall
be townhouses, and no more than 50% of the permissible dwelling
units shall be apartments.
§ 225-18. R-GA Garden Apartment District.
The following regulations apply in the R-GA Garden Apartment District:
A. Permitted primary uses.
(1) Garden apartment projects.
(2) Townhouse developments, at a density not to exceed 21 dwelling
units per acre.
(3) Municipal parks, playgrounds, buildings and uses deemed
appropriate and necessary by the Town Council of the Town of
Elsmere.
(4) Churches and similar places of worship, including rectories, parish
houses and convents which are located on the same lot.
(5) One-family dwellings, as per the lot yard and building regulations for
the R-2 Residential District.52
(6) Two-family dwellings, as per the lot yard and building regulations for
the R-2 Residential District.
B. Permitted secondary uses.
(1) Any secondary use enumerated in § 225-16B, but only to apply to
single-family, two-family and townhouse uses.
(2) Any secondary use normally incidental to garden apartment projects,
such as but not limited to playground and recreation areas,
swimming pools, coin-operated laundry facilities and vending
machines which are not externally visible, provided that the use of
such facilities is limited to the residents of the project.
C. Permitted special exception uses.
(1) Public utility uses.
D. Other provisions and requirements.
(1) Same as enumerated in § 225-16D.
(2) Garden apartment projects shall be subject to the following
regulations:
52.Editor's Note: The Schedule of Lot, Yard and Building Regulations is included at the end
of this chapter.
§ 225-17 ELSMERE CODE § 225-18
1:434
(a) The gross density of the project (units per gross acre) shall not
exceed 12 units per acre.
(b) Type and design of units.
[1] One-room apartment sizes shall contain not less than 500
square feet of gross floor area.
[2] All other apartment sizes shall contain not less than 750
square feet of gross floor area.
[3] Not more than 12 dwelling units shall be located in a single
structure.
[4] No apartment shall be located within a cellar.
(c) Site design requirements.
[1] Under no circumstance shall access be obtained from a
minor street.
[2] Private streets shall provide access to units within the
project, but shall be constructed in accordance with
applicable municipal standards and shall be protected by a
permanent easement.
[3] The design of streets within the project shall provide proper
access to every building for fire-fighting equipment, trash
collection and deliveries.
[4] The maximum distance between either entrance to any
garden apartment building and the closest point of a
parking area shall not exceed 200 feet.
[5] Recreation areas shall be provided at a rate of 100 square
feet per dwelling unit. Such areas shall be improved and
equipped in a manner suited to the various age groups
anticipated in the project.
[6] The minimum distance between two residential buildings in
the project shall be not less than 20 feet at the closest point.
[7] Open courts in which residential buildings are located on
three sides shall be of adequate size to provide natural light
and ventilation to all dwelling units. Such courts shall not
be less than 50 feet in width. In addition, the depth of such
a court shall not exceed 1 1/2 times the width of the court.
[8] Where contiguous buildings are parallel, there shall be a
minimum difference of five feet in the front building line.
Not more than three contiguous buildings shall have
parallel front building lines, after which the next building
shall be oriented so that its building line deflects from the
parallel line by at least 30°.
[9] The character of the site shall be preserved by retaining
and protecting all existing healthy tree growth and other
natural features of the site. Such additional plant material
shall be added as is necessary to provide privacy, shade and
beauty of buildings and grounds and screen objectionable
features.
[10] Outdoor lighting fixtures shall be provided at locations
which will assure the safe and convenient use of walks,
§ 225-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-18
1:435
steps, parking areas, driveways, streets and other such
facilities.
[11] Electric power and telephone lines shall be installed
underground.
[12] Facilities for the temporary sanitary storage of trash and
refuse shall be provided at the rate of one such area for
each 10 dwelling units. The design of such facilities shall
meet with the approval of the Division of Physical Health.
Trash and refuse shall be removed from these storage areas
at least twice each week for disposal. On-site incineration is
prohibited.
(d) A resident superintendent shall be provided for each project.
Any project which includes more than 100 units shall have one
additional maintenance employee for each additional 100 units
or part thereof.
(e) Garden apartment projects shall be subject to the site design
review procedure set forth in this chapter.
E. Permitted special exception uses.
(1) Offices for professional services and administrative activities, limited
to the following:
(a) Advertising agency.
(b) Attorney.
(c) Beautician.
(d) Broker.
(e) Accountant.
(f) Chiropractor.
(g) Dentist.
(h) Incorporator.
(i) Manicurist.
(j) Nurse.
(k) Occupational therapist.
(l) Optometrist.
(m) Osteopath.
(n) Photographer.
(o) Physician.
(p) Private detective.
(q) Engineer.
(r) Psychologist.
(s) Secretary.
(t) Public stenographer.
(u) Sales representative.
(v) Telephone answering service.
(w) Travel agent.
(x) Commercial lessor.
(y) Real estate broker.
(2) All such activities shall be permitted in parts of structures in which
the majority of the square footage of occupiable space is subject to
flooding in the floodplain, as that area is defined in § 225-22A(1) and
located in areas designated under § 225-18A(1).
§ 225-18 ELSMERE CODE § 225-19
1:436
§ 225-19. CC Community Commercial District.
The following regulations apply in the CC Community Commercial District:
A. Permitted primary uses.
(1) Retail business establishments, limited to the following:
(a) Hardware, paint, glass and wallpaper stores.
(b) Department stores and variety stores.
(c) Dry goods stores.
(d) Food stores, dairy stores and retail bakeries.
(e) Apparel and accessories stores.
(f) Furniture, home furnishings and equipment stores.
(g) Radio, television and music stores.
(h) Eating and drinking places, not including drive-in restaurants.
(i) Drug stores.
(j) Liquor stores.
(k) Antique stores.
(l) Book and stationery stores.
(m) Sporting goods, bicycle and hobby stores.
(n) Jewelry stores.
(o) Florist stores.
(p) Cigar stores and news dealers.
(q) Camera, photographic supply and art-supply stores.
(r) Gift, novelty and souvenir stores.
(s) Optical goods stores.
(t) Luggage and leather goods stores.
(2) Personal service establishments, limited to the following:
(a) Banks and fiduciary institutions.
(b) Credit agencies.
(c) Security and commodity brokers.
(d) Real estate and insurance offices.
(e) Holding and investment company offices.
(f) Laundry and dry-cleaning pickup stores.
(g) Photographic studios.
(h) Barber- and beauty shops.
(i) Shoe repair shops.
(j) Garment pressing, alteration and repair shops.
(k) Miscellaneous repair services, other than automotive.
(l) Motion picture theaters, except outdoor.
(m) Dance studios and schools.
(n) Medical and health services, excluding veterinarian services.
(o) Legal services.
(p) Engineering and architectural services.
(q) Accounting and bookkeeping services.
(r) Funeral homes.
(s) State-approved day-care centers.
(3) Municipal parks, playgrounds, buildings and uses deemed
appropriate and necessary by the Town Council of the Town of
Elsmere.
(4) Printing or publishing establishment.53
§ 225-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-19
1:437
(5) Residential uses enumerated in § 225-16A, B and C subject to the
provisions of § 225-16D.
(6) Two-family dwellings. [Added 7-13-2006 by Ord. No. 46854]
B. Permitted secondary uses.
(1) Off-street parking facilities for the use of customers and employees.
(2) Garage space for the storage of commercial vehicles uses in
conjunction with a permitted commercial use.
(3) Signs in accordance with the regulations of this chapter.55
C. Special exception uses.
(1) Public utility uses.
(2) Commercial uses which are of the type identified in § 225-19A and B,
but were not specified.
(3) General office uses.
(4) Motor vehicle service establishment uses.
(5) Commercial uses specified in § 225-19A and B, but which are not
conducted nor intended to be conducted on a regular, continuous
basis. Such uses may be those of a seasonal nature or those not
conducted in a store.
D. Other provisions and requirements.
(1) Truck loading and unloading facilities shall be provided on the
property in other than the front yard area in sufficient amount to
permit the transfer of goods in other than a public street.
(2) Each permitted use shall be conducted within a completely enclosed
building, except for: [Amended 9-11-2014 by Ord. No. 582]
(a) Off-street parking; and
(b) The patio permitted by § 225-31.
(3) No permanent storage of merchandise, articles or equipment shall
be permitted outside the building. Temporary outdoor storage in
conjunction with a retail or other permitted use shall be permitted,
provided that each storage shall be limited to a reasonable supply of
the goods which are to be sold and displayed on the premises and
that such storage shall be within a fenced area and that no goods,
articles or equipment shall be displayed or offered for sale beyond
the front line of the buildings on such premises or beyond the side
lines of the buildings on corner premises.
(4) No vending machine or station or similar use shall be allowed in the
required front yard or in a yard abutting a street.
(5) Each use established in this zone shall set aside at least 20 feet
in width immediately adjacent to any street upon which the lot has
frontage and extending for the full frontage of the lot, for purposes
of providing for proper site distance and buffering from the public
road. Within such area, the owner shall establish and maintain a
53.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(4), Garden apartment projects, was repealed
7-13-2006 by Ord. No. 468, which ordinance provided that it shall apply to any property
that was in a Community Commercial District on or before 4-1-2006 but was rezoned since
that date to a different zoning classification.
54.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it shall apply to any property that was in a
Community Commercial District on or before 4-1-2006 but was rezoned since that date to
a different zoning classification.
55.Editor's Note: See Art. VII, Sign Regulations.
§ 225-19 ELSMERE CODE § 225-19
1:438
planting of grass and/or horticultural ground cover. Other landscape
materials may be incorporated, provided that there is no obstruction
to vision other than a tree trunk, in the area between two feet and
seven feet above ground level. No other use shall be made of this
buffer area other than for a single driveway to provide access to the
use for each 100 feet of frontage upon a public road. Such driveway
shall not exceed 32 feet in width.
(6) Wherever the property line of a use in this zone abuts the boundary
of a residence zone, an area of not less than 20 feet in width shall
be set aside as a buffer area and used for no other purpose. Said
buffer shall be planted with a screen of evergreen shrubs which, in
the opinion of the Planning Commission, will be sufficient to preclude
any adverse effect of the use upon adjacent residential property or
from the transmission of headlight glare across the property line.
In addition to the landscape screen, the area shall be adequately
planted with other landscape materials, grass and/or ground cover
to present an attractive appearance.
(7) In any business establishment open to persons under the age of 17
years it shall be prohibited to display a book, pamphlet, newspaper,
magazine, film or videocassette, the cover of which depicts material
harmful to minors. Any business establishment which deals in
material harmful to minors is deemed to have complied with this
subsection if the establishment physically and visually segregates
material harmful to minors and keeps such materials in a separate
area or room to which persons under the age of 17 years are not
permitted.
E. Exterior building, accessory building or dwelling color. [Added
3-13-2008 by Ord. No. 488]
(1) All exterior surfaces of all buildings, accessory buildings or
dwellings, excluding roofs, shall be properly maintained and
protected from the elements by paint or other protective coating
applied in a workmanlike fashion. Painted or protective coatings
shall be uniform in color without blemishes throughout the exterior
and shall be in accordance with the color palette of the Town of
Elsmere adopted by resolution. Trim paint shall be uniform in color
and in accordance with the adopted color palette of the Town of
Elsmere without blemishes.
(2) The owner of any of any building, accessory building or dwelling
affected by this subsection of the Code may apply to the Board
of Adjustments for a variance from this regulation. The variance
procedure shall be the same as those established or followed for all
variance requests. However, for a variance requested pursuant to
this subsection which is the first such request for a variance to this
subsection by the current owner of the property, the normal fees
charged for a variance request shall be waived.
(3) The exterior of any building, accessory building or dwelling which is
to be painted or repainted shall be compatible with the official color
palette of the Town of Elsmere.
§ 225-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-19
1:439
(4) If any building, accessory building or dwelling located in the
Community Commercial District is secured for more than 30 days,
except in the case of a natural disaster, the boards, panels or other
means of securing structural openings shall be painted to match the
exterior color of the building, accessory building or dwelling.
(5) In the case of any property subject to this subsection for which a
variance has not been obtained, at the time the property is painted
or other protective coating applied, the property shall be made to
conform to the provisions of this subsection. It is the intent of this
subsection that property that is nonconforming shall not continue as
nonconforming after it is painted or other coating applied.
§ 225-20. HD Highway Development District.
The following regulations apply in the HD Highway Development District:
A. Permitted primary uses.
(1) Retail stores and personal service establishments, including but not
limited to commercial uses identified in § 225-19A(1), (2) and (4).
(2) Restaurant.
(3) Indoor facility of amusement or assembly.
(4) Club or lodge.
(5) Bus station.
(6) Municipal buildings and uses deemed appropriate and necessary by
the Town Council of the Town of Elsmere.
(7) General office uses.
B. Permitted secondary uses.
(1) Any secondary use enumerated in § 225-19B.
C. Permitted special exception uses.
(1) Laboratory (scientific or industrial research testing, experimental),
provided that no processing shall be permitted except insofar as
such processing is incidental to a research, experimental or testing
process and there is no commercial production or storage of goods,
materials or any other substance for sale, except as may be produced
by a small pilot plant for off-site sale or for storage necessary for
scientific research.
(2) Tourist cabin court, hotel or motel, for transient guests only, on a
lot area of three acres or more, provided that such use is located so
as not to detract from the character of the immediately surrounding
area.
(3) Service station, automobile sales agency, public garage, parking
garage or lot (not to include car lot or trailer sales agency as a main
use), but not including storage of wrecked cars, provided that:
(a) All facilities are located and all services are conducted on the lot;
(b) All repair work shall be conducted within an entirely enclosed
building;
(c) No equipment for the service of gasoline or oil shall be placed
closer to any street or property line than 20 feet;
(d) No portion of such structure or its equipment shall be located
within 800 feet of another service station on the same side of the
street within the same block; and
§ 225-19 ELSMERE CODE § 225-20
1:440
(e) Any such use shall be permitted only where it is determined
that it will not materially interfere with the main pedestrian
movement in conjunction with a compact retail area.
(4) Contractors', craftsmen's or general service shop, including welding
and similar shops.
(5) Motor vehicle body repair shop, provided that all repair work shall
be conducted within an entirely enclosed building; and incidental
storage of materials and wrecked or damaged vehicles out of doors
shall be shielded from any adjacent streets, uses or residential areas
by fencing, landscaping or other appropriate measures.
(6) Wholesale establishments.
(7) Commercial greenhouses.
(8) Veterinarian services.
(9) Public utility uses.
D. Other provisions and requirements.
(1) Same as enumerated in § 225-19D.
(2) Access barrier. Each use established in this zone shall set aside an
area at least 30 feet in width immediately adjacent to any street upon
which the lot has frontage and extending for the full frontage of the
lot, for purposes of providing for proper site distance and buffering
from the public road. Within such area, the owner shall establish and
maintain a planting of grass and/or horticultural ground cover. Other
landscape materials may be incorporated, provided that there is no
obstruction to vision, other than a tree trunk, in the area between
two feet and seven feet above ground level. No other use shall be
made of this buffer area other than for such accessways as are
provided for in Subsection D(3) below.
(3) Accessways. Each grouping of attached buildings or grouping of
uses permitted as part of a single integrated plan shall have not
more than two accessways to any one public highway or street.
Neither of such accessways shall be more than 32 feet in width. The
intent of this section is to encourage the use of common accessways
by two or more permitted highway uses in order to reduce the
number and closeness of access points along the highway and to
encourage the fronting of commercial structures upon a marginal
street, private roadway or similar area and not directly upon a
public highway. Adequate acceleration and deceleration lanes shall
be provided in the vicinity of shopping centers and in other locations
where desirable.
(4) Off-street parking and loading. Off-street parking and loading areas
shall be provided. In addition, areas provided for the loading and
unloading of delivery trucks and other vehicles and for the servicing
of establishments or shops by refuse collections, fuel and other
service vehicles shall be so arranged that they may be used without
blocking or otherwise interfering with the use of accessways or
automobile parking facilities.
(5) Special buffer requirements adjacent to residential districts.
Wherever the property line of a use in this zone abuts the boundary
of a residence zone, an area of not less than 50 feet in width shall be
§ 225-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-20
1:441
set aside as a buffer area and used for no other purpose. Said buffer
area shall be planted with a screen of evergreen shrubs, which in
the opinion of the Planning Commission will be sufficient to preclude
any adverse effect of the use upon adjacent residential properties,
either by reason of objectionable view from the residential property
or from the transmission of headlight glare across the property line.
In addition to the landscape screen, the area shall be adequately
planted with other landscape materials, grass and/or ground cover
to present an attractive appearance. Prior to the issuance of a zoning
permit, the Building Official shall submit the applicant's plans for
such buffer area to the Planning Commission for its approval.
§ 225-21. GI General Industrial District.
The following regulations apply in the GI General Industrial District:
A. Permitted primary uses.
(1) Manufacturing uses, including, but not necessarily limited to:
(a) Electronic component manufacture and assembly.
(b) Bottling establishments.
(c) Carpet and rug cleaning.
(d) Food and associated industries.
(e) Contractor or general service shops, including plumbing, heating,
carpentry, welding and similar shops.
(f) Scientific research laboratories and other experimental, testing or
research establishments, including applied engineering research such as
product development.
(g) Manufacture of beverages, ceramic products, clothing, cosmetics,
electrical appliances, silverware, tobacco products, tools and hardware,
toys and umbrellas.
(h) Manufacture of products from the following previously prepared
materials: bone, canvas, cork, feathers, felt, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather,
paper, plastics, shells, small rubber products and synthetic treated
fabrics (excluding all rubber and synthetic processing) and wood.
(i) Manufacture of jewelry, watches, clocks, optical goods, musical,
professional and scientific equipment.
(j) Light metal processing, including finishing, plating, grinding,
sharpening, polishing, cleaning, rustproofing and heat treatment;
fabrication or assembly of small products.
(k) Textile manufacture or processing, excluding bleaching.
(l) Warehousing or storage within a completely enclosed building,
excluding storage of hazardous materials.
(m) Printing or publishing establishments.
(n) Business establishments, wholesale.
(o) Building materials supply or distribution facilities.
(p) Automotive recycler businesses as defined and licensed by the State of
Delaware under Title 21, Chapter 75, of the Delaware Code. [Added
7-14-2011 by Ord. No. 53756]
(q) Uses enumerated in § 225-20A and B, subject to the provisions of
§ 225-19D.
B. Permitted secondary uses.
§ 225-20 ELSMERE CODE § 225-21
1:442
(1) Signs, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.57
(2) Private garage and storage buildings which are necessary to store any
vehicles, equipment or materials on the premises.
(3) Off-street parking space for the use of employees and visitors.
C. Special exception uses.
(1) Motor vehicle service establishments.
(2) Uses enumerated in § 225-20C(2), (7) and (8).
(3) Public utility uses.
(4) Motor vehicle body shops.
(5) A single residential dwelling unit as an accessory use, subject to the following
additional requirements: [Added 7-14-2011 by Ord. No. 536; amended
5-10-2012 by Ord. No. 553]
(a) The residential dwelling unit may only be established in an existing
building on the property;
(b) The resident of the dwelling unit must be an employee of the owner of
the property or of the business located on the property;
(c) Such an accessory dwelling unit may not exceed 600 square feet within
the existing building and must contain cooking and bathroom facilities
for the exclusive use of the resident of the dwelling unit; and
(d) Such accessory dwelling unit must receive a certificate of occupancy
from the Town of Elsmere.
D. Other provisions and requirements.
(1) Access barrier. Access to the public highway or street shall be controlled in the
interest of public safety. Each building or group of buildings and its parking
or service areas shall be physically separated from the highway or street by a
curb, planting strip or other suitable barrier against unchanneled motor vehicles
ingress or egress, except for accessways as authorized by Subsection D(2) below.
(2) Accessways. Each separate parcel shall have not more than two accessways to
any one public highway or street. Neither of such accessways shall be more
than 32 feet in width. The intent of this subsection is to encourage the use of
common accessways by two or more parcels in order to reduce the number and
closeness of access points along the street or highway and to encourage the
fronting of permitted structures upon a marginal street and not directly upon a
public highway.
(3) One off-street parking space shall be provided for each employee on the
maximum work shift, provided that at no time shall the use result in parking on
a public street for any reason.
(4) Parking areas may be located in any of the required yard areas other than the
front yard, provided that they are not closer than 20 feet to the boundary of a
residential zone or street line. Refer to § 225-10E(1)(c) for parking standards,
which shall not be superseded by these regulations.
(5) Each use located in this zone shall provide truck loading and unloading space on
the same lot and in other than the required front yard so as to permit the transfer
of goods in other than a public street.
(6) Each use established in this zone shall set aside 10% of the tract for seeding and
landscaping and use that area for no other purposes.
56.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection
A(1)(p) as Subsection A(1)(q).
57.Editor's Note: See Art. VII, Sign Regulations.
§ 225-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-21
1:443
(7) All industrial activities or processes shall take place within an enclosed building.
Incidental storage of materials and vehicles out of doors shall be shielded from
any adjacent public streets or residential areas by fencing, landscaping or other
appropriate measures.
(8) The following uses or activities are specifically prohibited in this zone:
(a) Auction markets.
(b) Automobile wrecking yards, junkyards or disassembly yards or the sorting or
bailing of scrap metal, paper, rags or other scrap metal.
(c) Gas (illuminating or heating) storage, except for consumption on the
premises.
(d) Incineration, reduction, storage or dumping of slaughterhouse refuse, rancid
fats, garbage, trash, junk, dead animals or offal, except by the municipality
or its agents.
(e) Petroleum or its derivatives except when stored in underground tanks and
not in excess of 40,000 gallons of fuel oil or 20,000 gallons of gasoline or
kerosene.58
(9) Along any district boundary line, a buffer yard shall be provided which shall
not be less than 100 feet in width and shall be used for no other purpose. This
required yard shall be measured from the boundary line or from the street line
where the street constitutes the boundary. The 30 feet of such yard space nearest
the district boundary line shall be used only as an evergreen buffer planting strip,
on which shall be placed shrubbery and/or trees. Where a street constitutes a
boundary, screen effect will not be required.
(10) In no case shall the smoke emitted into the open air from any fuel-burning
equipment, internal combustion engine, open fire, stack or chimney exceed a
shade or appearance darker than No. 2 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart.
(11) There shall be no emission of odorous gases, odorous matter or fumes in such
quantities as to be evident or perceptible to human senses at the property lines
of the lot on which the use is conducted, and no emission shall be made which
can cause damage to human health, to animals or vegetation or other forms of
property or which can cause any soiling at any point beyond the lot line of the
use creating the emission.
(12) Dust from any processing operation will be minimized by the installation and
use of appropriate mechanical and electrical devices to the extent necessary
to ensure that such dust will not be offensive at or beyond any property line.
All internal roads, drives and parking areas for the use of the general public
or by employees or trucks shall be hard-surfaced. All other roads or drives for
occasional use shall have a dust-free surface and shall be maintained in a dustfree
condition at all times. All dry waste in the form of dust or fine particles will
be transported in covered or closed vehicles. Disposal of waste within the Town
shall be in a manner and place approved by the Town Council.
(13) At no point on the boundary of the property on which a use is conducted
shall the sound pressure level of any individual operation or plant (other than
background noises produced by sources not under control of this chapter, such
as the operation of motor vehicles or other transportation facilities) exceed the
decibel levels in the designated octave bands shown below:
58.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(8)(f), listing residential dwelling units as a prohibited
use, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 7-14-2011 by Ord. No. 536.
§ 225-21 ELSMERE CODE § 225-21
1:444
Octave Band Cycles Per Second Sound Pressure Level in Decibels
0 to 75 72
75 to 150 67
150 to 300 59
300 to 600 52
600 to 1,200 46
1,200 to 2,400 40
2,400 to 4,800 34
Above 4,800 32
(14) Sound levels shall be measured with a sound-level meter and associated octave
band analyzer manufactured according to standards prescribed by the American
National Standards Institute, Inc., New York, New York. Measurements shall be
made using the flat network of the sound-level meter. Impulsive-type noises shall
be subject to the performance standards hereinbefore prescribed, provided that
such noises shall be capable of being accurately measured with such equipment.
Noises capable of being so measured, for the purpose of this chapter, shall be
those noises which cause rapid fluctuation of the needle of the sound-level meter
with a variation of no more than plus or minus two decibels.
(15) Noises incapable of being measured as indicated above, such as those of an
irregular and intermittent nature, shall be controlled so as not to become a
nuisance.
(16) The proposed use shall produce no objectionable heat, glare or radiation beyond
the property line. No industrial use or operation shall produce a glare or flash
visible from any boundary line of a property on which the use is located. Yard
lights and/or floodlights shall be so installed, shielded or directed not to cause
objectionable glare to surrounding property. The light source itself shall not be
visible from any property line.
(17) The proposed use shall not endanger surrounding area by reason of fire or
explosion. Each use shall comply with all pertinent state laws or regulations and
with the following specific requirements where applicable:
(a) The manufacture, storage, handling and use of explosives, fireworks and
similar materials shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the
appropriate state agency.
(b) The handling, transporting and utilizing of liquid petroleum gases shall be
subject to approval of, and shall comply with, the rules and regulations of the
appropriate state agency.
(18) The proposed use shall not create an objectionable traffic condition on the
highway or in an adjacent area or generate a nuisance to surrounding property
by reason of truck traffic.
(19) The proposed use shall not result in electrical disturbance in an adjoining or
nearby residence or other use, adversely affect the operation of equipment, other
than on the property on which the disturbance is located, or emit dangerous
radioactivity at any point.
(20) The proposed use shall not contribute to the pollution of waters or endanger the
underground supply to other properties.
§ 225-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-21
1:445
(21) The proposed use shall not create any other objectionable condition in adjoining
areas which will endanger health, safety or the proper use of property.
(22) The applicant when requested shall demonstrate that the proposed use will
comply with such other standards as may have been adopted by the Town
Council and adequate provisions will be made to reduce and minimize any
objectionable elements to the degree necessary to ensure that the proposed
use will not be noxious, hazardous or offensive. In order to determine that
adequate safeguards are provided, the Building Official may require that the
applicant submit necessary information, impartial expert judgments and written
assurances; obtain the advice of official agencies or of private consultants; and
require that the use comply with such tests or provide such safeguards as may
be deemed necessary.
§ 225-22. (Reserved)59
59.Editor's Note: Former § 225-22, FP Floodplain District, was repealed 11-13-2014 by Ord.
No. 586.
§ 225-21 ELSMERE CODE § 225-22
1:446
ARTICLE IV
Permitted Modifications
§ 225-23. Height modifications.
A. The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to silos, church
spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not used for human occupancy.
B. Chimneys, ventilators, skylights, water tanks and similar features and
necessary mechanical appurtenances usually carried on and above the
roof level may exceed the height limitations of this chapter by not more
than 15 feet, provided that not more than 30% of the roof area is
occupied by such equipment. If such equipment is construed as a second
structure, apart from the primary structure, the height restrictions of
this chapter shall apply.
C. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to prevent the erection
above the building height limit of a parapet wall or cornice for ornament
(and without windows) extending above such height limit not more than
five feet. Public and quasi-public buildings, schools, churches and other
similar permitted uses shall increase the front, rear and side yards by
one foot for each foot by which such buildings exceed the height limit
herein established for such zone in which it is located, and further
provided that in no case shall any building have a height greater than 50
feet.
§ 225-24. Undersized lots.
Any parcel of land with an area or width less than that prescribed for a lot in
the zone in which such a lot is located may be used as a lot for any purpose
permitted in the zone, provided that the minimum area requirements for
such lot shall be 50% of the area and width requirements for the zone in
which located, and further provided that all other regulations prescribed
for the zone by this chapter are complied with. Lots which are not of the
required minimum area or width may be used for any purpose permitted in
the zone in which they are located.
§ 225-25. Permitted yard area modifications.
A. Front yards. In such cases in residential and commercial zones where
the frontage on the same side of the street within 500 feet is 50% or
more developed, then the required front yard area for a new structure
shall be modified to the average for existing development.
B. Side yards. In the case of lots upon which an existing structure is
located or which comply with the provisions for modification of § 225-24,
combined total side yard requirements, as specified in Column 6 of Table
I, shall be reduced by six inches for each foot by which a lot is less than
the minimum requirement specified in Column 4 of Table I for the zone
in which located. In any case, the yard area for either side yard shall not
be reduced to less than 50% of the requirement of Column 5 of Table I.60
60.Editor's Note: Table I, Schedule of Lot, Yard and Building Regulations, is included at the
end of this chapter.
§ 225-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-26
1:447
§ 225-26. Temporary uses.
A. It is recognized that it may be in the interests of the Town of Elsmere
and in accordance with the purpose of this chapter to permit temporary
activities for a limited period of time, which activities may not be
permitted by other provisions of this chapter, if such uses are of such a
nature and are so located that at the time of application they will:
(1) In no way exert a detrimental effect upon the lawful use of land and
activities normally permitted in the zone in question; and
(2) Be intended to contribute materially to the welfare and well-being of
the public or to the lawful improvement or development of land.
B. Upon proper application to and favorable findings by the Town Council,
the Building Official may be directed to issue a permit for such period
as the Town Council may specify, not to exceed 30 days. Such permit to
be issued must state the specific temporary activities to be conducted on
the premises. All temporary use permits will be issued on the condition
that the grounds on which the use is situated be returned to their former
condition within 72 hours.
§ 225-26 ELSMERE CODE § 225-26
1:448
ARTICLE V
Special Exception Uses
§ 225-27. Guiding principles.
A. Recognizing that certain uses, activities and structures are necessary
to service the needs and convenience of the Town of Elsmere and, at
the same time, recognizing that such uses may be or become inimical
to the public health, safety and general welfare if located and operated
without proper consideration being given to the existing conditions and
character of the surrounding area, such uses are hereby designated
as special exception uses. In addition to other powers conferred by
this chapter and applicable statutes, the Board of Adjustment shall
have exclusive jurisdiction and powers to grant a permit for a special
exception use under the terms and conditions established by this
chapter, under the following stipulations and guiding principles:
(1) The use for which application is being made is specifically authorized
as a special exception use in Article III of this chapter for the zone in
which located.
(2) The design, arrangement and nature of the particular use is such
that the public health, safety and welfare will be protected, and
reasonable consideration is afforded to the:
(a) Character of the neighborhood.
(b) Conservation of property values.
(c) Health and safety of residents and workers on adjacent
properties and in the surrounding neighborhood.
(d) Potential congestion of vehicle traffic or creation of undue
hazard.
(e) Stated principles and objectives of this chapter and the
Comprehensive Plan of the Town of Elsmere.
B. In addition, such special exception uses shall adhere to the minimum
standards specified for the particular use in § 225-28 and to such
additional conditions and safeguards as, in the opinion of the Board of
Adjustment, will implement the intent and objectives of this section and
chapter.
§ 225-28. Special exception uses.
Special exception uses include the following:
A. Public utility uses, such as water filtration plants, sewage disposal plants,
pumping stations, high-voltage transmission lines and towers, electric
substations, telephone exchanges and repeater stations, but no service or
storage yards, subject to the following:
(1) Proof is furnished that the proposed installation in the specific location is
necessary for the proficiency of the public utility system and the satisfactory
and convenient provision of service to the neighborhood or area in which
the facility is to be located.
(2) The design of any building or structure required for such use conforms to
the general character of the area in which it is located.
(3) Adequate fencing and landscaping will be provided and periodically
maintained.
§ 225-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-28
1:449
(4) The lot on which located is sufficient in size to adequately accommodate the
proposed facilities, together with any parking space required to serve the
facility, together with any of the structural portions of the use or parking
facilities being closer than 25 feet to adjacent properties.
B. Churches and similar places of worship and rectories or parish houses or
convents of religious groups on the same tract, subject to the following:
(1) In addition to the material required for the application as specified in
§ 225-29, the application shall be accompanied by the existing or proposed
charter and bylaws of the organization and such other material to guarantee
to the satisfaction of the Board of Adjustment the following:
(a) The organization is or will be a bona fide nonprofit religious group
organized purely for the benefit of its membership and such other
activities normally carried on by religious groups.
(b) The organization will not engage in sales of products or materials to the
general public or otherwise engage in activities normally carried on as a
business or commercial activity, except that the premises may be made
available on a rental basis for groups, private social functions and the
like.
(2) The area of the lot on which the proposed use is to be located shall have a
minimum area of two acres and a minimum width of 150 feet.
(3) The coverage of the lot by structures will not exceed 20%.
(4) No building will be located within 60 feet of a street line nor within 50 feet
of a side or rear property line.
(5) Off-street parking space shall be provided at a rate of one space for each
six seats in the church building and one for each four seats in any other
form of meeting room space. Such parking space shall not be located within
the front yard area nor within 30 feet of a property line and shall otherwise
comply with all general requirements of this chapter concerning parking
areas. In addition, landscape plantings shall be provided in sufficient
quantity and locations to preclude the transmission of headlight glare or
other lighting to adjacent properties and to preclude view of the parking
area from a public street.
C. Public schools and private schools and institutions of higher learning operated
by charitable, religious or eleemosynary organizations which are not conducted
as a business, subject to the following:
(1) The site area is five acres plus one additional acre for every 100 pupils or
portion thereof of maximum capacity.
(2) The lot coverage does not exceed 15%.
(3) No structure is located within 100 feet of a street or property line.
(4) Sufficient off-street parking space shall be provided to ensure that the
use will not cause parking in a public street during the course of normal
educational programs.
D. Motor vehicle service stations.
(1) A minimum lot area of 15,000 square feet shall be provided, together with a
minimum lot width of 100 feet. In addition, if the Board of Adjustment finds
that the nature of the particular use proposed, either by virtue of scale,
intensity of use, potential hazard or other such considerations, is such that
a larger site is in the public interest, then it shall impose such additional
requirement.
§ 225-28 ELSMERE CODE § 225-28
1:450
(2) Such lot shall be located within the following limitations:
(a) Not closer than 1,000 feet to a public or private school, hospital, church,
library or other similar place of public assembly.
(b) Not closer than 100 feet to the intersection of any two streets
designated as primary or secondary in the Comprehensive Plan.
(3) Yard requirements, which are applicable to all pumps, mechanical
equipment and other appliances in addition to the main structure, are as
follows:
(a) Front, side and rear yard area: 25 feet.
(b) Maximum lot coverage: 20%.
(c) Maximum building height: one story.
(4) All fuel tanks or other such containers for the storage of flammable
materials, either liquid or solid, shall be installed underground at sufficient
depth to ensure against hazard of fire or explosion.
(5) Parking facilities shall be maintained as follows:
(a) Two square feet of space for each square foot of floor area in the
primary building.
(b) Where such parking areas abut a residential zone, they shall be
screened by a buffer area not less than 10 feet in width composed of
densely planted evergreen shrubbery, solid fencing or a combination of
both which, in the opinion of the Board of Adjustment, will be adequate
to prevent the transmission of headlight glare across the zone boundary
line. Such buffer screen shall have a minimum height of five feet above
finished grade at the highest point of the parking area. The materials
used shall be in keeping with the character of the adjacent residential
area.
(c) Driveways to parking areas shall be limited to two for each 100 feet of
frontage. Such driveways shall not be less than 12 feet nor more than
25 feet in width.
(d) No area on the lot which is required for the movement of vehicles in and
about the buildings and facilities shall be used for complying with the
parking requirements of this section.
(6) Accessory goods for sale may be displayed out-of-doors on the pump island
and building island only and shall be stored in a suitable rack or container.
E. Clubs or lodges for fraternal or social purposes operated by chartered
membership organizations for the benefit of their members, and not for profit,
may be permitted in the R-1, R-2 or R-GA District, subject to the following:
(1) In addition to the material required for the application as specified in
§ 225-29, the application shall be accompanied by the existing or proposed
certificate of incorporation and bylaws of the organization. Such material
shall guaranty to the satisfaction of the Board of Adjustment the following:
(a) The organization is or will be a bona fide nonprofit group organized
solely for the benefit and enjoyment of its members.
(b) The organization will not engage in sales of materials to the general
public or otherwise engage in activities normally carried on as a
business or commercial activity, except that the premises may be made
available on a rental basis for meetings or other groups, private social
functions and the like. The maximum membership and guest limit of the
organization is fixed at a level which is commensurate with the scale
§ 225-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-28
1:451
of facilities to be provided. No further membership expansion will take
place without prior approval of the Board of Adjustment.
(c) The hours of use are fixed in a manner in which the property rights of
nearby property owners will not be adversely affected.
(d) All activities of the organization will be carried on within an enclosed
building.
(2) The proposed use is located on a primary street or secondary street as
established by the Comprehensive Plan.
(3) The area of the lot on which the use is proposed shall have a minimum of
two acres and is not less than 100 feet wide.
(4) The coverage of the lot by structures will not exceed 20%.
(5) No building will be located within 30 feet of any property or street line.
(6) Off-street parking space shall be provided, at a rate of one for each four
memberships over the age of 17 permitted. Such parking space shall not
be located within 30 feet of a property or street line and shall otherwise
comply with general requirements of this chapter concerning parking areas.
In addition, landscape plantings shall be provided in sufficient quantity and
locations to preclude the transmission of headlight glare or other lighting to
adjacent property.
F. Planned unit developments in the R-1 or R-2 District, subject to the following:
(1) Site requirements.
(a) The minimum required land area for a planned unit development shall
be 40 contiguous acres.
(b) The tract shall be serviced by a system of sanitary sewers, water mains,
fire hydrants, storm sewers, easements and rights-of-way for utilities,
shade trees, streetlighting and public utilities placed underground, all
of which shall be constructed so as to conform with the applicable
statutes, ordinances and regulations of the State of Delaware and the
Town of Elsmere.
(2) Applicability of Comprehensive Master Plan. Any planned unit development
shall be based on and interpreted in relation to the Comprehensive Plan for
the development of the Town of Elsmere. Every application for approval of
a planned unit development shall be based on and interpreted in relation to
such Comprehensive Plan.
(3) Permitted uses.
(a) Single-family detached dwellings.
(b) Townhouses.
(c) Apartment houses.
(d) Common, public or private open space, park or recreation areas,
including playgrounds, woodland, conservation areas, walkways, trails,
stream crossing and drainage control areas, golf courses, swimming
pools, tennis courts, ice-skating rinks and other similar recreational
uses, but which may not include any such uses or activities which
produce noise, glare, odor, air pollution, fire hazard or other safety
hazards, smoke, fumes or any use or activity which is operated for a
profit or other things detrimental to existing or prospective adjacent
structures or to existing prospective development of the neighborhood.
(e) Municipal, church or philanthropic use.
(f) Educational use.
§ 225-28 ELSMERE CODE § 225-28
1:452
(g) Model home exhibits, temporary sales and construction office and uses
accessory thereto for use solely in conjunction with planned unit
development in the Town of Elsmere.
(h) Neighborhood retail sales and service facilities.
(i) Accessory uses on the same lot with, and customarily incidental to, any
of the foregoing uses.
[1] In residential areas, these accessory uses include:
[a] Off-street parking facilities.
[b] Swimming pools.
[c] Garages.
[d] Storage facilities for landscape and building maintenance and
equipment.
[2] In commercial areas, these accessory uses include:
[a] Off-street parking facilities.
[b] Off-street loading facilities.
[c] Garages for vehicles necessary for the proper functioning of
commercial operations.
[d] Storage areas for trash and refuse.
(4) Area design standards.
(a) Area limitations for various uses. Within a planned unit development,
the following percentage of the total land area shall be devoted to the
specific uses:
[1] A maximum of 80% for the residential uses and other uses permitted
in Subsection F(3) above, excluding the open space and recreation
uses in Subsection F(3)(d), and the space devoted to streets and
parking within and exclusively servicing such open space or
recreation use. Said maximum shall include all of the recreational,
playground and athletic activity areas which are part of a school
site.
[2] A minimum of 20% for common or public open space and
recreational uses as defined in Subsection F(3)(d) above. This area
shall include space devoted to streets and parking, provided that
such facilities are within and service exclusively an open space or
recreation area.
[3] A maximum of 5% for neighborhood retail sales and service
facilities, but in no event to exceed 10 acres. Said maximum shall
include the parking and service areas exclusively servicing such
facilities.
(b) Design standards. The following minimum requirements shall apply:
[1] Area, width, height and yard regulations.61
[2] Additional requirements that apply to townhouses:
[a] There shall be no continuous group of townhouses consisting of
more than eight dwelling units.
[b] For the purpose of avoiding developments resembling what have
been customarily referred to as "row houses," there shall be
within any continuous group of townhouses at least three
different architectural plans having substantially different
designs, building materials and exterior elevations. In addition,
no more than three continuous townhouses shall have the same
§ 225-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-28
1:453
front setback, and the variations in front setbacks shall be at
least four feet.
[c] Notwithstanding the requirements of Subsection F(4)(b)[1]
above, no group of townhouses shall be closer than 60 feet as to
facing walls and 30 feet as to end walls, from any other group of
such dwellings, nor closer than 60 feet to any boundary line of a
designated townhouse area of which the group is a part.
[d] The minimum width of any side yard abutting a street, driveway
or parking area within the townhouse area shall not be less than
30 feet.
[3] Additional requirements that apply to apartment houses:
[a] Notwithstanding the requirements of Subsection F(4)(b)[1]
above, no apartment house shall be closer than 60 feet to any
other apartment house, nor closer than 80 feet to any boundary
line of the designated apartment house area of which the
apartment house is a part.
[4] Off-street parking requirements. Adequate parking areas shall be
provided for townhouses and apartment houses within the areas
designated for the same, and there shall be at least two parking
spaces, each 10 feet by 20 feet minimum in size, per dwelling unit,
in addition to the driveways, roadways, and turning and access
areas within the designated housing area.
[5] Location of structures. The proposed location and arrangement of
structures shall not be detrimental to existing or prospective
development of the neighborhood.
[6] Protection of open spaces. All recreation areas designated on the
development plan shall be improved and equipped initially by the
developer in accordance with plans approved by the Planning
Commission and shall be protected by adequate covenants running
with the land or by conveyances or dedications of same to the Town
of Elsmere as the Town Council shall determine.
[7] Open space and recreation areas shall be designed to be primarily
for the benefit of the residents of the planned unit development,
and to this end the developer shall have as many dwelling units (all
types) as is feasible abut or be near an open space area.
[8] Roads and parking areas. The dimensions and construction of roads
and parking areas within the development, whether or not
dedication of them to the Town of Elsmere is contemplated, shall
conform with all applicable Town ordinances and regulations.
(5) Creation of an organization to own and maintain a common open space and
recreation area within a planned unit development.
(a) The developer and landowner of every planned unit development shall
prepare and present at the time of submission of the final development
plan for the approval of the Town Council of the Town of Elsmere
documents creating and governing a property owner's organization
and containing the declarations of covenants, restrictions, easements,
61.Editor's Note: See the Schedule of Lot, Yard and Building Regulations included at the end
of this chapter.
§ 225-28 ELSMERE CODE § 225-28
1:454
charges and liens deemed necessary to own and maintain the common
open space and recreation areas within the planned unit development.
(b) In addition to the foregoing, these documents shall contain the following
minimum essential provisions with respect to such organization:
[1] Powers and duties in maintaining and administering open space
and recreation facilities, administering and enforcing all covenants
and restrictions and in the levying, collecting and disbursing of
assessments and charges.
[2] Membership and voting rights.
[3] Rights and duties of the Town of Elsmere, members of the
organization and residents of the planned unit development in the
event of a breach of the covenants and restrictions.
[4] Establishment of bond in the amount of 120% of the estimated
construction with surety to guarantee the construction and
installation of all recreation facilities within the common open space
and recreation areas initially.
[5] If such organization is abandoned or abolished or if such
organization proposes to dispose of the common open space and
recreation areas, said open space and recreation areas shall be first
offered for dedication to the Town of Elsmere before it is otherwise
disposed of.
G. Cluster residential development.
(1) Tract requirements.
(a) A tract under single ownership of an area and of dimensions not less than
those prescribed by the appropriate district schedule shall be required
for a cluster development. The tract may be divided by an existing public
street, which may be retained as a part of the plan for the development
or relocated in accordance with an approved site plan. The minimum yard
requirements of the schedule shall apply only to the periphery of the tract.62
(b) There shall be no access from the tract to existing public roads other than
by interior streets at minimum intervals of 400 feet, and no dwelling unit
shall front upon a collector or arterial street incorporated into or created
within a planned residential development.
(c) Every dwelling unit shall be connected to and properly served by public
water and public sanitary sewer and by a storm drainage system.
(d) All improvements within a cluster development shall be installed in
accordance with an approved site plan and with the specifications of
Chapter 196, Subdivision and Land Development.63
(e) The gross density of the project shall not exceed the maximum units per
acre permitted by the appropriate district schedule.
(2) Only single-family detached dwellings shall be permitted within a cluster
development.
(a) All accessory uses permitted with single-family dwellings by the appropriate
district schedule shall be permitted with single-family detached dwellings
within a cluster development.
(3) Lot area and dimensions for single-family detached units.64
62.Editor's Note: See the Schedule of Lot, Yard and Building Requirements included at the
end of this chapter.
63.
§ 225-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-28
1:455
District R-1 or R-2
Minimum lot area 5,000 square feet
Minimum average lot area 6,000 square feet
Minimum lot width 50 feet
Minimum average lot width 60 feet
Minimum lot depth 80 feet
Minimum front yard 20 feet
Minimum side yard:
One 5 feet
Both 10 feet
Minimum rear yard 30 feet
Maximum lot coverage 20%
(4) Open space. All land not included within lots to be conveyed or utilized for
required improvements shall be deeded to the Town or shall be reserved by a
covenant in favor of the municipality or by grant of easement providing that
it shall be set aside in perpetuity for the use of residents of the development
or it shall be deeded to a homeowners' association, as the Council shall elect,
by written instrument to be approved by them. If the Town Council elects to
approve a conveyance to a homeowners' association, the landowner shall so
organize it that it may not be dissolved, nor may the association dispose of
the open space by sale or otherwise (except to an organization conceived and
established to own and maintain it) without first offering to dedicate it to the
Town. Such organization shall be subject to the approval of the Council.
(a) The area to be dedicated for public use shall be so located and of such
a shape to be acceptable to the Town Council. In determining the
acceptability of proposed open space, the Town shall consider future Town
needs and may require a portion of open space to be designated as the site
of a potential future public use, provided that not more than 25% of all
available open space shall be taken for public buildings.
(b) All open space area shall be graded and seeded by the developer during
the course of construction unless the Town Council approves or directs the
maintaining of all improvements, in which case it will be disturbed only as
necessary to make the specified improvements.
(c) Streets or off-street parking areas. The Town Council may require all streets
within the tract which do not directly implement the proposals of the
Comprehensive Plan or Official Map and do not provide a direct connection
between existing streets outside the tract to be transferred to the
ownership of the homeowners' association for maintenance and repairs.
Wherever reverse planting strips, medial grass strips or other landscaped
areas are proposed which will be visible to the general public within the
development, covenants and/or agreements shall provide for the
64.
§ 225-28 ELSMERE CODE § 225-28
1:456
maintenance of such areas by the homeowners' association even though
they may be upon land subdivided into lots.
(d) No single area of less than three acres in size shall be dedicated for public
use, unless, due to special conditions that are peculiar to the particular
parcel of land or to the public purpose for which the land is to be used,
dedication of a smaller area is authorized by the Town Council.
(e) Open space areas may be used as park, playground or recreation areas,
including golf courses, swimming pools, equestrian trails and centers,
tennis courts, shuffleboard courts, basketball courts and similar facilities;
woodland or stream conservation areas; pedestrian walkways, streamcourse
or drainage control areas; children's nurseries or day-care centers;
or any similar use of benefit to the residents of the development if in the
ownership of a homeowners' association or the Town if dedicated to and
accepted by the Town and deemed appropriate by the Town Council.
H. Motels, motor courts or hotels may be permitted in the HD District, provided:
(1) The area to be occupied for such use shall be not less than three acres, and
no rental structure or part thereof shall be placed closer to a street line than
100 feet or closer to any property line than 50 feet.
(2) Wherever located, a motel, motor court or hotel shall conform to the
following additional requirements:
(a) Each rental structure shall contain not fewer than 20 rental units.
(b) One off-street parking space per rental unit shall be provided, and the
automobile parking lot shall conform with § 225-10C; no part thereof
shall be closer to any street line than 70 feet.
(c) Each rental unit shall be supplied with a toilet and hot running water.
(d) Sanitary facilities and water supply shall be approved by the State
Division of Environmental Protection and any other appropriate
governmental agency.
I. Convalescent homes.
(1) Off-street parking shall be in other than the required front yard area and
shall be not closer than 25 feet to a property line other than a street line.
Parking areas shall be provided with illumination. All outdoor illumination
shall be so arranged, shielded or otherwise restricted to protect adjacent
properties from glare or reflection.
(2) Any outdoor storage of trash, laundry, oxygen tanks or other waste supplies
shall be fully enclosed by a fence or wall at least six feet in height.
(3) One externally illuminated identification wall sign may be erected on one
facade of the building, provided that the sign shall not exceed an area equal
to 10% of the area of the facade upon which it is created; and either one
comparable identification wall sign, subject to the same regulations, may be
erected on each of up to three additional facades of the building, whether or
not such facades face a public thoroughfare; or one externally illuminated
identification projecting sign which does not exceed 20 square feet in area
on either side may be erected on one side of the building. Additionally,
one externally illuminated ground directional sign may be erected at each
driveway. Such signs shall not exceed four square feet in area or two feet in
height above ground level, and shall not be closer than 15 feet to a property
line or more than five feet from a driveway. Such signs shall be limited
§ 225-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-28
1:457
to directions to parking, marking entrances or exits, denoting restricted
parking areas or marking emergency entrances.
(4) Driveways shall not be closer than 20 feet to any property line other than
a street line and shall not be wider than 30 feet at the street line. Two
driveways shall be not closer to each other than 75 feet.
§ 225-29. Application procedure.
A. Any person seeking a permit for any special exception use shall first
make application in the form described by Subsection D to the Building
Official for a special use permit.
B. The Building official shall forward the file to the Board of Adjustment
for its consideration. A copy of the file shall also be forwarded to the
Planning Commission of the Town of Elsmere for a review of the site
plan and for an evaluation of the proposed special exception use and
its relationship and conformity to the goals and objectives and policies
established by the Comprehensive Plan. The Planning Commission shall,
within 30 days after receipt of such application, make a written report to
the Board of Adjustment setting forth its findings and recommendations
concerning the application. In its review, the Planning Commission shall
grant the applicant and other interested parties the right to be heard.
In its recommendations, the Planning Commission may suggest any
revisions to the site plan, landscaping plan or other plans as will, in its
opinion, cause the proposed special use to be in substantial conformance
with the Comprehensive Plan and its principles of land use and
development.
C. The Board of Adjustment shall approve or deny such application in
accordance with the time limits provided by law. In approving any such
applications, the Board of Adjustment may impose any modifications or
conditions it deems necessary to carry out the intent of this chapter or to
protect the health, safety or welfare of the community. If an application
is approved, the Building Official shall be empowered to issue a building
permit upon request of the applicant in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the Board's approval.
D. The application and all supporting documents shall be made in triplicate
and shall include the following plans and information:
(1) The location, use, design, dimensions and height of each proposed
building or structure.
(2) The location and arrangement of vehicular accessways and location,
size and capacity of all areas to be used for off-street parking,
loading and unloading.
(3) The location and dimensions of sidewalks, walkways and all other
areas to be devoted to pedestrian use.
(4) The design and treatment of open areas, recreation areas, buffer
areas and screening devices to be maintained, including dimensions
of all areas devoted to planting lawns, trees or other landscaping
devices.
(5) Provisions for water supply, storm drainage and sewer disposal.
(6) Sufficient data to indicate the effects of the proposed use
development in producing traffic congestion and safety hazards and
§ 225-28 ELSMERE CODE § 225-29
1:458
sufficient additional data to enable the Board of Adjustment of the
Town of Elsmere to determine compliance with the design
requirements set forth in this and other pertinent sections of this
chapter.
§ 225-30. Variances in Floodplain Districts.
A. The Board of Adjustment shall have original jurisdiction and powers
to recommend to the Town Council the granting of a variance from
the community's floodplain management regulations, provided that such
variance is in harmony with, and preserves the spirit of, the general
purpose and intent of these regulations.
B. Any person seeking a variance shall first make application in the form
described in § 225-11, Permit requirements, to the Building Official. The
Building Official shall forward the file to the Board of Adjustment for its
consideration. The following procedure shall be followed in considering
the granting of variances:
(1) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, provided that:
(a) Variances shall only be issued upon a showing of good and
sufficient cause, a determination that failure to grant the
variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant
and a determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety or extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause
fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing
local laws or ordinances;
(b) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief;
(c) The Building Official shall notify the applicant in writing that
the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of the insurance
coverage, and such construction below the base flood level
increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be
maintained with a record of all variance actions as required in
Subsection B(1)(d) below; and
(d) The Building Official shall maintain a record of all variance
actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such
variances issued in its annual report submitted to the Federal
Insurance Administrator.
(2) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use
or activity within any floodway area that would cause any increase in
the one-hundred-year-flood elevation.
C. Variances may be issued by the Building Official for the reconstruction,
rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register
§ 225-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-30
1:459
of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard
to the procedures set forth in this section.
§ 225-30 ELSMERE CODE § 225-30
1:460
ARTICLE VA
Regulations Applicable to Specific Uses
§ 225-30.1. Used car businesses. [Added 11-10-2005 by Ord. No.
455]
Effective January 1, 2007, in addition to all other regulations contained in
the Code of the Town of Elsmere, the following additional restrictions shall
apply to all existing and future used car businesses and used car lots located
within the corporate boundaries of the Town of Elsmere.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
USED CAR BUSINESS — Any business, person, firm or corporation who
or which intends as a primary or supplemental course of business to sell
or offer for sale five or more used motor vehicles within a period of 12
months.
USED CAR LOT — Land within the Town of Elsmere maintained or used
for the sale of five or more used motor vehicles within a period of 12
months.
B. Regulations.
(1) All exterior areas used for the display, storage or offer for sale of
used motor vehicles shall be paved with either concrete or asphalt.
(2) A parking space which is no less than 10 feet by 20 feet shall be
provided for each motor vehicle offered for sale.
(3) Each parking space which is located within 15 feet of a sidewalk,
roadway or other public conveyance or easement shall have a
vehicle restraint device which will prevent any part of a parked
vehicle from encroaching upon the sidewalk, roadway or other
public conveyance.
(4) There shall be an aisleway of no less than 15 feet wide between
each row of vehicles offered for sale or display.
(5) There shall be two driveways, one for ingress and one for egress.
There may be one driveway, provided any single driveway shall be
of sufficient width to allow for the simultaneous ingress and egress
of motor vehicles.
(6) Each lot shall contain a building to serve as the primary office space
for the establishment.
(a) Such building shall contain no less than 150 square feet of
interior floor space to be used as a business or sales office.
(b) Such building shall include a restroom with sink, which shall be
accessible to customers and others visiting the establishment.
(7) At no time shall any used parts or used tires be stored on the site of
the establishment for a period of time exceeding 72 hours.
(8) At no time shall any inoperable, dismantled or wrecked vehicle
be stored on the site of the establishment for a period of time
exceeding 72 hours.
(9) At no time shall any repair or maintenance be performed upon
any vehicle located on a used auto sales lot unless the repair
or maintenance is conducted within the confines of a garage
§ 225-30.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-30.1
1:461
specifically designed to be used as a garage for maintenance or
storage of vehicles.
(10) Any vehicles which are offered or intended to be offered for sale
by any used car dealer licensed to sell used vehicles at a specific
location within the corporate limits of the Town of Elsmere, as well
as any vehicles owned or operated by the employees, owners and/
or partners of a used car business licensed to sell used vehicles at a
specific location within the corporate limits of the Town of Elsmere,
shall be parked off the street on the used car business's lot and in
an area as described in § 225-30.1B(1) and (2) of this article and
not upon any public road, alley or way. [Added 4-12-2012 by Ord.
No. 54665]
65.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it become effective immediately upon its
adoption and apply to all existing and future used car businesses.
§ 225-30.1 ELSMERE CODE § 225-30.1
1:462
ARTICLE VI
Nonconforming Uses
§ 225-31. Continuance. [Amended 9-11-2014 by Ord. No. 582]
Except as otherwise provided in this article, the lawful use of land or
buildings existing at the date of the adoption of this chapter may be
continued although such use or building does not conform to the regulations
specified by this chapter for the zone in which such land or building is
located; provided, however:
A. That no nonconforming lot shall be further reduced in size.
B. That no nonconforming building shall be enlarged, extended or
increased unless such enlargement would tend to reduce the degree of
nonconformance, except that an existing eating and drinking place may
add a covered patio not exceeding 1,400 square feet that is connected to
the nonconforming building.
C. That no nonconforming use may be expanded.
§ 225-32. Abandonment.
A nonconforming use shall be adjudged as abandoned when there occurs a
cessation of any use or activity by an apparent act or failure to act on the
part of the tenant or owner to reinstate such use within a period of three
months from the date of cessation or discontinuance.
§ 225-33. Restoration.
If any nonconforming building shall be destroyed by reason of windstorm,
fire, explosion or other act of God or the public enemy to an extent of less
than 50% of the recorded true valuation, then such destruction shall be
deemed partial destruction and the nonconforming building may be rebuilt,
restored or repaired within one year from the date of the destruction. If
such a structure is located within the Floodplain District, the development
regulations cited in § 225-22B shall be utilized to the greatest extent
possible; provided, however, that if such a structure is located within the
floodplain, as that area is defined in § 225-22A(1), then the requirements
of § 225-22B(1)(d), as amended, must be satisfied, notwithstanding the
destruction of less than or more than 50% of the recorded valuation of the
structure. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent strengthening or restoring
to a safe condition any wall, floor or roof which has been declared unsafe by
the Building Official.
§ 225-34. Reversion.
No nonconforming use shall, if once changed into a conforming use, be
changed back again to a nonconforming use.
§ 225-35. Alterations. [Amended 9-11-2014 by Ord. No. 582]
A nonconforming building may be remodeled but not enlarged or extended,
unless said building is changed to a building conforming or more nearly
§ 225-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-35
1:463
conforming to the requirements of this chapter, and further provided that an
existing eating and drinking place may add a covered patio not exceeding
1,400 square feet that is connected to the nonconforming building. In
the Floodplain District, until a regulatory floodway is designated, no
enlargement or extension or remodeling which would be considered a
substantial enlargement shall be permitted unless the applicant has
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development,
when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at
any point within the community.
§ 225-36. Zone changes.
Whenever the boundaries of a zone shall be changed so as to transfer an
area from one zone to another of a different classification, the foregoing
provisions shall also apply to any nonconforming uses existing therein or
created thereby.
§ 225-36.1. Nonconforming use permit.
A. Whenever any person with an actual or potential interest in any land or
building that is a nonconforming use as defined in this article shall need
to determine whether a proposed use of such land or building would
be permitted, such person may apply to the Board of Adjustment for a
nonconforming use permit. Any person who obtains a nonconforming use
permit under the procedures provided for by this subsection shall be
entitled to rely upon such permit as a defense to any claim that the use
so permitted violates the Town of Elsmere Zoning Code.
B. The procedures and rights of appeal provided for other proceedings
before the Board of Adjustment under Article VIII of this chapter shall
be equally applicable as far as practical to any determination of an
application for a nonconforming use permit.
C. At any meeting where a nonconforming use permit is scheduled to be
considered, the Town Attorney shall be notified of the meeting. The
Attorney shall review the application and facts of the request. He or
she shall then either attend the meeting or send to the Chairman of
the Committee holding the hearing any comments he or she deems
appropriate. [Amended 4-12-2012 by Ord. No. 547]
D. The fee to be paid at the time an application for a nonconforming use
permit is filed shall be $200 for a residential property and $500 for a
commercial property. In addition, all petitions shall provide for a deposit
of $500 at the time of application. Town Attorney's fees related to the
petition will be deducted from this $500. Any remaining balance shall be
returned to the petitioner upon resolution of the petition.
§ 225-35 ELSMERE CODE § 225-36.1
1:464
ARTICLE VII
Sign Regulations
§ 225-37. Definitions; permitted signs.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BANNER — A sign intended to be hung either with or without frames,
mounted on a wall or a pole, that is constructed of a lightweight paper,
fabric, canvas, plastic or similar material. National, state, municipal
or institutional flags or the official flag of any business shall not be
considered a "banner."
BUILDING SIGNS — These shall be placed on the vertical wall or portion
of a building and shall not extend beyond the wall or portion in any
direction.
FLAG — A rectangular fabric, banner or bunting, containing distinctive
colors, patterns or symbols used as a symbolic representation of a
government, political subdivision or other entity. Flags may contain logos
and other symbolic representations of businesses or other entities, but
shall not include statements or commercial messages of any kind.
FREESTANDING SIGNS — These shall be independently supported and
firmly fixed to the ground.
HARMFUL TO MINORS — The quality of any description or
representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual contact, sexual
excitement or sadomasochistic abuse which predominantly appeals to
the prurient, shameful or morbid interest of minors, is patently offensive
to prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect
to what is suitable material for minors and is, when taken as a whole,
lacking in serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value for any
reasonable minor.
PENNANT — A lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, whether or
not containing a message or lettering of any kind, usually designed to
taper to a point, suspended from a rope, wire or string, often in a series
and intended to move in the wind.
B. Use regulations. The following sign uses, and no other, are permitted:
(1) Professional, accessory use or name signs indicating the profession
or activity of the occupant of a dwelling or signs indicating the
private nature of a driveway or property, provided that not more
than two such signs shall be located along one road frontage and
that the total combined area on one side of such sign or signs shall
not exceed two square feet. These signs shall be of the freestanding
type.
(2) Identification signs, announcement signs or bulletin boards relating
to a church, school, hospital, municipal building, club or similar
public, charitable or religious institution or building, provided that
the area on one side of any such sign shall not exceed 12 square
feet, each sign shall be located on the lot of the institution or use
to which it relates, not more than one sign shall be placed on
§ 225-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-37
1:465
any street frontage of any one property and such sign will contain
nothing of an advertising nature. In addition, such institutions, as
defined above, may place on their buildings identification signs,
provided that not more than one such sign shall face on any street
frontage and the gross area of such a sign shall not exceed 5% of
the face of the building on which it is mounted.
(3) Business signs or signs which primarily direct attention to the
identity of business, profession, industry, laboratory or similar
activity and which may describe in general the nature of the activity
conducted on the property on which the sign is located may be
erected in the General Industrial District, Highway Development
District and the Community Commercial District. Such signs shall
not exceed two in number on any one road frontage, and the total
area on one side shall be 24 square feet. No sign shall be placed
within 20 feet of the street line. However, for signs set back further
than 10 feet, then 10 square feet of area can be added for each
additional 10 feet of setback.
(a) Building identification signs may be used, but only one such
sign shall face on any street frontage, and the gross area of
such sign shall not exceed 5% of the face of the building on
which it is attached.
(b) For buildings occupied by more than one enterprise, a
combined sign may be installed identifying the occupants. The
total area on one side of the sign shall not be more than 24
square feet, with 10 square feet added for each added
occupant.
(c) Building identification signs may be used on the portions
occupied by each occupant, but all such signs together shall not
be greater in area than 5% of the area of the face of the building
on which they are placed.
(4) Official signs, erected by a public authority or public utility, such as
but not limited to highway signs, railroad crossing, danger and any
other sign that may be required by a governmental or public utility
authority or agency in connection with the identification, operation
or protection of property or activity.
(5) Warning signs may be placed by property owners to warn of
dangers, such as but not restricted to hidden driveways, cattle
crossings, traffic directions on private drives, etc., but such signs
shall not be greater than one square foot on any one side.
(6) Real estate signs relating to the advertising of individual properties
for sale or rent may be placed on the property, but shall not be
greater than three square feet. No more than one sign shall be
placed on a property by any one real estate organization. The
signs shall be removed promptly when the properties are sold.
Advertising signs of development of 10 or more approved lots may
be placed on the development, but the total area of one side of
all signs shall not be more than 24 square feet with three added
square feet for each additional 10 approved lots. These signs shall
be removed promptly when the properties are sold.
§ 225-37 ELSMERE CODE § 225-37
1:466
(7) Directional signs relating to a use located in the Town may be
erected off the property of use. These signs shall not include more
than the name, direction and nature of the business or activity
referred to. Each sign shall have not more than two square feet
on one side, and not more than two shall be erected for any one
activity. Directional signs for activities outside the Town will not be
allowed within the Town.
(a) Real estate directional signs for a development within the Town
may have an area on one side of not more than two square feet
and may carry only the name of the development, the developer
or agent and a direction.
(b) These signs may be erected for developments of 10 lots or
more. There shall be not more than two directional signs
erected on any one road leading to the development, and not
more than 10 signs may be erected in the Town.
(8) Legal notices, such as but not limited to signs used to "post"
property to prevent trespassing, hunting, trapping, etc., are
permitted.
(9) Public announcements to advertise public benefits of churches, fire
companies, other public charitable or religious events and also
public sales of an individual's household goods, farm equipment,
stock or property are permitted, provided that the event is held
within the Town, the notices are not posted for more than three
weeks prior to the event and the notices are removed within 48
hours following the event.
(10) Farmers' signs advertising the sale of farm products produced
within the Town may be erected, provided that not more than two
signs are erected, the area on one side of a sign shall not be more
than six square feet, and the sign shall be removed or kept in good
condition during seasons when products are not being offered for
sale.
(11) Banners, pennants and noninstitutional flags.
(a) Banners, pennants and noninstitutional flags shall be permitted
under the following conditions:
[1] Pennants shall be permitted to control ingress or egress
to undeveloped property or property under construction
or to designate restricted areas within such property, for
properties under construction or repair or for purposes of
public safety. No sign permit shall be required. Otherwise,
pennants shall not be permitted.
[2] Banners shall be permitted in R-GA Community
Commercial, Highway Development or General Industrial
Zones for advertising a special sales event, grand openings,
holidays or similar activities if attached to a wall.
[Amended 4-12-2018 by Ord. No. 635]
(b) Permits for banners shall be issued only under the following
conditions:
[1] No permit shall be issued for a period longer than two
weeks.
§ 225-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-37
1:467
[2] A request for an extension of the permit for a maximum of
an additional two weeks can be approved at the discretion
of the Town Manager; provided, however, that there have
been no valid complaints regarding the display during the
initial permit period.
[3] No more than four permits (with extensions where
approved) shall be issued in any given calendar years to a
single business or site.
[4] Maximum banner size and number shall be determined as
follows:
[a] No combination of approved permanent signage and
banners on a building facade shall be greater in area
than 10% of the area of the face of the building on which
they are placed.
[b] Banners on walls shall not be combined with flags or
freestanding banners.
[c] In the case of a property or business facing more than
one street, banners shall be permitted only so that no
combination of approved permanent signage and
banners on either building facade shall be greater in
area than 7.5% of the area of the face of the building on
which they are placed.
[d] In the case of businesses in shopping centers, the
calculation shall be based on the facade of the specific
business as rented.
[5] Noninstitutional flags and/or freestanding banners attached
to poles shall be permitted so long as they do not contain
statements or commercial messages of any kind; such flags
shall be set back five feet; only one flag or banner shall
be permitted on any street frontage for a property facing
more than one street; the maximum area for any flag or
freestanding banner shall not exceed 20 square feet;
noninstitutional flags or freestanding banners shall not be
combined with wall banners; a permit is required for each
flag or freestanding banner, under the same issuance and
time limitations described above in Subsection B(11)(b)[1]
and [2].
§ 225-38. General restrictions on sign uses.
The following restrictions shall apply to all sign uses:
A. No sign shall be erected so that the top of the sign is more than 20 feet
above the ground.
B. No sign shall be attached to trees, fence posts, stumps, utility poles,
bridges, culverts or other signs, but shall be freestanding or attached
to buildings in an approved manner, except that this restriction shall
not apply to legal notices and public announcements [as defined in
§ 225-37B(8) and (9)] which may be so affixed.
C. No sign shall be exhibited in the Town which is portable, i.e., fixed on
a movable stand, or is self-supporting without being firmly embedded
§ 225-37 ELSMERE CODE § 225-38
1:468
in the ground or which is supported by other objects or is mounted
on wheels or movable vehicles or made easily movable in some other
manner.
D. No sign shall be displayed which basically directs attention to a product
or group of products or service or group of services rather than primary
attention to the identity of the business operation. This restriction shall
include billboards.
E. No signs shall be placed in such position along a highway or street or at
an intersection so as to cause danger to traffic by obscuring the view.
F. Signs may be illuminated, but such illumination shall be of white light,
either direct or diffused.
G. No sign shall be a flashing, moving, rotating, oscillating or similar type.
In no cases shall buildings or structures be outlined by tubing or strings
of lights for advertising purposes.
H. All signs must be constructed of durable materials and kept in good
condition. Whenever a sign, pennant, banner or flag becomes
dilapidated, faded, torn or structurally unsound, endangers public safety
or property or loosens from its mountings, such sign must be removed
or repaired to the satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Officer by the
owner or the property owner within five days of notification.
I. No sign, pennant, banner or flag that is harmful to minors shall be
permitted.
§ 225-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-38
1:469

ARTICLE VIII
Administration
§ 225-39. Certificates and permits; recordkeeping.
A. Certificate of occupancy. Certificates of occupancy shall be issued by
the Building Official. On serving of notice to the owner of any violation
of any of the provisions or requirements with respect to any building
or use thereof or of land, as specified in this chapter, the certificate of
occupancy for such use shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter
and subject to the penalties hereinafter prescribed. A new certificate of
occupancy shall be required for any further use of such land or building.
No certificate of occupancy shall be granted, however, for dwelling space
in which the majority of square footage of habitable space is subject to
flooding in the floodplain, as that area is defined in § 225-22A(1).
B. Records. It shall be the duty of the Building Official to keep a record
of all applications for building permits, a record of all permits issued
and a record of all certificates of occupancy, together with a notation
of all special conditions involved. He shall file and safely keep copies
of all plans submitted, and the same shall form a part of the records
of his office and shall be available for the use of the officials of the
Town of Elsmere. The Building Official shall prepare a monthly report
for the Town Council, Building Committee and Planning Commission
summarizing for the period since his last report all building permits
issued and certificates a countersigned by him. A copy of each such
report shall be filed with the Tax Assessor at the time it is filed with the
Town Council, Building Committee and Planning Commission.
§ 225-40. Board of Adjustment.
A. The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five persons who shall be
residents of the Town of Elsmere and who shall have knowledge of
the problems of urban and rural development and who, at the time of
their appointment and throughout the term of their office, shall not be
candidates nor members for elective office in the Town of Elsmere, nor
employees of the Town of Elsmere. The Mayor of Elsmere shall appoint
such members of the Board of Adjustment, and all such appointments
shall be confirmed by a majority vote of the elected members of the
Council. Upon the effective date of this chapter, the Mayor shall
reappoint the existing three members as follows, one for three years, one
for two years and one for one year. He shall appoint two new members
as follows, one for two years and one for one year. Thereafter, each
new member shall serve for three years or until his successor has been
appointed.
B. The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers:
(1) To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error
in any order, requirement decision or determination made by an
administrative official in the enforcement of appropriate laws and
codes of the State of Delaware and any amendment thereto or of this
chapter.
§ 225-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-40
1:471
(2) To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this chapter
upon which the Board is required to pass under this chapter.
(3) To authorize upon appeal, in specific cases, such variance from the
terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest
where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship and
so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed and substantial
justice done.
(4) In exercising the above-mentioned powers, it may reverse or affirm,
wholly or partially, or may modify the order of requirement, decision
or determination appealed from and may make such order,
requirement, decision or determination as, in its opinion, ought to be
made. Notices of such decision shall forthwith be given to all parties
in interest.
C. Meetings.
(1) Meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such times
as the Board may determine.
(2) All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public.
(3) Minutes of meetings shall show the vote of each member upon
questions or, if absent or failing to vote, the indication of such fact.
The Board shall also keep a record of its examinations and other
official actions, all of which shall be filed in the office of the Clerk of
the Board and shall be a public record.
(4) The Chairman or, in his absence, the Acting Chairman may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
(5) No issue before the Board of Adjustment for consideration shall be
considered or acted upon by the Board unless such issue has been
reviewed by the Planning Commission and the Planning Commission
has issued a recommendation as to what action the Board of
Adjustment should take when considering the issue. [Added
7-11-2013 by Ord. No. 568]
D. Appeals. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any
person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the
municipality affected by any decision of the Building Official and
Building Committee. Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable
time as provided by the rules of the Board by filing with the Board of
Adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer
or committee from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to
the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from was taken. [Amended 4-12-2018 by Ord. No. 635]
(1) An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action in
respect of which the decision appealed from was made, unless the
officer or committee from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the
Board of Adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed
with him or the committee, that by reason of facts stated in the
certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life
or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise
than by action of the Board of Adjustment or by a court of competent
§ 225-40 ELSMERE CODE § 225-40
1:472
jurisdiction on application on notice to the officer or committee from
whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
(2) The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing
of the appeal. The Board of Adjustment shall give public notice, as
well as due notice to the parties in interest, of the date and time of
the hearing of the appeal. Any party may appear in person, by agent
or attorney, at the appeal hearing.
(a) The Town shall give personal notice of the date and time of the
appeal hearing before the Board of Adjustment to all property
owners within 200 feet of the property to be affected by said
appeal. Such notice shall be given either by handing a copy
thereof to the property owners or by leaving a copy thereof at
the usual place of abode of said property owners, if said property
owners are the occupants of the property affected by such appeal
or are residents of the Town of Elsmere.
(b) Whenever said owners are nonresidents of said municipality,
such notice may be given by sending written notice thereof by
mail to the last known address of the property owner or owners,
as shown by the most recent tax lists of said municipality.
(c) Where the owner is a partnership, service upon any partner as
above outlined shall be sufficient.
(d) Where the owner is a corporation, service upon any officer, as
above set forth, shall be sufficient.
(e) The appellant shall, by affidavit, present satisfactory proof to the
Board of Adjustment at the time of the hearing that said notices
have been duly served as aforesaid.
(3) Whenever an appeal is taken pursuant to this chapter, the Board of
Adjustment shall refer a copy of the application and all pertinent
data to the Town Planning Commission, which Commission shall
submit a report to the Board of Adjustment with respect to the
effect which approval of the application would have upon the
comprehensive planning and the Comprehensive Plan of the Town of
Elsmere. The Board of Adjustment shall not make a recommendation
on such an appeal until such report is received or until 30 days have
passed since referral to the Planning Commission.
(4) Whenever an appeal shall be taken to the Board of Adjustment
under the provisions of this chapter, said Board shall render its
decision upon such appeal within 30 days from the date of hearing of
such appeal and receiving any additional information the Board had
requested to be provided to it in order to reach its decision.
E. Any exception or variation from this chapter granted by the Board of
Adjustment to an application shall expire by limitation if no construction,
alteration or conversion has been commenced within one year from the
date of granting such variation or exception, if no building permit is
issued.
F. Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision
of the Board of Adjustment or any taxpayer or any officer, department,
board or bureau of the Town may present to a court of record a petition
duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or
§ 225-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-40
1:473
in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be
presented to the court within 30 days after the filing of the decision in
the office of the Board.
§ 225-41. Violations and penalties.
A. No person shall erect, construct, reconstruct, alter, convert, maintain or
use any building or structure or use any land in violation of this chapter
or any change thereof or shall refuse or fail to comply with an order of
the Building Official or an order of the Board of Adjustment.
B. Whoever commits, takes part in, aids or assists in violating any provision
of this chapter or an order of the Building Official or an order of the
Board of Adjustment shall be fined not more than $100 or imprisoned not
more than 30 days, or both.
C. Each and every day during which such unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use continues
shall be deemed a separate offense.
D. In addition to the remedies set forth herein, the Building Official or the
Board of Adjustment or other officials of Town of Elsmere so authorized
may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent the
occupancy of the building, structure or land or to prevent any illegal act,
conduct, business or use in or about such premises.
§ 225-42. Amendments.
A. The Town Council may from time to time amend, change, modify or
repeal any regulations, limitations and restrictions of this chapter,
including the Zoning Map. No such amendment, change, modification
or repeal shall be adopted until after a public hearing is held thereon
by the Town Council at which parties in interest and citizens shall have
an opportunity to be heard. In addition to the notice required by law,
notices of such hearing shall be mailed to every civic association or
association of residents in the Town which shall have registered its
name and address for this purpose with the Town Clerk. Failure to give
such notices by mail shall not, however, invalidate any such amendment,
change, modification or repeal. No amendment or change shall become
effective unless the ordinance proposing such amendment or change
shall first have been submitted to the Planning Commission for approval
or disapproval or suggestions, and the Planning Commission shall have
30 days after the formal submission of the proposed amendment or
change for consideration and report. In the case of an unfavorable
report by the Planning Commission, such amendment or change shall not
become effective except by a favorable vote of 3/4 of the Town Council.
B. The Town Council may, from time to time upon the recommendation
of the Planning Commission after public notice and hearing, amend,
supplement or change the regulations and districts herein established
and adopt rules and regulations for the purpose of interpreting and
carrying this chapter into effect. When owners of more than 50% of the
frontage within a district or part of a district comprising not less than
one block shall present to the Town Council a duly signed petition for
the change, relocation or revision of said district or part of district, the
§ 225-40 ELSMERE CODE § 225-42
1:474
Town Council shall act upon said petition within 30 days after the filing
of said petition with the Town Clerk. Said petition shall be accompanied
by a map showing the area for which the change of district is asked and
all immediately abutting property and uses thereof, and, further, shall
be accompanied by a statement setting forth the grounds or reasons
for the proposed change. All such proposed changes of ordinance or
relocation of districts shall be referred by the Town Council to the
Planning Commission. In the event of unfavorable report from the
Planning Commission or in case of protests against such proposed
change, signed by owners of 20% or more either of the area of the
lots or land included in such proposed change or of the lots or land
in the rear thereof extending 100 feet therefrom or of the lots of land
on either side thereof or directly opposite thereto extending 100 feet
therefrom (exclusive of street space), such change shall not become
effective except by the favorable vote of 3/4 of all the members of the
Town Council.
C. A petition for change, relocation or revision of a district or part of a
district shall be accompanied by a filing fee in the amount of $500
payable to the Town of Elsmere.
§ 225-43. Construction prior to approval.
Any building permit heretofore issued pursuant to any ordinance which
provided for the erection of a building or structure in conformity to the
ordinance or ordinances to which this is an amendment and supplement
shall continue in full force and effect, provided that the holder has
substantially undertaken such construction on the date of this chapter.
§ 225-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-43
1:475