TOWN CODE TOWN OF SMYRNA, DELAWARE 
____________ 
Published by Order of the Town Council 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
TOWN OF 
SMYRNA, DELAWARE 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Robert P. Newnam 
Mayor 
____________ 
Roderick H. Burritt 
Nelson Messick 
Robert J. Montgomery, Jr. 
Kenneth P. Brown 
Keith I. Faulkner 
Kenneth J. Musto 
Town Council 
____________ 
Michael S. Jacobs 
Town Manager 
____________ 
John Terence ("Terry") Jaywork 
Town Solicitor 
____________ 
Carol McKinney 
Town Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Town of Smyrna, Delaware. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the compilation of general ordinances and ordinances subsequently adopted by the town council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of any ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 
CDB:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of James S. Vaught, Supervising Editor, and Laura Johnson, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Michael Jacobs, Town Manager, and Mr. John Terence Jaywork, Town Solicitor, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Town Code which will make the active law of the town readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the town's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Smyrna, Delaware. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Smyrna, Delaware. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Smyrna, Delaware. 1995. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE TOWN OF SMYRNA, DELAWARE; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
    BE IT HEREBY ENACTED by the Town Council of the Town of Smyrna, a majority thereof concurring in Council duly met, that: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Smyrna Town Code" published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 74, each inclusive, is adopted with the note that what now appears as Section 2-43 should be Section 2-44 "Internal Procedures" and that Section 2-43 should read: 
    2-43 Exemptions. Notwithstanding any other provision in this ordinance to the contrary, this ordinance shall have no application to the following which are specifically exempt from the terms of this ordinance: 
(a)  Any action by the Town Council involving the Town Zoning Ordinance, including the adoption, amendment or repeal of the Town Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Map. 
(b)  Any action adopting, amending or repealing the Town Subdivision Ordinance. 
(c)  Any action by the Town Council involving the town Personnel Ordinance, including the adoption, amendment or repeal of any provision of the Town Personnel Ordinance or the modification or revision of any job description, job classification, benefit, pay grade or personnel policy adopted pursuant thereto. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before January 19, 1993 and not included in the code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed except the Smyrna Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision Regulations included as Appendices A & B and the Town Personnel Policy. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been replaced by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided in this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the town may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the Town Council to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the code so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after January 19, 1993 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance is adopted notwithstanding any provisions contained in the "Ordinance Governing the Adoption, Amendment or Repeal of Ordinances" adopted March 6, 1986 and codified in Sections 2-36 through 2-43 of the code hereby adopted. 
    Section 8. This ordinance shall become effective October 1, 1995. 
    This will certify that this is a true and correct copy of the Ordinance duly adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Smyrna at its regular Council Meeting on September 18, 1995. 
ATTEST: 
/s/ Kenneth P. Brown       /s/ Robert P. Newnam       Council Secretary Mayor  
    This shall certify that the title, synopsis and effective date of this ordinance were published in the Delaware State News on September 20, 1995 and that a copy of the complete text hereof was posted at the Town Hall on September 19, 1995. 
So Certifies: 9-20-95       /s/Michael S. Jacobs       Date Town Manager  
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Town Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 009-10  2-16-10 Included 16 001-10  3- 1-10 Included 16 002-10  3- 1-10 Included 16 003-10  3- 1-10 Included 16 004-10  3- 1-10 Included 16 005-10  3- 1-10 Included 16 006-10  3- 1-10 Included 16 007-10  3- 1-10 Included 16 008-10  3- 1-10 Included 16 008-09  4- 5-10 Included 16 010-10  5-17-10 Included 16 011-10  5-17-10 Included 16 013-10  6- 7-10 Included 16 015-10 12- 6-10 Included 16 016-10 12- 6-10 Included 16 017-10 12-20-10 Included 16 001-11  2- 7-11 Included 16 002-11  4-18-11 Included 16 003-11  7- 5-11 Included 16 004-11  8- 1-11 Included 16 005-11  8- 1-11 Included 16 006-11  8- 1-11 Included 16 007-11 10- 3-11 Included 16 008-11 10-17-11 Included 16 House Bill 116  4- 6-09 Included 17 House Bill 318  5- 1-12 Included 17 001-12  2-21-12 Included 17 002-12  2-21-12 Included 17 003-12  5- 7-12 Included 17 004-12  6- 4-12 Included 17 006-12  7-16-12 Included 17 007-12  7-16-12 Included 17 008-12  8-20-12 Included 18 009-12  8-20-12 Included 18 010-12  8- 6-12 Included 18 011-12 10- 1-12 Included 18 012-12 12- 3-12 Included 18 001-13  2- 4-13 Included 18 004-13  7-15-13 Included 18 005-13  8-19-13 Included 18 006-13 10-21-13 Included 18 001-14  3-10-14 Included 18 002-14  3-17-14 Included 18 004-14  4- 7-14 Included 18 005-14  6- 2-14 Included 18 008-14  5- 7-14 Included 18 009-14  6-16-14 Included 18 010-14  6- 2-14 Included 18 011-14  7- 7-14 Included 18 012-14  7-21-14 Included 18 015-14 11- 3-14 Included 19 016-14 12-15-14 Included 19 017-14 1- 5-14 Included 19 018-14 12- 1-14 Included 19 020-14 12-15-14 Included 19 021-14  1-20-15 Included 19 001-15  2-2-15 Included 19 002-15  4- 6-15 Included 19 004-15  4-20-15 Included 19 005-15  5- 6-15 Included 19 006-15  6- 1-15 Included 19 Senate Bill No.97 7-15-15 Included 19 012-15  8- 3-15 Included 19 017-15 11-16-15 Included 19 018-15  1- 4-16 Included 19 019-15  1- 4-16 Included 19 013-15  9-21-15 Included 20 014-15 10- 5-15 Included 20 001-16  2-16-16 Included 20 003-16  3-21-16 Included 20 004-16  6-20-16 Included 20 005-16  6-20-16 Included 20 006-16 10- 3-16 Included 21 003-17  3- 6-17 Included 21 004-17  5-15-17 Included 21 005-17  8-21-17 Included 21 007-17 11-20-17 Included 22 008-17 11-20-17 Included 22 009-17 11-20-17 Included 22 010-17 12-18-17 Included 22 011-17 12-18-17 Included 22 012-17  1-16-18 Included 22 014-17  2- 5-18 Included 22 001-18  2- 5-18 Included 22 007-18  8- 6-18 Included 23 008-18  8- 6-18 Included 23 009-18  7-16-18 Included 23 House Bill 396  7- 1-18 Included 24 014-18 11- 5-18 Included 24 002-19  2-19-19 Included 24 004-19  4-15-19 Included 24 005-19  4-15-19 Included 24  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Charter of the Town of Smyrna as adopted by House Bill No. 191, passed July 17, 2003. This Charter replaces the previous Charter, which derived from chapter 339 of the Laws of 1980, as adopted by the General Assembly, found at chapter 39, volume 62 of the Laws of Delaware; 62 Laws of Del. ch. 339, §§ 1-6, 9, 10; 67 Laws of Del. ch. 146, §§ 1, 2; 67 Laws of Del. ch. 196, §§ 2, 3; Amd. of ch. 339, §§ 1-5, 7-13. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Incorporation. 
    The inhabitants of the Town of Smyrna within the corporate limits as hereinafter defined in this Charter or as extended as hereinafter provided, are hereby constituted and declared to be a body politic incorporated in law and equity, by the corporate name of the "Town of Smyrna " (hereinafter "town"), with power to govern themselves by such ordinances, rules, resolutions, and regulations for municipal purposes as they, through their duly-elected officers and agents may deem proper, not in conflict with the provisions of this Charter of government, nor with the Constitution and Laws of the State of Delaware, or of the United States; and as such shall be able and capable to sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, answer and be answered, defend and be defended, in all courts. 
    The town shall have perpetual succession and shall succeed to own or possess all property, whether real, personal, or mixed, tangible or intangible, of whatever kind and nature, and all the powers, rights, privileges or immunities now or heretofore belonging to, possessed, or enjoyed by the Town of Smyrna previously incorporated at chapter 339, Volume 62 Laws of Delaware, as amended. 
Sec. 2. - Territorial Limits. 
    The boundaries of the Town of Smyrna are hereby established and declared as depicted on the most recent map entitled "Town of Smyrna Municipal Limits" certified and dated by the Mayor and Secretary of the Town Council and of public record in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds for Kent and New Castle Counties. Such map or plot shall, from time to time, be updated and revised to reflect intervening changes in the Town's municipal boundaries and duly recorded, but failure to record such map shall not void an annexation. Such map or plot, or any supplement thereto, or the record thereof, or a duly certified copy of said record, shall be evidence in all courts of law and equity in this State. 
(H.B. No. 318, § 1, 5-1-12) 
Sec. 3. - Annexation of territory. 
    Subject to state laws of general application to municipalities pertaining to annexation of territory, the town shall have power to annex any additional contiguous territory adjoining the corporate limits of the town as hereinbefore set forth or as hereafter extended pursuant to the procedure set forth in this section, and to apply to all such additional territory all laws, ordinances, resolutions, and policies in force in the town so far as they may be locally applicable. For purposes of this section, "contiguous" means that a part of the boundary of the territory sought to be annexed is coterminous with a part of the boundary of the municipal corporation. 
3.1  Initiation of Annexation Proceedings. 
3.1.1  By Petition of the Property Owners. Any property owner(s) holding record fee title to real property in territory contiguous to the then existing corporate limits of the Town may petition the Town Council to annex that certain territory in which they own property. Such petition shall be in writing, duly executed and acknowledged by each petitioner, shall describe with reasonable certainty the territory proposed for annexation, indicate the property owned by each petitioner therein, state the reasons for the requested annexation, and identify the proposed zoning district classification(s) for such territory (which proposed zoning classifications shall be consistent with the Town's Comprehensive Plan). The Town Council may, within 90 days following the filing of such petition in the Town Office, vote to accept such petition and proceed as hereinafter provided, or to reject such petition. Any petition not so accepted within said 90 days shall be null and void. For purposes of this subsection 3.1.1 and subsection 3.1.2, "territory contiguous to the then existing corporate limits of the Town" shall include both real property which, though itself not contiguous to the Town's then existing corporate limits, is contiguous to other real property which is proposed to be included in the annexation and real property which would be contiguous under subsection 3.2.10(b); provided, however, that where the contiguity of any parcel for annexation is dependent upon the annexation of another abutting parcel or parcels and such "connecting" parcel(s) is/are not annexed prior to or simultaneously with the dependent parcel, the annexation of such dependent parcel shall fail and be void for lack of contiguity. 
3.1.2  Resolution of the Town Council. The Town Council may, at any time, adopt a resolution proposing the annexation of any territory(s) contiguous to the Town. Such resolution shall describe, with reasonable certainty, the territory(s) proposed to be annexed, state the reasons for the proposed annexation, and identify the proposed zoning district classification(s) for such territory(s) (which proposed zoning classifications shall be consistent with the Town's Comprehensive Plan). Upon adoption of such resolution, the Town Council shall proceed as hereafter provided. This resolution may be adopted at the same Town Council meeting at which the resolution required in subsection 3.2.1(a) is also adopted. 
3.2  Annexation Procedure. Whether annexation is proposed by petition of the property owners or by resolution of the Town Council, the following procedure shall be complied with: 
3.2.1  Resolution and Notice; Referral To Planning Commission. 
(a)  The Town Council shall adopt a resolution notifying the property owners and the residents of both the Town and the territory proposed to be annexed, that the Town proposes to annex certain territory which adjoins its then corporate limits. The resolution shall contain a description of the territory proposed to be annexed, shall identify the zoning district classification(s) proposed for such territory if annexed (which proposed zoning classifications shall be consistent with the Town's Comprehensive Plan), shall describe the right of a qualified resident to object to the annexation, and shall fix a time and place for a public hearing on the subject of the proposed annexation and zoning. For purposes of this section, a "qualified resident" shall be any individual residing in the territory proposed for annexation who is not a property owner but who would be qualified under subsection 3.2.5(a) to vote for the annexation. A qualified resident may file a written objection to the annexation with the Town at any time prior to the close of the public hearing held pursuant to subsection 3.2.2. Such resolution may also provide that if the annexation is finally approved, the Town shall not be obligated to provide any municipal services or extend any municipal facilities or improvements unless and until the Town Council, in the sole exercise of its reasonable discretion, determines that it is appropriate for the Town to do so or the owner or developer of any property so annexed (or any portion thereof) binds itself, with reasonable surety acceptable to the Town, to pay in full all costs and expenses to provide such municipal services and/or to extend or construct such municipal facilities and improvements to serve such lands (in strict accordance with all governing federal, state, and Town regulations and standards), subject to an appropriate "recapture agreement" (acceptable to the Town) pursuant to which the owner(s) or developer(s) of other lands benefited by the services, extensions, or improvements paid for by the initial owner/developer under the recapture agreement would pay to the Town their equitably-determined proportionate share of such costs and expenses (as a condition precedent to obtaining such services, extensions, and/or improvements) which amounts the Town would, upon receipt, rebate to the owner or developer which had originally paid for those services, extensions, and/or improvements. The resolution setting forth the information shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town and in the territory proposed to be annexed. Such publication shall appear no fewer than 14 days nor more than 60 days before the date set for the hearing. Such notice shall be in bold print or bordered in black in such manner as to call attention thereto. 
In addition to publication as herein provided, the Town Council shall, no fewer than 14 days nor more than 60 days before the date of such hearing: (1) cause a public notice containing the full text of the resolution, to be posted in at least 5 public places in the Town and in at least one place, viewable to the public, in the territory proposed to be annexed; (2) shall comply with the applicable provisions of 29 Del. C. Chapters 92 and 93 as those provisions may from time to time hereafter be amended (or with any future corresponding provision of law), and (3) send a copy of such notice, certified mail, to the owners of record of the lands proposed to be included in the annexation at their address as shown on the public tax records. Written notice to one co-owner shall be notice to all. 
(b)  The Town Council shall forward a copy of the aforesaid resolution to the Planning Commission for its advisory review and comment. The Planning Commission's recommendations and comments shall be submitted to the Town Council at or before the public hearing held pursuant to subsection 3.2.2, provided that if such recommendations or comments are not received from the Planning Commission at or prior to such public hearing, the Town Council may proceed without the benefit thereof. 
3.2.2  Public Hearing. At the time, date, and place specified in the Resolution proposing annexation (or at any revised date, time, or place if duly noticed as provided in subsection 3.2.1) the Town Council shall sit to hear comments and opinion from any concerned party (and to receive the recommendations and comments of the Planning Commission, if any) regarding the proposed annexation and proposed zoning district classification. Such public hearing shall be for the purpose of obtaining public opinion and legislative fact finding and the Town Council shall not be bound, in any way, to act in response to any information or comments offered at such hearing. 
3.2.3  Annexations Not Requiring Special Election; Resolution Ordering Special Election. 
(a)  Where the territory proposed for annexation is either initiated at the written petition of all of the owners of record of all lands proposed for such annexation or consented to in a notarized writing signed by all such owners and submitted to the Town Council no later than the conclusion of the public hearing held pursuant to subsection 3.2.2, and where the Town has received no written objection from a qualified resident of the territory proposed for annexation as defined herein, the Town Council may, at any duly noticed regular or special meeting held within six (6) months of the public hearing, vote to accept or reject such proposed annexation and if accepted, the Town Council shall proceed at that meeting, or at the next duly noticed regular or special Town Council meeting, to adopt a final resolution annexing the territory in accordance with subsection 3.2.7(c). In such cases, no special election shall be required. 
(b)  Where fewer than all of the owners of record of all parcels of land within a territory proposed for annexation have requested annexation or consented to annexation by the close of the public hearing or where a qualified voter has filed with the Town a written objection to the annexation, at any time following the public hearing, the Town Council may (but is not required to) pass a resolution ordering a special election and setting the date, time, and place of the special election, which shall not be fewer than 14 days nor more than 60 days after the date of such resolution proposing the special election. Such resolution shall include a description of the territory proposed for annexation and shall identify the zoning district classification(s), consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, which shall be assigned to the parcel(s) if annexed. The passage of this resolution shall ipso facto be considered the determination of the Town Council to proceed with the matter of the proposed annexation and zoning district classification if the election results are in favor of the annexation. 
3.2.4  Notice of Special Election. Notice of the date, time, and place of said special election shall be published no fewer than 14 days before the date set for said Special Election. Notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town and in the territory proposed to be annexed, and shall be posted in at least five public places in the Town and in at least one place, viewable to the public, in the territory proposed to be annexed. Such notice shall be in bold print or bordered in black in such manner as to call attention thereto, and shall include a description of the territory proposed for annexation and proposed zoning district classifications. 
3.2.5  Those Entitled to Vote. 
(a)  At such special election, any person residing in the territory proposed for annexation who would be entitled to vote at the annual Town election if the territory proposed for annexation was already included in the Town, shall be entitled to one vote. (For purposes of this section "lawfully entitled to vote" shall not include "registered to vote" if registration is required for Town elections). In addition, each legal entity or natural person holding record title in its own name in any parcel proposed for annexation shall be entitled to one vote. 
(b)  These provisions shall be construed so as to permit only "one-man, one vote". Where a voter is entitled to vote by virtue of both residence and ownership of property or is entitled to vote by ownership of two or more parcels, that voter shall be entitled to only one vote. 
(c)  Any legal entity (other than a natural person) entitled to vote must cast its vote by a duly executed and acknowledged power of attorney. Any natural person may cast his/her vote by a duly executed and acknowledged power of attorney. Such power of attorney shall be surrendered to the Board of Special Elections, which shall file same in the Office of the Town Manager. Such power of attorney so filed shall constitute conclusive evidence of the right of said person to vote in the Special Election on behalf of the legal entity or natural person granting the power. 
3.2.6  Conduct of the Special Election. The Town Council may cause voting machines, electronic voting systems, or paper ballots to be used in the Special Election, as required by law, the form of ballot to be printed as follows: 
_______ For the proposed annexation. 
_______ Against the proposed annexation. 
The Town Board of Elections appointed pursuant to subsection 5.5.5(f) of this Charter shall act as a Board of Special Elections for the annexation. If there is not already a board chairperson, one (1) of the said Board of Special Elections members shall be designated the presiding officer by majority vote of the Board of Special Elections. The Board of Special Elections shall be the sole and final judges of the legality of the votes offered at such special election. It shall keep a true and accurate list of all natural persons and other legal entities voting. Voting shall be conducted in a public place as designated by the resolution calling the special election. The polling place shall be open for such period of time as the Town Council determines to be reasonable and appropriate under the circumstances, provided the poll is open for at least one hour, as set by the Town Council, on the date set for the special election. All persons in the polling place at the time of the closing of the polls shall be permitted to vote, even though such votes are not cast until after the time for the closing of the polls. 
All ballots cast by those persons or other legal entities authorized to vote as property owners in the territory proposed to be annexed shall be deposited in designated ballot box(es) or cast in designated voting machine(s). 
3.2.7  Results of special election; final resolution. 
(a)  In order for the territory proposed to be annexed to be considered annexed, a majority of the votes must have been cast in favor of the proposed annexation. 
(b)  If the vote is favorable to the proposed annexation, the Town Council shall, at its first meeting following the special election, proceed in accordance with subsection 3.2.7(c) to adopt a resolution annexing the said territory and including it within the limits of the Town ("final resolution"), as well as an ordinance designating the zoning district classification(s) of the territory(s) so annexed. 
(c)  Whether acting pursuant to subsection 3.2.3 (all record owners request or consent to annexation) or 3.2.7 (majority of votes at special annexation election cast in favor of annexation), the Town Council shall adopt a resolution annexing the said territory and including it within the limits of the Town ("final resolution"). Contemporaneous therewith, the Town Council shall also adopt an ordinance designating the zoning district classification(s) of the territory(s) so annexed, which shall be consistent with the Town's Comprehensive Plan. If the initial resolution proposing annexation provided that the Town was not obligated to provide municipal services or to extend municipal facilities or improvements to the annexed lands as provided in subsection 3.2.1, the resolution annexing such lands shall contain the same or substantially similar provisions. Upon the adoption of said resolution of annexation, copies thereof, signed by the Mayor, and certified by the secretary, with municipal seal affixed, together with a plot of the area annexed, shall forthwith be filed for record in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds in and for Kent and/or New Castle counties and sent to the Office of State Planning or its successor agency. The territory so annexed shall be considered to be a part of the Town from the moment the last mentioned resolution is adopted by the Town Council. Failure to record said resolution, or the plot accompanying same, shall not invalidate the annexation, but such recording may be enforced by writ of mandamus or mandatory injunction. 
3.2.8  Simultaneous annexation proceedings. Provided that such parcels otherwise meet the requirements of this charter for contiguity, nothing herein shall be deemed to require the town council to include all contiguous parcels proposed for annexation as one "territory" in one annexation election, but the town council may, in its sole discretion, simultaneously conduct an annexation election on each such parcel, or on such combinations of contiguous such parcels, as it deems appropriate; nor shall anything herein prevent the town council, in its sole discretion, from combining two or more contiguous parcels proposed for annexation in one "territory" for purposes of conducting an annexation election. 
3.2.9  Annexation agreements. Notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary, where, pursuant to section 3.1.1 of this Charter, annexation proceedings are initiated by a property owner(s) holding record title to real property in territory contiguous to the then existing corporate limits of the town, such petition may be made contingent upon an annexation agreement with the town which agreement may address any matters which would be relevant to the subject lands, if annexed. By way of example and not in limitation, such agreement may address zoning, subdivision approval, site plan approval, tax relief, public utilities, and public improvements. No provision of any annexation agreement shall violate the town's comprehensive plan. The town planning commission shall review any annexation agreement submitted and make a report or recommendation thereon to the town council which shall make the final decision. The town council may, with the concurrence of the entity petitioning for annexation, make revisions to the annexation agreement in response to the comments and recommendations of the planning commission without reconsideration by the planning commission. In the event the town council approves such an agreement and votes to accept a petition under section 3.1.1 of this Charter, such annexation agreement, as reviewed and finally approved, shall be deemed a material part of the annexation and shall be included in all subsequent steps of the annexation procedure; that is: (1) the resolutions and notices adopted by the town council pursuant to section 3.2.1., section 3.2.3, section 3.2.4, and section 3.2.11 shall recite that the proposed annexation includes and is subject to an annexation agreement, shall briefly summarize its terms, and shall state that copies of the agreement are available upon request at the town hall; (2) if the results of the election are favorable to the proposed annexation as provided by section 3.2.7(a) of this Charter, the resolution annexing the territory (as provided by section 3.2.7(b)) shall recite that the annexation is subject to an annexation agreement and shall incorporate the terms of such agreement by specific reference; and the town shall be bound to honor the provisions of such agreement unless released therefrom by the petitioner(s). 
Provided further, that no annexation agreement made at the time of annexation under this section 3.2.9 shall extend beyond seven years from the date the property is annexed into the town; and such agreements shall be null, void, and unenforceable after the expiration of said seven years. 
An annexation agreement may be modified or amended by mutual agreement of the petitioner and the town council at any time prior to the resolution ordering the special election pursuant to section 3.2.3 of this Charter, but any substantial modification or amendment shall be deemed to be the withdrawal of the original petition and the filing of a new petition under section 3.1.1. 
3.2.10  Property owned by the State of Delaware; highways, streets, roads and alleys, ponds, canals, streams and other waters. 
(a)  Real property owned by the State of Delaware may be annexed into the town without the State's casting a vote in the special election, provided the state agency having control and supervision thereof does not notify the town, in writing, of its objection to such annexation within 30 days after notice of the resolution proposing the annexation as provided in section 3.2.1. 
(b)  Highways, streets, roads, and alleys; ponds, canals, streams, and other waters. Contiguity with the town's existing corporate limits, or with other territory which is itself contiguous with the town's existing corporate limits, shall not be deemed interrupted by the existence of any highway, street, road, alley, pond, canal, stream, or other body of water running parallel with and between the parcel sought to be annexed, but nothing herein shall be construed to allow rights of way, utility easements, waterways, or like entities to be annexed in "corridor" fashion or to be utilized as a corridor route for annexation to create contiguity. 
3.2.11  Limitations. No action contesting the annexation of any territory under this section shall be brought after the expiration of 60 days from the publication of a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the town and in the territory annexed, which notice shall contain the following information: 
(a)  Notice that the town has annexed such territory and a description thereof. 
(b)  Notice that any person or other legal entity desiring to challenge such annexation must bring his/her/its action within 60 days from the date of publication of such notice or forever be barred from doing so. 
(c)  Such notice shall be in bold print or bordered in black in such manner as to call attention thereto. 
(d)  In addition to publication as herein provided, the town council shall cause a public notice, containing the information set out in subsections (a) and (b) above (using date of "posting" for date of "publication"), to be posted in at least five public places in the town, viewable to the public, one of which places shall be in the territory annexed. 
(e)  In the event the publications and/or postings do not appear on the same date, the date of the first publication or posting shall control. 
3.2.12  Re-submission of proposed annexation. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the council from resubmitting a proposal for annexation to the voters of said territory, or any portion thereof, under the authority of this section and in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
(H.B. No. 318, § 2, 5-1-12) 
Sec. 4. - Powers of the town. 
4.1  General. The town shall have and enjoy all the powers possible for a municipal corporation to have under the Constitution and laws of the State of Delaware, as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter. 
4.2  Enumeration of powers. Not by way of limitation upon the scope of the powers vested in the town council to exercise all powers delegated by this Charter to the town (except as may expressly appear herein to the contrary), but rather by way of enumeration and for purposes of clarity, the town council is vested by this Charter with the following powers, that is to say, the town council: 
4.2.1  May have and use a corporate seal which may be altered, changed, or renewed at pleasure. 
4.2.2  May hold and acquire by gift, negotiation and purchase, devise, lease, or condemnation, property both real (improved or unimproved) and personal, or mixed, within or without the boundaries of the town, in fee or lesser estate or interest, necessary or desirable for any municipal or public purpose, including but not limited to, providing sites for constructing, improving, extending, altering, or demolishing: 
(a)  Public buildings; 
(b)  Parks; 
(c)  Streets, squares, lanes, alleys, and sidewalks; 
(d)  Sewer systems, including but not limited to sewage lines, conduits, lift stations, sewage disposal or treatment plants, and all appurtenances thereto; 
(e)  Water systems, including but not limited to, water plants, wells, lines, conduits and all appurtenances thereto; 
(f)  Electric systems, including but not limited to, electric plants, substations, distribution systems, lines, conduits and all appurtenances thereto; 
(g)  Gas systems, including but not limited to storage tanks, distribution systems, conduits and all appurtenances thereto; 
(h)  Recreational facilities, including but not limited to public bathing beaches, gymnasiums, athletic fields, bicycle paths, tennis, basketball, or paddle ball courts and all appurtenances thereto; 
(i)  For slum clearance and redevelopment, urban renewal, revitalization, or rehabilitation of blighted areas or removal of dangerous buildings; 
(j)  For the protection of the health of the citizens of the town; 
(k)  For the proper furnishing of adequate municipal services to the citizens of the town and those persons residing in such proximity to, but beyond, the corporate limits of the town who can be furnished with such municipal services, in the discretion of the town council to the mutual benefit and advantage of the town and such non-residents thereto, upon such terms, charges, and conditions as the town council may determine and approve. 
4.2.3  May sell, grant, alienate, lease, mortgage, manage, hold and control such property as the interests of the town may require except as prohibited by the Constitution of the State of Delaware or as restricted by this Charter. 
4.2.4  May pay for the acquisition, construction, improvement, repair, extension, alteration, or demolition of any municipal or public property, real, personal, or mixed, from the general fund of the town, from the proceeds of any bond issue which may be authorized and sold for any of the purposes for which lands and premises are authorized by this Charter to be acquired, and/or from the proceeds of any grant or loan made to the town by any governmental entity of the United States or the State of Delaware where the proceeds of the grant or loan are for the purposes for which lands and premises are authorized by this Charter to be acquired. 
4.2.5  May acquire, build, erect and maintain buildings and facilities necessary or required for housing and equipping the offices of the town. 
4.2.6  May purchase, take and hold real and personal property when sold for any delinquent tax, assessment, trash bill, water rent, electric bill, gas bill, license fee, tapping fee, charge growing out of abatement of nuisances and the like, laying-out and repairing sidewalks, or other charge due the town, and to sell the same. 
4.2.7  May ascertain, locate, lay out, establish, open, change, alter, widen, abandon, regulate the use and enjoyment of, prevent or remove any obstruction of, level, grade, flag, dress, macadamize, pave, gravel, shell, improve, dredge, erect, remove, repair and replace any new or present street, highway, lane, alley, water course, park, lake, crosswalk, wharf, dock, sewer, drain, gutter, aqueduct, or pipeline or portion thereof, or any new or present sidewalk, curb, or gutter or portion thereof in the town and the beach or beach strand in or contiguous to the town; to specify the grade thereof, the materials to be used in the doing thereof and the manner in which the same shall be done; to enter into contracts or agreements for the doing thereof, including contracts or agreements with the State of Delaware for the permanent maintenance, repair and upkeep of any street, lane, alley, roadway or other public thoroughfare within the town. 
4.2.8  May enforce the removal of ice, snow or dirt or other foreign substance from sidewalks and gutters by owners or abutting owners. 
4.2.9  May prohibit, remove or regulate the erection of any stoop, step, platform, bay window, cellar door, gate, area, descent, sign, post or any other erection or projection in, over, upon or under any street, highway, alley, lane, water course, park, lake, strand, sidewalk, crosswalk, wharf, dock, sewer, drain, aqueduct or pipeline of the town. 
4.2.10  May provide, construct, extend, maintain, manage and control dams, jetties, bulkheads, embankments, flood gates, piers, or fills for the preservation of any strand or high land within the limits of the town and contiguous thereto to the end that the same may be preserved and properly protected that the general public might enjoy the use thereof. 
4.2.11  May direct, regulate and control the planting, rearing, treatment and preserving of ornamental shade trees in the streets, avenues, highways, parks and grounds of the town and to authorize or prohibit the removal or destruction of said trees. 
4.2.12  May fully control within the town the drainage of all water and to that end to alter or change the course and direction of any natural water course, runs or rivulet within the town, to regulate, maintain, clean and keep the same open, clean and unobstructed, and to provide, construct, extend and maintain, manage and control a surface water drainage system and facilities for the health, sanitation and convenience of the inhabitants of the town. 
4.2.13  May provide an ample supply of potable water for the town and its inhabitants and to this end to acquire, lease, erect, construct, maintain, operate, extend, enlarge, renew, replace, control and dispose of wells, reservoirs, pumps, machines, water treatment facilities, stations, tanks, standpipes, water mains, fire hydrants, and all other equipment, property, or rights used in or about the collection, storage, purification, conveyance, or distribution or sale of water; to regulate and prescribe for what public or private purposes the water furnished by the town may be used, the manner of its use, the amounts to be paid by the users thereof, the means whereby such amounts shall be collected and the fines or penalties, or both, for any wilful or negligent injury, or damage to or interference with the water system or the equipment of the town; in the interest of the public's health, may compel any and all properties in the town to be connected to the water system of the town; may furnish or refuse to furnish water from the town system to places and properties outside the town limits; and may contract for and purchase water and distribute the same to users within or without the town with the same full powers as though such water had been initially reduced to usefulness by the municipality itself. 
4.2.14  May provide, construct, extend, maintain, manage and control a sewer system and/or a sewage treatment and disposal plant and facilities for the health, sanitation and convenience of the inhabitants of the town; may regulate and prescribe for what private or public uses or purposes the system may be used, the manner of its use, the amounts to be paid by the users thereof, the means whereby such amounts shall be collected and the fines or penalties or both, for any wilful or negligent injury or damage to, or interference with the said system, plant or facilities; may furnish or refuse to furnish sewer disposal service from the town system to places and properties outside the town limits; in the interest of the public's health, may compel any and all properties in the town to be connected to the sewer system of the town; and may contract for sewer collection, treatment and/or disposal service and to resell the same to users within or without the town with the same full powers as though such service had been initially provided by the facilities therefor of the town itself. 
4.2.15  May provide, construct, extend, maintain, manage and control the plant and system, or plants and systems, for the generating, manufacturing and distributing of electric current or gas, or both, to the inhabitants of the town and for lighting the streets, highways, lanes, alleys, water courses, parks, lakes, strands, sidewalks, crosswalks, wharfs, docks, public buildings or other public places in the town, and to this end may acquire, lease, erect, construct, maintain, operate, extend, enlarge, renew, replace, control and dispose of transmission and distribution lines, pipes, mains and other conveyances for any such current or gas as may be necessarily proper to light the town, and to furnish proper connections for electric current and gas to the properties of the inhabitants of the town who may desire the same; to regulate and prescribe for what private or public purpose the current or gas furnished by the town may be used, the manner of its use, the amount to be paid by the users thereof, the means whereby such amounts are to be collected and the fines or penalties, or both, for any wilful or negligent injury or damage to or interference with the electric or gas system or systems of the town; to furnish or refuse to furnish electric current or gas from the town's system or systems, to places and properties outside the town limits; and to contract for and purchase electric current or gas and distribute the same to users within or without the town with the same full powers as though such current or gas had been initially reduced to usefulness by the town itself. 
4.2.16  May regulate, control or prevent the use or storage of gasoline, naphtha, gun powder, fireworks, tar, pitch, resin, and all other combustible or dangerous materials and the use of candles, lamps, and other lights in stores, shops, and other places; may regulate, suppress, remove or secure any fireplace, stove chimney, oven broiler, or other apparatus which may pose a danger of causing fires. 
4.2.17  May provide for the organization of a fire department and the control and government thereof; may establish fire limits and do all things necessary for the prevention or extinguishment of fires; and at the discretion of the town council, may contribute, donate or give an amount or amounts to any volunteer fire company or companies incorporated under the laws of the State of Delaware, or any volunteer fire association or associations maintaining and operating fire fighting equipment and service to the town, provided that any such contribution, donation or gift may be made subject to such conditions and stipulations as to the use thereof as the town council shall deem advisable. 
4.2.18  May provide for the organization of ambulance, rescue or paramedic services(s) and the control and government thereof; may, at the discretion of the town council, contribute, donate or give an amount or amounts to any such service formed or incorporated under the laws of the State of Delaware, or to any volunteer service maintaining and operating ambulance, rescue or paramedic equipment and services for the inhabitants of the town, provided that any such contribution, donation or gift may be made subject to such conditions and stipulations to the use thereof as the town council may deem advisable. 
4.2.19  May prevent vice, drunkenness, and immorality. 
4.2.20  May prohibit gaming and fraudulent devices. 
4.2.21  May prevent and quell riots, disturbances, and disorderly assemblages. 
4.2.22  May adopt and enforce such ordinances regulating traffic, on all streets, alleys, avenues, and public ways within the town as are not inconsistent with the motor vehicle laws of the State of Delaware. 
4.2.23  May regulate or prohibit the use of public streets, alleys, sidewalks, boardwalks, beaches, parks, right-of-ways, public places and town-owned lands for commercial uses or activities not otherwise protected from such regulation or prohibition by the Constitutions of either the United States or the State of Delaware, or by any controlling federal statute. 
4.2.24  May regulate or prevent the use of guns, air guns, spring guns, pistols, sling shots, bow and arrows, and any other device for discharging missiles which may cause bodily injury or injuries or harm to persons or property; and to regulate or prevent the use of bonfires, fireworks, bombs and detonating works of all kinds. 
4.2.25  May provide for and preserve the health, peace, safety, cleanliness, ornament, good order and public welfare of the town and its inhabitants. 
4.2.26  May prohibit, restrain, license or regulate all public sports, exhibitions, shows, parades, productions, circuses or other public performances, amusements and games. 
4.2.27  May direct the digging down, draining, filling up, cleaning, cutting or fencing of lots, tracts, pieces or parcels of ground in the town which may be deemed dangerous or unwholesome or necessary to carry out any improvements authorized by this Charter and to assess the cost thereof against the owner thereof. 
4.2.28  May define, prevent, abate or remove nuisances, obstructions or any other condition detrimental to the public safety, health or welfare; and to cause the cost of such abatement or removal to be paid by the legal entity causing or permitting same to exist. 
4.2.29  May adopt ordinances providing for the condemnation, upon inspection, of any building or structure in the town which is determined, on the basis of standards set forth in such ordinance(s) to be a fire hazard or otherwise unsafe, and cause the same to be torn down or removed; and to cause the cost of such demolition and removal to be paid by the legal entity causing or permitting same to exist. 
4.2.30  May establish and regulate pounds and to restrain, prohibit and impound any domestic or wild animal, beast, bird or fowl running at large and to authorize the destruction of the same; and to regulate the keeping of dogs within the town, and to provide for registration and fees thereof. 
4.2.31  May provide civil penalties or criminal penalties for the violation of any ordinance of the Town by fine or imprisonment or both, not exceeding $1,000.00 and/or thirty days imprisonment for each offense. 
4.2.32  May acquire, build, erect and maintain a suitable place as a lock-up or jail for the town which shall be used as a place for detention of persons accused of violations of law or ordinances, for a reasonable time in cases of necessity prior to hearing and trial; provided that any correctional institution located in Kent or New Castle County may be used for any such purpose, in which event the town shall pay for the board of persons committed thereto for violations of ordinances which are not violations of any general law of the State. 
4.2.33  May provide for payment of any tax, license, assessment, fee, charge, or other amount due the town by the performance of labor or service for the town by any person owing the same. 
4.2.34  May regulate and control the manner of building, moving, or removal of dwellings or other structures and to provide for granting permits for same. 
4.2.35  May prohibit and prevent the carrying on of construction by private persons or companies at such times and seasons of the year and at such hours of the day as the town council may determine necessary and appropriate for the public health and welfare. 
4.2.36  May provide for or regulate the numbering of houses and lots on the streets and the naming of the streets and avenues. 
4.2.37  May, for the prevention of fire and the preservation of the beauty of the town, establish a building line for buildings to be erected; may zone or district the town and make particular provision for particular zones or districts with regard to building or building materials; and may prohibit any building or construction except those for which a building permit has been issued as prescribed by the town council; and generally may exercise all powers and authorities vested by virtue of 22 Del. C. ch. 3, as it may hereafter from time to time be amended, or any future corresponding provision of law. 
4.2.38  May license, tax and collect fees of such various amounts as the town council from time to time shall fix from any individual, firm, association or corporation carrying on or practicing any business, profession or occupation, or renting out any real or personal property, within the limits of the town. 
4.2.39  May impose, upon new development or construction or upon first time occupancy of new construction, such "impact fees" as are reasonably and proportionally calculated to recover the cost of installing, enlarging, improving, or expanding public or municipal improvements which have a rational nexus to such new construction; and/or to contribute to the costs of operations of those volunteer fire companies and/or ambulance/paramedic companies providing services within the town. 
4.2.40  May grant licenses and impose fees for licenses, issue permits, and regulate any activity within the corporate limits of the town. 
4.2.41  May grant franchises or licenses to any responsible person, firm, association or corporation for such period of time, upon such terms, restrictions, stipulations and conditions and for such consideration as the town council shall deem in the best interest of the municipality, to use the present and future streets, highways, lanes, alleys, water courses, parks, lakes, strands, sidewalks, boardwalks, crosswalks, wharfs, docks, beaches and other public places of the town for the purpose of furnishing heat, light, power, gas, water, sewer, drainage, electric current, telephone, telegraph, television, internet services, railroad (excepting railroads or railways engaged in interstate commerce), bus, taxi or other transportation, carrier or public service to the town, unto the persons, firms or corporations residing or located therein and for the purpose of transmitting the same from or through the town to points outside the limits thereof; provided, however, that whenever any state or federal law grants jurisdiction over any such activity to a state or federal agency, the town shall have no authority inconsistent therewith. 
4.2.42  May regulate and control the exercise of any license or franchise mentioned in section 4.2.41 of this Charter, or intended so to be. 
4.2.43  May appropriate money to pay the debts, liabilities and expenditures of the town, or any part or item thereof, from any fund applicable thereto, and to transfer temporarily money from one fund to another fund of the town in case of emergency. 
4.2.44  May inquire into and investigate the conduct of any officer, agent or employee of the town or any municipal affair and for such purpose or purposes may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths or affirmations, and compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers, or other evidence by subpoena. 
4.2.45  May establish a pension, health, dental, or other insurance plan, (including participation in any pension, health, dental, or insurance plan offered by or through the State of Delaware) for the employees of the town under such terms and conditions as the town council, in its discretion, may deem most appropriate. The method of funding may, if deemed desirable by the town council, be accomplished through an insurance company or brokerage firm licensed by the State of Delaware or authorized to do business in this State. 
4.2.46  May determine what purposes are deemed to be public purposes or municipal purposes. 
4.2.47  May make, adopt, and establish, alter and amend all such ordinances, regulations, rules, and by-laws not contrary to the laws of this state and the United States as the town council may deem necessary to carry into effect any of the provisions of this Charter or any other law of the state relating generally to municipal corporations or which they may deem proper and necessary for the order, protection and good government of the town, the protection and preservation of persons and property, and of the public health and welfare of the town and its inhabitants; provided, however that any Ordinance relating to the public health of the town and its inhabitants or designed to prevent the introduction or spread of infectious or contagious diseases or to prevent nuisances affecting the same shall apply not only within the corporate limits of the town but as well to all areas and persons outside the town within one (1) mile from said limits. 
4.2.49  Where the title to real property is held by an association of property owners (e.g. homeowner association, condo association, maintenance association), the Town may assess each member of the association individually, on a pro-rata basis, for any expenses incurred by the Town to bring the real property held by the association into compliance with the Town laws and ordinances, where the association has failed to make payment in full within 60 days after written demand from the Town. When the Town has a good faith belief that the association is defunct or no longer has a functioning board (or other similar representative body), the Town shall provide notices directly to, and make demand of, individual association members. Notwithstanding the provisions of 25 Del. C. § 81-317, assessments pursuant to this section may be collected in the same manner as other amounts owed to the Town. 
4.3  Liberal construction; manner of exercise. The powers of the town under this Charter shall be liberally construed in favor of the town, and the enumeration of particular powers by this Charter shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive, but, in addition to the powers enumerated herein, implied hereby, or appropriate to the exercise thereof, the town shall have and may exercise any and all powers which, under the Constitution of the State of Delaware, it would be competent for this Charter to specifically enumerate. 
4.4  Manner of exercising powers. All powers of the town, whether express or implied, shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this Charter, or if not prescribed herein, then in the manner provided by ordinance or resolution of the town council. The council may, by resolution, do such other act or thing incidental, necessary, or useful in connection with any of the matters in this Charter duly authorized. 
4.5  Intergovernmental cooperation. The town may exercise any of its powers or perform any of its functions and may participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation, by contract or otherwise, with the State of Delaware or with any agency or political subdivision thereof, or the United States or any agency thereof, except as prohibited or restricted by the Constitution or laws of the State of Delaware or by this Charter. 
(H.B. No. 318, §§ 3, 4, 5-1-12) 
Sec. 5. - Town Council. 
5.1  Governing Body; Election Districts. 
5.1.1  Governing Body. The government of the Town and the exercise of all powers conferred by this Charter, except as otherwise provided herein, shall be vested in and exercised by a Town Council composed of a Mayor and six (6) Council members to be chosen as hereinafter provided. Unless the context is clearly to the contrary, the term "Council" or "Town Council" herein shall mean the Mayor and Council members. 
5.1.2  Election Districts. In order that the members of the Town Council shall be distributed throughout the Town, before March 1, 2004, the Town Council shall, by ordinance, divide the Town into no fewer than three (3) representative districts, such districts to be drawn so that the same shall be reasonably equal in population. The Town Council may thereafter provide, by amendatory ordinance, for the creation of up to three (3) additional districts and/or re-arrangement of the boundaries of existing districts in the event of annexation or significant increases in the total population of the Town, but such revisions shall continue to result in districts of reasonably equal population. 
(a)  District and "At-Large" Representation. The Town Council shall be comprised of one Council member from each representative district (identified as such); the Mayor and the remaining Council members may be domiciles of any representative district, and shall be elected "at large." At any Town election, each qualified voter of the Town shall be entitled to vote for one candidate for each "at large" office to be filled, but only those qualified voters who, for at least 30 days prior to the date of the election, have been continuously domiciled in the representative district for which a seat is up for election shall be entitled to vote for a district representative candidate. 
(b)  Re-Districting; Public Hearing; Notice. In a timely manner upon the release of the decennial census data (commencing with the release of the 2010 census), the Town Council shall review the population of the then-current election districts to determine if they are reasonably equal in population. In the event that any action is subsequently taken to create a new election district or to revise the boundaries of the then-existing election districts, the Town Council shall hold at least one public hearing, on not fewer than 30 days public notice, stating the date, time, place, and purpose of the hearing which public notice shall be: (i) published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town and (ii) posted in at least five public places in the Town. The Town Council shall conduct its review and any proceedings or actions resulting therefrom, so that the boundaries of the new or revised representative districts are finalized and set forth in an appropriate ordinance no later than the second regular Council meeting in February of the year following the year in which the review was commenced. Notice of such new or revised representative districts shall be promptly published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town and posted in at least five public places in the Town. 
(c)  "Phase-In" of District Representation; Creation of Additional Districts. The present Mayor and Council members of the Town, and other officers appointed to serve, in office under Chapter 339, Volume 62, Laws of Delaware, as amended, shall continue to serve from and after the effective date of this Charter, until their successors are duly elected or appointed. In 2004, two persons shall be elected to the Town Council to fill the vacancies created by the expiration of the terms of office of the two then-outgoing Council members. One of those two vacancies shall be designated as the representative for the 1st representative district and candidates for such seat shall be domiciled in that district. In 2005, three (3) persons shall be elected to fill the vacancies created by the expiration of the terms of office of the then out-going Mayor and two Council members. One of the two Council member vacancies shall be designated as the representative for the 2nd representative district and candidates for such seat shall be domiciled in that district. In 2006, two persons shall be elected to fill the vacancies created by the expiration of the terms of the two then out-going Council members, and one of those two vacancies shall be designated as the representative for the 3rd representative district, and such candidate shall be domiciled in that representative district. 
In the event that the Town Council subsequently acts to create new, additional election districts as provided in subsection 5.1.2 above, the vacancy created by the expiration of the term of the then out-going at large Council member shall be designated as the representative for the 4th (or, if necessary, the 5th and 6th) representative district, and candidates for that seat shall be domiciled in the representative district for which they are seeking election. Any Council member who ceases to reside in his or her representative district as a result of the changing of district boundaries or the creation of a new district shall be entitled to complete his or her current term of office. 
(d)  Where No Qualified Candidate Files To Run. In the event that no qualified candidate files a timely "Notice of Candidacy" under subsection 5.3 to run for a district seat or an "at-large" seat, (i) such district seat shall be filled for that term of office by the "at-large" candidate receiving the second-highest number of votes for the at-large seat or (ii) such "at-large" seat shall be filled for that term of office by the candidate for the district seat receiving the second-highest number of votes for the district seat. 
5.2  Qualifications. Candidates for the office of Mayor or Council member shall be at least 21 years of age, shall not have been convicted of a felony, shall have been a bona-fide domiciliary of the Town for at least one year prior to the date of the election, and shall be otherwise qualified to vote at the annual Town election as provided in subsection 5.5.2. Additionally, any candidate for a representative district Council seat shall have been a bona-fide domiciliary of his/her representative district for at least one year. Any person elected to the office of Mayor or Council member must continue, throughout his/her term of office, to meet these qualifications or forfeit his/her office; provided however, that if a Council member with less than one year remaining in his/her term of office shall change that domicile to another representative district in the Town, such Council member shall not, for that reason, be disqualified from or forfeit his/her office. 
The Town Council, by majority vote of its disinterested members, shall be the sole and final judge of the qualifications of its members, and shall interpret and apply the standards set forth in this Charter. 
5.3  Notice of Solicitation of Candidates; Notice of Candidacy; Determinations Concerning Qualifications; Filing Certificate of Intention and Statement of Organization. 
5.3.1  Notice of Solicitation of Candidates; Notice of Candidacy. Notice of solicitation of candidates shall be posted conspicuously within the municipality twenty (20) days prior to the filing deadline for the offices up for election and shall include the terms of the offices up for election, the qualifications to run for each office, and the filing procedures and deadline to run for office. In order to be listed on the ballot at any regular or special Town election, each candidate shall file a written and signed notice of intention to seek office with the Town Manager, on a form prescribed by the Town, before the second regularly scheduled Town Council meeting in March. Such form shall contain an affidavit that the candidate meets all the qualifications for office. The Town Manager shall present all timely received notices of candidacy to the Town Council at the second regularly scheduled meeting in March. No later than one (1) business day following the second regularly scheduled meeting in March, the Town Manager shall submit the names of candidates for each office up for election to the Department of Elections. The Town Council may, by ordinance or resolution, adopt such rules, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter or with controlling state or federal law, governing the notice of solicitation of candidates. 
5.3.2  Determinations Concerning Qualifications. If the Town Manager determines that any candidate may not meet the qualifications for office, he/she shall notify the Mayor who shall call a special meeting of the Town Council to be held no fewer than twenty-one days prior to the date set for the election, at which the Town Council shall decide the matter. The candidate whose qualifications are at issue shall be notified, by registered mail, of the date, time and place of the hearing, at which he or she may appear and testify. If the Town Council determines that the candidate does not meet the qualifications for office, it shall reject his/her notice of intention to seek office and his or her name shall not appear on the ballot. In making the determination, only those members of the Town Council who are not competing for that seat shall be entitled to vote on the question. 
5.3.3  Elected Officials Running for the Office of Mayor. Any member of the Town Council whose term of office is not expiring at the next upcoming Town election may file to run for the office of Mayor without resigning his or her seat on Council. If such a member of Council is not elected to the office of Mayor, such Council member shall continue to serve in his or her seat on the Town Council; if such a member of Council is elected to the office of Mayor, that member's prior seat on Council shall become vacant upon that member's taking office as Mayor, and a special election shall be held as soon as practicable thereafter to fill the vacancy on Council so created. 
5.3.4.  Filing Certificate of Intention and Statement of Organization. All candidates shall file a certificate of intention or statement of organization if either is applicable and required under 15 Del. C. Ch. 75 ("Municipal Election") as those provisions may from time to time hereafter be amended or with any future corresponding provision of law. 
5.4  Term of Office. The term of office for the Mayor shall be two years from the date of the election, and the term of office for each Council member shall be three (3) years. Newly-elected persons shall hold office from the date they are sworn into office and until their respective successors have been duly elected and qualified. 
5.5  Elections. 
5.5.1  Compliance with State Regulations. The Town shall act in accordance with the state laws governing municipal voting found in 15 Del. C. Ch. 75 ("Municipal Elections"), as it may be hereby amended from time to time, and any other existing or future corresponding provisions of law, and the Town shall implement the election provisions found in this Charter in accordance with the same state laws governing municipal voting. 
5.5.2  Voter Qualifications. Any person shall be qualified to vote who, on the date of the election: 
(a)  is a United States citizen; 
(b)  has attained eighteen (18) years of age; 
(c)  has been continuously domiciled in the Town for at least thirty (30) days; 
(d)  has not been adjudged a mentally incompetent person by a court of competent jurisdiction; and 
(e)  has not been disenfranchised pursuant to Sections 3 or 7 of Article V of the Constitution of the State of Delaware. 
Persons appearing to vote shall present proof of identity and address pursuant to 15 Del. C. Ch. 75 ("Municipal Elections"). For purposes hereof, a person is "domiciled" in the Town when he/she physically resides within the corporate limits of the Town with the actual intent to make that residence his/her fixed and permanent home; however, any person who is enlisted or engaged in any government service of the United States or any military organization of this State of the United States, which service requires him/her to reside outside the limits of the Town, shall be considered to be a domiciliary of the Town during the period of his/her service so long as it remains his/her actual intention to retain Smyrna as his/her fixed and permanent home. All questions regarding an individual's qualification to vote raised prior to the day of the election shall go before the Board of Elections and an individual shall be given notice and an opportunity to be heard before the Board of Elections makes a determination regarding that individual's qualification to vote. Questions regarding an individual's qualifications to vote that are raised at the time of voting shall be resolved by the Board of Elections or its designated Election Officers. 
5.5.3  Voter Registration. The Town Council may enact such ordinances concerning the registration of qualified voters for municipal elections in the Town as it deems reasonably necessary to provide for the orderly and efficient conduct of municipal elections; provided that no such ordinances shall alter the qualifications of voters as hereinabove set forth, nor shall any such ordinances unduly impair the right to vote in a municipal election. 
5.5.4  Uncontested Elections; Write-In Candidates. 
(a)  Where there is only one official candidate for each office up for election, if none of the official candidates has a formal opponent on the day of election, the official candidates may assume office without the holding of a formal election. 
(b)  No person or candidate whose name does not appear on the ballot shall be eligible for election, and votes for "write-in" candidates shall not be counted. 
5.5.5  Date, Time, and Place and Manner of Conducting Elections. 
(a)  Date, Time, and Place. The annual Town Election shall be held on the last Tuesday in April of each year at such time and place, within the Town, as shall be determined by the Town Council. The polls shall remain open for no fewer than six (6) hours, the times to be determined by the Town Council. 
(b)  Notice of Elections. Notice of Town elections shall be posted in a conspicuous public place no later than twenty (20) days prior to the election date. Additionally, notice of elections shall be published at least once per week for two successive weeks immediately prior to the date of the election in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town. Such notices shall be in bold print or bordered in black in such manner as to call attention thereto. In the event that the publications and/or postings do not appear on the same date, the date of the first publication shall control. The notice of elections shall include the date, time, and place of the election, the names of the candidates for each office, and the qualifications to vote. The Town Council may, by ordinance or resolution, adopt such rules, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter or with controlling state or federal law, governing the notice of elections. 
(c)  Voting machines. Elections shall be by voting machine provided by the Department of Elections in accordance with 15 Del. C. Ch. 75 ("Municipal Elections"), as it may be hereby amended from time to time, and any other existing or future corresponding provisions of law. Separate voting machines or electronic voting system controls shall be utilized to insure that only those persons entitled to vote for candidates running for representative districts seats are allowed to vote for such candidates. 
(d)  Absentee Voting. The Town Council may (but shall not be required to), by ordinance, provide for a qualified voter (duly registered if required by ordinance) who shall be unable to appear in person, to cast his or her ballot at any municipal election by absentee ballot. All absentee voting authorized by the Town shall be conducted in accordance with 15 Del. C. Ch. 75 ("Municipal Elections"), as it may be hereby amended from time to time, and any other existing or future corresponding provision of law. 
(e)  Rules Governing Conduct of Elections. The Town Council shall follow the rules governing the conduct of elections and voting procedures found in 15 Del. C. Ch. 75 ("Municipal Elections"), as it may be hereby amended from time to time, and any other existing or future corresponding provisions of law. The Town Council may, by ordinance or resolution, adopt such rules, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter or with controlling state or federal law, governing the conduct of elections. 
(f)  Board of Elections. Every election shall be held under the supervision of a Board of Elections. The Board of Elections shall consist of five (5) persons (as determined by the Town Council) who shall be qualified voters of the Town and shall not be an elected official or candidate for Town office or an immediate family member of such (mother, father, son, daughter, brother, sister, including half-brothers and sisters, step-family members and in-laws) and who shall be appointed for that purpose by the Town Council at least twenty (20) days before such election. The Board of Elections shall serve for a term of one year commencing the second Council meeting in February, provided that the term of the Board of Elections shall in no instance expire until a successor Board of Elections has been appointed. Members of the Board of Elections may serve for more than one term. Each board member shall be confirmed and have his/her name and contact information publicly posted in accordance with 15 Del. C. Ch. 75 ("Municipal Elections"), as it may be hereby amended from time to time, and any other existing or future corresponding provisions of law. The Town shall notify the State Election Commissioner and Department of Elections of the members appointed to the Board of Elections. The Board of Elections shall oversee the absentee ballots and either appoints an odd number of absentee ballot judges or, at the discretion of the Town Council act itself as the absentee ballot election judges. If, at the opening of the polls, there shall not be present all the members of the Board of Elections, then in such case the ranking Town officer available at the opening of the polls shall appoint a qualified voter or voters to act as a member or members of the Board of Elections to fill such vacancies caused by the absence of the previously-appointed members of the Board of Elections through the conclusion of the election. Members of the Board of Elections shall be the sole and final judges of the conduct of the election and of the legality of the votes offered. The Board of Elections shall keep a list of all voters voting at said election. The Board of Elections shall have the power to subpoena persons, and officers of the Town, and books, records and papers relative to the determination of the qualifications of voters and the legality of any vote or votes offered. The Board of Elections may appoint election officers (including an inspector) when needed to administer elections. In the absence of the appointment of election officers, members of the Board of Elections shall act as election officers, and the Board of Elections shall designate one of the board members as the inspector. 
(g)  Election Results. Upon the close of the election, the Board of Elections shall count the votes, and the candidate having the highest number of votes for each office shall be declared, by the Board of Elections, to be duly elected to such office. 
(h)  Ties. In the event of a tie vote for any office, the Board of Elections shall determine such tie by the casting of lots. 
(i)  Preservation of Ballots and Records. All ballots cast and all records of the election kept by the Board of Elections shall be preserved in the custody of the Board of Elections for a period of thirty (30) days, unless the election is contested or an appeal is filed in a court of appropriate jurisdiction, in which case such ballots and records shall be preserved until further direction of the reviewing body or court having jurisdiction. 
(j)  Election Record Book. The Board of Elections shall enter in a book, to be provided for that purpose, the results of the election, containing the names of the persons elected. The members of the Board of Elections shall subscribe the same. The book, containing such matters, shall be preserved by the Town Council. 
(H.B. No. 318, § 5, 5-1-12) 
Sec. 6. - Town council [Organization]. 
6.1  Organizational meeting. An organizational meeting of the town council shall be held as soon as practicable, but not fewer than seven (7) days, following the determination of the election results by the election board. Such meeting shall be held at the usual place for holding regular meetings. The newly elected council-members shall assume the duties of their respective offices, being first duly sworn or affirmed to perform their duties with fidelity, which oath or affirmation shall be taken before a notary public, a justice of the peace, the mayor, or by one of the holdover council-members. 
At the organizational meeting, the mayor shall appoint, from among the other members of the town council, a vice-mayor and secretary, subject to confirmation by the town council. Each of these officers (i.e. the vice-mayor and secretary) shall serve in that position for a term of one year or until the organizational meeting after the next succeeding election, unless sooner removed from such office by action of the town council. 
6.2  Officers. The offices of mayor and council member shall be elective. All other officers shall be appointed offices, such appointment to be made by the town council, as provided in section 7 of this Charter. 
6.2.1  Mayor. It shall be the duty of the Mayor to preside at all meetings of the Town Council, to serve as the representative of the Town government for all ceremonial purposes and head of the Town government for purposes of military law, and to perform such other duties as may be prescribed by any ordinance or resolution adopted by the Town Council. The Mayor shall have the same right as other Council members to vote on all matters and may at any time appoint another Council member to preside if he/she desires to make a motion, move the adoption of a resolution, second either, or debate any question from the floor, and may thereafter immediately resume his/her duties as presiding officer. For purposes of establishing a majority vote or quorum, the Mayor shall be counted as a member of Council. 
The Mayor shall be authorized to act on behalf of the Town, without prior Council approval, in the event of some sudden emergency requiring prompt action in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the Town, its residents and property owners. A "sudden emergency" for purposes of this section shall include, by way of example and not in limitation, a major fire or conflagration, significant flooding, or serious storm threatening significant damage, a civil disturbance, or a toxic spill. A "sudden emergency" shall also include any emergency situation as declared by any County, State, or federal agency having jurisdiction over the Town where the scope of the emergency so declared includes the Town of Smyrna. If reasonably possible, the Mayor shall notify each Council member, in writing, by personal delivery, fax, e-mail, overnight courier service, or U.S. mail, of the action so taken within 48 hours. Notice shall be complete upon depositing such notice in the U.S. Mail, proper postage affixed, to each Council member at his/her last known address, upon personal delivery to the Council member or an adult residing with the Council member, or by confirmation of receipt of such overnight delivery, fax, or e-mail transmission. 
Any action taken by the Mayor under the powers vested in him/her under this section shall be as good as the act of the entire Council, provided that the Council may at a regular or special meeting held within 15 days of the Mayor's action, cancel the further implementation of any such action not yet completed and notify any persons or legal entities affected. 
6.2.2  Vice-mayor. The vice-mayor shall act as mayor during the absence or disability of the mayor, and while so acting, shall be vested with all the powers, duties, and authority of the mayor. The vice-mayor shall perform such other duties as may be assigned to him by the mayor or by ordinance or resolution adopted by the town council. 
6.2.3  Secretary. The secretary shall have general supervision of the town's records and documents. The secretary shall cause to be kept a true and faithful record of the proceedings of the town council. During the temporary absence or disability of the mayor and vice-mayor, the secretary shall act as mayor and while so acting, shall be vested with all the powers, duties, and authority of the mayor. The secretary shall also have such other duties as directed by ordinance or resolution of the town council. 
6.2.4  Filling vacancies. If a vacancy shall occur in the office of vice-mayor or secretary, the mayor shall appoint such qualified person to fill such vacancy for the remainder of that term, subject to council confirmation. 
6.2.5  Succession of authority. In the event that the mayor is unavailable or incapable of assuming his/her responsibilities in a sudden emergency (as defined in section 6.2.1) the emergency powers therein vested in the mayor shall devolve upon the following officers and officials of the town in the following order of sequence: (1) vice-mayor, (2) secretary, (3) each of the four remaining council-members in order of their total number of years served on council, (4) the town manager, (5) the assistant town manager, (6) the chief of police, (7) the building inspector. 
6.3  Prohibitions. 
6.3.1  Holding other office; employment restrictions. Except where authorized by law, no member of the town council, nor the mayor, shall hold any other town office or town employment while serving in office, and any former mayor or council-member shall not hold any compensated appointed town office or employment until one year after he/she leaves such office. 
6.3.2  Reserved. 
6.4  Vacancies, forfeiture of office. 
6.4.1  Vacancies. The office of mayor or council-member shall become vacant upon his/her death, resignation, lawful removal from, or forfeiture of his/her office. 
6.4.2  Forfeiture proceedings. A forfeiture of office shall occur when the mayor or any council-member: 
(a)  Lacks, at any time during his/her term of office, any qualification for his/her office prescribed by this Charter or by law. 
(b)  Willfully violates any express prohibition of this Charter. 
(c)  Is convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude. 
(d)  Fails to attend three consecutive regular council meetings without being excused by council. 
(e)  Is physically, mentally, or emotionally incapable of performing the functions of his/her office. 
6.4.3  Determination concerning forfeiture. Where the conditions set forth in 6.4.2(c) or (d) occur, forfeiture shall be automatic. Where the conditions set forth in 6.4.2(a), (b), or (e) are alleged to have occurred, a determination concerning such alleged forfeiture shall be made by the council, but the affected party shall not have a vote in any such decision. Such deliberations may be had in executive session and if the council preliminarily determines by a unanimous vote of the council-members entitled to vote on the question, that a forfeiture has occurred, it shall, within 48 hours of that determination, provide written notice thereof to the affected council-member, stating specific reasons. The affected party shall then have ten days in which to make a written demand for a public hearing before the council, to be held within twenty days of the written demand, at which hearing he or she may appear with the assistance of counsel and present evidence to the relevant issues. Thereafter, the council shall hear any other relevant evidence and vote again on the question of forfeiture; and if a determination of forfeiture is again made by a unanimous vote of the disinterested council-members entitled to vote on the question, the decision shall be final. 
6.4.4  Failure to request hearing as a bar. Failure of the affected person to make written demand for a public hearing as hereinabove stated shall be an absolute bar to the right to challenge the council's decision. During, or in connection with, any such proceedings, the council shall have authority to subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of documentary or physical evidence, all of which shall be done if requested in writing by the affected person. 
6.5  Filling vacancies on the town council. 
6.5.1  Council-members. In case of a vacancy among the council-members, the remaining members of the town council may elect another qualified person to fill that vacant seat until the next ensuing regular municipal election. At such election, the qualified voters of the town shall elect a qualified candidate to fill the seat for the remainder of the original term. Each such vacancy shall be separate and distinct from any other such vacancy and from the full-term seats to be filled at such election; and shall be so designated on the ballot. The written notice of candidacy for election to fill a vacancy under this section shall specify the vacant seat for which the notice of intention to run is made, and no candidate shall file a notice of intention to run for more than one seat. The candidate receiving the highest number of votes for each such vacant seat shall be declared the winner. 
6.5.2  Mayor. In case of a vacancy in the office of mayor, the vice-mayor shall assume the office of mayor until the next regularly-ensuing municipal election, at which time the qualified voters of the town shall elect a qualified candidate to fill the mayor's seat for the remainder of the original term, if any. If the vacancy in the office of mayor occurs more than three months prior to the next regularly-ensuing municipal election, the town council shall, within 30 days of such vacancy, appoint some qualified person to fill the temporary council-member vacancy created by the vice-mayor's assuming the office of mayor. Such person shall serve only until the next regularly-ensuing town election at which time, upon the election of a new mayor (and provided that the vice-mayor has not resigned his/her original council-member seat to run for the office of mayor), the vice-mayor shall resume his/her seat on council for the remainder of his/her original term, if any. 
6.6  Compensation; reimbursement of expenses. 
6.6.1  Compensation. The mayor and each member of the council shall receive a specified sum for each regular or special meeting attended by such person. The amount paid for attendance at each meeting shall be established by the town council based upon the written recommendations of a "compensation committee" which shall be comprised of five members who shall be the citizen-members (i.e. shall not be employees or elected officials of the town) of not less than three standing committees of the town, one of which committees shall be that standing committee which has primary oversight for the town budget (i.e. the "budget committee" by whatever title known). The compensation committee's recommendations, if any, shall be submitted to the town council by July 1st of any year, but no action by the town council to modify the then-existent amount of compensation shall take effect until after the next town election. 
6.6.2  Reimbursement of Expenses. Members of the Town Council are encouraged to participate in training and educational activities offered by the Delaware League of Local Governments, the National League of Cities, the University of Delaware, and other organizations to the extent possible under budgetary limitations. The Mayor and members of Council shall be reimbursed for their documented actual and necessary expenses incurred on Town business if approved by the Town Council. Council may enact an ordinance outlining approved Town business expenses and reimbursement procedures. No member of the Town Council shall be entitled to vote upon their own request for reimbursement unless similar expenses were incurred by four or more members of the Town Council in connection with the same event or activity. 
6.7  Meetings. 
6.7.1  Regular meetings. The town council shall meet regularly the first and third Monday of each month, provided that when any meeting date falls on a town holiday, that meeting shall be held on the next business day. The time and place of each regular meeting shall be set by council each year at their organizational meeting, but council shall not hereby be prohibited from rescheduling such meetings from time to time during the year as need arises. 
6.7.2  Special meeting; waiver of notice. Special meetings shall be called by the town manager upon the written request of the mayor, or upon the written request of any three council-members, stating the day, hour, and place of the special meeting requested and the subject or subjects proposed to be considered thereat. Such notice shall be given at least 48 hours prior to the time set for such special meeting, and shall be effective if delivered and received by the person to whom sent, or by an adult person residing in the household of the person to whom sent, if sent by personal delivery, overnight courier or special delivery service, telephonic message, facsimile message ("fax"), telegram, or "e-mail." Receipt of such notice may be established by reasonable proofs of same according to the means of delivery utilized. Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, any member of the town council entitled to notice of a special meeting under this section may at any time, before, at, or after the holding of such special meeting, submit a written waiver of notice which written waiver shall make valid the holding of such special meeting at any time and for any purpose named in such waiver, or the transaction of any other business at the meeting, if the waiver so states. Additionally, attendance at any such meeting, except for the express and limited purpose of objecting to the holding of such meeting, shall constitute a waiver of notice for such meeting. Subject to the scope of the notice, the town council of the town shall have the same power and authority to enact all ordinances, adopt all resolutions, pass all motions, make all orders and transact all business at any such special meeting, called as aforesaid, as council has at a regular meeting. 
6.7.3  Adjourned meetings. The town council may adjourn its meetings from time to time, stating the date, place, and time to which such meeting shall be adjourned. 
6.8  Manner of acting. 
6.8.1  Rules of procedure, record of proceedings. The town council may determine its own rules of procedure and order of business. It shall keep a record of its proceedings. 
6.8.2  Ordinances. The council is hereby vested with the authority to enact ordinances or resolutions relating to any subject within the powers and functions of the town, or relating to the government of the town, its peace and order, its sanitation, beauty, health, safety, convenience and property, and to fix, impose and enforce the payment of fines and penalties for the violation of such ordinances or resolutions, and no provision of this Charter as to ordinances on any particular subject shall be held to be restrictive of the power to enact ordinances or resolutions on any subject not specifically enumerated. 
In addition to other acts required by law or by specific provisions of this Charter to be done by ordinance, those acts of the town council shall be by ordinance which: 
(a)  Adopts or amends an administrative code; provided that no ordinance shall be required to amend the personnel policy, or any component thereof, unless so required by a duly adopted ordinance. 
(b)  Provides for a fine or other penalty or establishes a rule or regulation for violation of which a fine or other penalty is imposed; 
(c)  Grants, renews or extends a franchise; 
(d)  Amends or repeals any ordinances previously adopted; 
(e)  Revises the town's fiscal year. 
Acts other than those referred to in the preceding may be done either by ordinance or by resolution. Every ordinance shall be introduced in writing. Vote on any ordinance may be by voice vote or written vote and the vote of each council-member on any ordinance shall be entered on the record. No ordinance shall be passed unless it shall have the affirmative vote of a majority of all members of the town council. 
6.8.3  Quorum. Four members of the town council shall be physically present in order to constitute a quorum to conduct business, but if a lesser number be present at any regular or properly called special meeting, they may adjourn from time to time and compel the attendance of absent members in such manner and under such penalties as may be prescribed by ordinance adopted by the majority of the entire council. 
6.8.4  Participation and voting by remote access. The town council is hereby authorized, by duly enacted ordinance, to provide that whenever unavoidable circumstances prevent the mayor or any member of the town council from being physically present at any meeting of the town council at which a quorum is physically present, such person(s) may participate in the meeting, including the making or seconding of any motion and the casting of a vote on any motion, by remote electronic access (e.g. speaker telephone, videoconferencing equipment), provided that all persons present at the place of the meeting can hear and speak to the person(s) participating through remote access and provided that the person participating by remote access can hear and speak to all persons participating at the meeting; provided further, however, that the meeting shall not be presided over by any person not physically present at the meeting. 
6.8.5  Vote necessary to carry action. All powers of the town council, whether express or implied, shall be exercised in the manner provided herein, or if not prescribed herein, then by ordinance or resolution. In the general performance of their duties, the acts, doings, and determinations of a majority of the entire town council shall be as good as the acts and determinations of all the members of the council. No ordinance, resolution, motion, order, or other act of the town council, except as herein specifically authorized, shall be valid unless it receives the affirmative vote of a majority of all members of the town council. 
(H.B. No. 318, §§ 6-9, 5-1-12) 
Sec. 7. - Appointed officers. 
7.1  Town manager. 
7.1.1  Appointment; Term. The Town Council shall appoint a Town Manager who shall be the chief administrative officer for all departments and functions of the Town except the Police Department. He/she shall be appointed solely on the basis of his/her professional, executive and administrative qualifications. He/she need not, when appointed, be a resident of the Town or of the State of Delaware, but shall, within six (6) months of his/her appointment, as a condition of his/her employment, become domiciled within such radius of the Town Hall as determined by Council at the time of his/her appointment. 
The Town Manager shall be appointed in accordance with the provisions of any resolution, ordinance, and/or written agreement authorized by the Town Council and specifically applicable to that Town Manager, provided however, that: (1) although there shall be no limit on the number of terms of employment a Town Manager may serve, in no case shall any single term of employment exceed three (3) years, upon the expiration of which the Town Manager's employment with the Town shall be automatically re-newed for an additional three-year term unless the Town Council votes (no fewer than 6 months prior to the expiration of the then-current term) to renegotiate such employment or not to re-new such employment, or to re-new such employment for a term shorter than three (3) years; (2) the Town Council may at any time terminate the Town Manager's employment for "just cause" without payment of any severance pay or benefits; and (3) the Town Council may at any time terminate the Town Manager's employment without "just cause" upon payment to the Town Manager of such severance pay and benefits as provided in the terms of any resolution, ordinance, and/or written agreement governing the employment of that Town Manager. For purposes of this section, "just cause" shall mean one or more specific, articulable reasons related to the Town Manager's unsatisfactory performance involving misfeasance, malfeasance, nonfeasance, or incompetence, which rationally support termination of employment. In case of the extended absence, disability, or suspension of the Town Manager, the Council may designate some other competent person to perform the duties of the office during such absence, disability or suspension; subject to the Town Council's authority aforesaid, the Town Manager may appoint a Town employee to serve as "Acting Town Manager" during the Town Manager's temporary absences. 
7.1.2  Duties. The town manager shall be responsible to the town council for the proper administration of all affairs of the town placed in his/her charge, and he/she shall have such powers and duties as shall be established by the terms of any ordinance or resolution duly adopted, or from time to time amended, by the town council. Subject to and in accordance with applicable ordinances, rules, and policies adopted by the town council, the town manager shall be responsible for the hiring, supervision, discipline, lay-off, and termination of all employees (other than those within the Police Department) necessary to fill those positions of municipal employment which have been authorized and funded by the town council. 
7.1.3  Vacancy from office. In the event of a vacancy in the office of town manager, the duly appointed and qualified successor to that office shall succeed to all the rights, privileges and powers theretofore reposed in his/her predecessor or predecessors in office in the same manner as though all acts, deeds and steps theretofore taken by any such predecessor or predecessors with respect to any matter or thing pertaining to said office had been taken or performed by the successor to such office. 
7.2  Chief of police. 
7.2.1  Appointment; term. The town council shall appoint a duly-qualified chief of police who shall be the chief law enforcement officer of the town and the chief administrative officer of the town police department. He/she need not, when appointed, be a resident of the town or of the State of Delaware, but shall, as a condition of his/her employment, become domiciled within a radius of the town hall as determined by council, within six months of his/her appointment. No member of the town council shall, while in office, be appointed to act as police chief. The chief of police shall be removable in accordance with the provisions of any resolution, ordinance, and/or written agreement authorized by the town council and specifically applicable to that chief of police, subject to any governing state statutory provisions. 
7.2.2  Duties. The chief of police shall be responsible to the town council for the proper administration of all affairs of the police department placed in his/her charge by the town council. Subject to and in accordance with the provisions of any applicable state statutes, and applicable town ordinances, rules, and policies adopted by the town council, the chief of police shall be responsible for the hiring, supervision, discipline, lay-off, and termination of all employees within the police department which have been authorized and funded by the town council. 
7.2.3  Vacancy from office. In case of the absence, disability, or suspension of the police chief, the council may designate some other competent person to perform the duties of the office during such absence, disability or suspension. 
7.3  Town solicitor. The town council shall select and appoint a town solicitor for an indefinite term who shall be removable at the pleasure of the town council. The solicitor shall be a member in good standing of the Bar of the State of Delaware. It shall be his/her duty, when requested, to give legal advice to the council, the town manager, and the chief of police, (provided however, that in the event of any conflict of interest, the town solicitor shall advise only the town council); and to perform other legal services as may be required of him by the council. 
7.4  Other officers, agents, and boards. 
7.4.1  Appointment; Hiring. 
(a)  Boards and Commissions. Subject to Town Council confirmation, the Mayor shall recommend the appointment of members to all Boards and Commissions in the Town of Smyrna, including, but not limited to, the Board of Adjustment, Board of Elections and Planning and Zoning Commission. The Town Council may provide for the appointment or hiring of such other officers and agents of the Town, which it may deem proper and necessary, for the proper conduct and management of the Town, including by way of example and not in limitation, a consulting engineer and financial auditor. Except as otherwise provided by written agreement approved by the Town Council, or as provided elsewhere in this Charter or in any governing statute or ordinance, such officers, agents, and board-members shall serve at the pleasure of the Town Council. 
(b)  Committees and Subcommittees. Committees may be formed as deemed necessary by the Town Council to gather and report information needed for the Town Council to make informed decisions. The Mayor shall recommend the appointment of committees, subject to Council confirmation, and committees shall serve at the direction, and under the authority, of the Town Council. Subject always to the authority of the Town Council to direct and control the activities of any committee appointed under this subsection, the chairperson of any such committee may, with the affirmative vote of a majority of the committee, appoint one or more persons to act as a subcommittee of the committee to perform specified designated tasks and report back to the committee (or to such other authority as designated by the appointing committee). Any subcommittee so appointed shall consist of at least one member of the appointing committee. 
7.4.2.  Compensation. 
(a)  Officers and agents. The town council shall by ordinance, resolution, or written contract, fix the amount of any salaries or compensation of the officers and agents employed by the town. 
(b)  Members of boards and commissions. The amount (if any) to be paid to the members of any board or commission appointed or confirmed by the town council for attendance at each meeting of such board or commission shall be established by the town council based upon the written recommendations of a "compensation committee" which shall be comprised of five members who shall be the citizen-members (i.e. shall not be employees or elected officials of the town) of not less than three standing committees of the town, one of which committees shall be that standing committee which has primary oversight for the town budget (i.e. the "budget committee" by whatever title known). The Compensation Committee's recommendations, if any, shall be submitted to the town council by July 1st of any year, but no action by the town council to modify the then-existent amount of compensation shall take effect until after the next town election. 
7.5  Personnel records. The town council shall cause to be kept appropriate personnel records for all town employees, as necessary to comply with all applicable federal and state laws and regulations and in accordance with commonly-accepted personnel practices for municipal employees. Such records shall not be "public records" and shall not be subject to public inspection. 
7.6.  Surety bonds. The town council may, at the town's expense, require any town employee to be bonded by a commercial bonding company in such amount and according to such terms as deemed necessary and appropriate by the town council. 
(H.B. No. 318, §§ 10, 11, 5-1-12; H.B. No. 396, § 1, 7-1-18) 
Sec. 8. - Town finances. 
8.1  Use of town monies. The town council of said town shall have full power and authority to use the money in the treasury of said town, or any portion thereof, from time to time, for the improvement, benefit, protection, ornamentation and best interests of the said town, as council may deem proper, and to use town money to accomplish and carry into effect all acts and things which it has power to do by virtue of the Laws of Delaware, this Act, and all lawful ordinances and resolutions of council. 
8.2  Fiscal year. Unless revised by ordinance duly adopted by the town council, the fiscal year of the town shall begin with the first day of January in each year and end with the next-succeeding thirty-first day of December. 
8.3  Annual budget. The town council shall annually, at or before the first regular town council meeting in December of each year, adopt a budget, which shall include the real property tax rate per $100 of assessed value, for the upcoming fiscal year. 
8.3.1  Determination of revenue needs. The town council shall determine, in its best judgment and knowledge, the total amount necessary to be raised by the town to meet the fixed and anticipated expenses and obligations of the town, including reasonable and appropriate reserves, for the then upcoming fiscal year plus a reasonable amount to cover unanticipated expenses and emergencies. 
8.3.2  Determination of revenue sources. The town council shall determine, in its sole discretion, from which sources of the authorized revenues of the town the amount so determined by them shall be raised and, within the limits prescribed by this Charter with respect to any such source, the amount to be raised from each such source: 
(a)  Real estate and improvements. The proposed rate of tax on real estate including improvements thereon per $100.00 of the assessed value; and/or 
(b)  Utility fixtures. The proposed rate of tax upon all poles, construction, erections, wires, and appliances more particularly mentioned, or intended so to be in section 4.2.41 of this Charter; and/or 
(c)  License fees. The several license fees to be charged for carrying on or conducting of the several businesses, professions or occupations more particularly mentioned or intended so to be in sections 4.2.38 and 4.2.40 of this Charter: and/or 
(d)  Municipal services. The several rates to be charged for furnishing water and sanitary sewer service and front footage assessment; electric supply and distribution service; trash collection; and/or 
(e)  Other services. The fees or rates to be charged in respect to any other authorized source of revenue sufficient in their judgment and estimation to realize the amount to be raised from each such source determined by them to be used as aforesaid; provided, however, that sources (c), (d), and (e) aforementioned may be determined, fixed, assessed, levied and/or altered or changed upon other than a fiscal year basis at any regular or special meeting of the town council as the town council, in its own proper discretion, shall determine; and provided further that the rate of tax upon taxable real property (a) and upon utility fixtures (b) may be revised at such time the town council finally approves and accepts the annual assessment list for town property taxes pursuant to section 9.7.2. 
8.4.  Annual audit. The town council shall retain a certified public accountant to be the auditor of accounts of the Town of Smyrna. It shall be the duty of the auditor to audit the accounts of the town and all its officers whose duty involves the collection, custody and payment of moneys to or by the town. The auditor shall on or before June 30 of each year make and deliver a detailed report of any and all accounts, records, and books from the previous fiscal year by him or her examined and audited which report under his/her hand and seal shall be available for public inspection; provided however, anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, the date for submission of the auditor's report may be extended by the town council beyond June 30 at the written request of the auditor for reasonable cause shown. Notice of the filing of the auditor's report shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of Smyrna within ten days of its receipt by the town council. The auditor, in the performance of his/her duties, shall have access to all records and accounts of the offices of the town. 
8.5  Recovery of legal expenses incurred in enforcement of town ordinances and/or collection of amounts due to the town. Whenever it becomes necessary or expedient for the town to file any legal action or proceeding to enforce compliance with a town ordinance and/or to collect an amount due to the town before any court or administrative agency having jurisdiction thereof, if the town is the prevailing party in such action, the court or administrative agency having jurisdiction shall be authorized, in the exercise of its reasonable discretion, to award judgment to the town in an amount deemed appropriate by it to reimburse the town for its costs of prosecution, including court costs, expert witness fees, reasonable attorney's fees, and other documented out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with such prosecution; provided however, that in order to recover such amounts under this section, the town shall, prior to the filing of such legal action or proceeding, make written demand upon the responsible party for compliance with the ordinance and/or payment of the amount due (as the case may be), which written demand shall include notice of this provision of the Town Charter. 
(H.B. No. 318, §§ 12-14, 5-1-12; S.B. No. 97, § 1, 7-15-15) 
Sec. 9. - Assessment for taxes. 
9.1  Alternate methods for establishing annual property assessment. In any year, the Town may establish the assessed value of all taxable real estate and improvements, and of all taxable public utility fixtures, by one of the following two methods: (a) local Tax Assessor, or (b) adoption of the appraised values implicit in the assessments as shown on the assessment lists prepared by Kent and New Castle County. 
9.2  Local Tax Assessor. 
9.2.1  Appointment; Annual Term. The Mayor may, with the advice and consent of a majority of the entire Council, appoint a qualified individual or entity to serve as a Tax Assessor for a one-year term. 
9.2.2  Duties, Compensation. It shall be the duty of the Tax Assessor to make a fair and impartial valuation and assessment of real property and improvements subject to taxation situate within the limits of the Town of Smyrna at the true market value thereof, and to perform such other duties with reference thereto as shall be prescribed from time to time by the Town Council. The compensation to be by them received for the performance of their duties, and the hiring of consultants or employees to assist them in the performance of their duties, shall be fixed by and subject to the approval of the Town Council. 
9.2.3  Professional appraisers to assist. In addition to the appointed Tax Assessor, it shall be within the discretion of the Council to appoint any professionals needed to assist the Tax Assessor in performing the duties of the office to which they were appointed, but the Tax Assessor shall in all instances be responsible for making the final determination. 
9.3  Adoption of appraised values implicit in Kent and New Castle County assessments. The town council may adopt the appraised values implicit in the assessments established by Kent and New Castle County for all property located within the corporate limits of the Town of Smyrna, in lieu of making its own independent assessment and valuation, anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding. In such event, the appraised values implicit in the appraisals established by Kent and New Castle County shall be conclusive for purposes of levying town taxes, and the town council shall have no authority to hear appeals (under section 9.7) regarding same. If the town council elects to adopt the appraised values implicit in the Kent and New Castle County Assessments, only this section, section 9.4.3 ("delivery of assessment list"), section 9.5 ("additions to tax bills") and section 9.7.1 ("posting of assessment list") shall have effect; but the town council will also have authority (under section 9.7.2) to consider appeals concerning any additions to tax bills made under section 9.5, at any regular or special meeting. 
9.4  Assessment procedure by Town's Tax Assessor. 
9.4.1  Making the assessment. 
(a)  Annual assessment. If appointed, the Tax Assessor shall, prior to the first day of March of each year, make a just, true and impartial annual valuation or assessment of all real estate and improvements located within the Town of Smyrna. All real estate shall be described with sufficient particularity to be identified. Real estate shall be assessed to the owner or owners if he, she, or they be known. If the owner or owners of real estate cannot be found or ascertained, it may be assessed to "Owner Unknown." A mistake in the name of the owner or owners or a wrong name or an assessment to "Owner Unknown" shall not affect the validity of the assessment of any municipal tax or assessment based thereon; provided, however, the assessment shall specify the last record owner or owners thereof as the same shall appear from the records in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds, in and for Kent or New Castle County. 
(b)  Supplemental assessment. In addition to the annual assessment provided herein, the Tax Assessor may, at the option of the Town Council, prepare quarterly supplemental assessments for the purposes of: (1) adding property not already valued and included in the last assessment and (2) revising the valuation and assessment of all real property which has undergone some significant change of condition as to materially change the true market value thereof since the last assessment. 
9.4.2  Assessment of Tax Assessor. The real property of the Tax Assessor shall be assessed by the Town Council of the Town of Smyrna and approved by the affirmative vote of at least five (5) members of the Town Council. 
9.4.3  Delivery of assessment list. Prior to the first regular Town Council meeting in March, the Tax Assessor, after making such annual assessment, shall deliver to the Town Council of the Town of Smyrna a list containing the names of owners of all properties assessed and the amount of assessment against each. 
9.5  Additions to tax bills. Whether utilizing the appraisals implicit in the Kent and New Castle County Assessments or those prepared by the Town's own Tax Assessor, the Town Manager shall annually, prior to the posting of the assessment list, provide the Town Council a list of any and all charges, costs, or other assessments owed to the Town, which list of charges incurred shall include, but not be limited to, the following: sidewalk assessments, waterline assessments, water service charges, weed and grass cutting bills, sanitary sewer service charges, trash collection bills, past due electric charges, costs for demolition or repair of any building or structure in accordance with governing town ordinances, any charges incurred by the Town in bringing the property into compliance with the Town Code and the amount of any unpaid penalty imposed by any court of competent jurisdiction for violation of any municipal ordinance. Said amounts, when adopted and set forth by resolution of the Mayor and Council, shall be shown on the copies of the assessments posted pursuant to the provisions of section 9.7.1 of this Charter. 
9.6  Exemption from taxation. 
9.6.1.  Mandatory exemptions. Property belonging to the State of Delaware, or to the United States, or to Kent or New Castle County, or to any municipality of the state, and held for public use, or any church or religious society, and not held by way of investment, or to any college or school and used for educational purposes, or to any corporation created for charitable purposes and not held by way of investment, shall be exempt from town real property taxes, as provided in 9 Del. C. § 8103, as it may from time to time hereafter be amended, or in accordance with any future corresponding provision of law. 
9.6.2.  Town's authority to exempt property. The town council shall have the power and authority to exempt from taxation, or to reduce the rate of taxation, such real property and improvements from the town's property tax as, in the opinion of council, will best promote the public welfare, including by way of example and not in limitation: (a) newly-annexed un-developed lands (until the issuance of a building permit and/or transfer of ownership of any parcel(s) from the owner(s) at the time of annexation), (b) lands improved or to be improved by commercial, industrial, or similar facilities which will create significant employment opportunities in the community, or (c) lands, fixtures, or betterments used in the provision of such public utilities and communications services, and/or emergency response services (e.g. fire, ambulance) which the town council deems desirable or necessary for the residents and property owners of the town. 
9.7  Assessment appeals. 
9.7.1  Posting of annual assessment list; notice. Immediately upon receiving the annual assessment list from the Tax Assessor, the Town Council shall cause a full and complete copy of the same, containing the amount assessed to each taxable, to be made available for public inspection at the Town office, and there it shall remain for a period of at least 14 days for the information of and examination by all concerned. Public notice of the posting of the assessment list, and the date, place, and time where the Town Council will sit as a board of revision and appeal to hear appeals from the said assessment and to make such corrections and revisions as it deems appropriate, including the procedures for appealing an assessment, shall be posted in at least five public places in the Town and published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town not less than 14 days prior to the date set for the hearing of such appeals. 
9.7.2  Appeals day annual assessment list. The Council may direct that appeals from any annual assessment be heard by a committee of no fewer than two (2) nor more than three (3) Council-members appointed by the Town Council. The committee of Council-members shall sit at the stated place and time to hear the appeals of all taxpayers dissatisfied with the assessment of their properties, shall collect such information as they consider proper and necessary, and, shall report their findings and recommendations, together with such other information as the Council shall permit or require, to the full Council at its next ensuing meeting, at which time the appeal of each dissatisfied taxpayer shall be heard. On the day and time fixed for hearing appeals, the Tax Assessor shall be available to furnish to the Town Council such information and answer such questions as the Town Council may require with respect to any assessment for which an appeal has been taken. No member of the Town Council shall sit on his/her own appeal, but the same shall be heard and determined by the other members of the Town Council. The Town Council shall have full power and authority to alter, revise, add to, and take from the said assessment. The decision of a majority of the Council shall be final and conclusive. 
Upon completion of the appeal process under this section, the Town Council shall at that meeting or at the next ensuing regular meeting, adopt a resolution approving the final assessment list (including any and all charges, costs, or other assessments owed to the Town and added to the assessment list under section 9.5). 
9.7.3  Supplemental assessment appeals. Whenever the Tax Assessor prepares a quarterly supplemental assessment list under §9.4.1(b), it shall deliver such list to the Town Manager. Immediately upon receiving such supplemental assessment list from the Tax Assessor, the Town Manager shall cause a full and complete copy thereof, containing the amount assessed to each taxable on such supplemental assessment list to be mailed, certified mail, return receipt requested, to each taxable on the supplemental assessment list at their last address as shown on the Town's tax records. Such mailing shall also include a notice that any taxable on said supplemental assessment list may request, in writing, an appeal to the Town Council concerning such supplemental assessment, such written request to be received at the Town office within 14 days of the date that the notice is mailed. 
In the event that any taxable so noticed timely submits a written request for an appeal, the Town Manager shall notify the Town Council, and the Town Council may direct that such appeals may be heard by a committee of not less than two (2) nor more than three Council-members appointed by the Town Council. The Town Manager shall provide any taxable requesting such an appeal with written notice of date, place, and time when the committee of Council-members shall sit to hear such appeal; provided however, that such notice of the appeal hearing shall be mailed not less than 14 days prior to the date set for the hearing, certified mail return receipt requested. 
Such appeals and all proceedings and actions taken pursuant to and in consequence of such appeal, shall be subject to and governed by the same provisions set out in §9.7.2 pertaining to appeals from the annual assessments, except that upon completion of the appeal process, the Council shall adopt a resolution approving the final supplemental assessment list. 
(H.B. No. 318, §§ 15-20, 5-1-12; S.B. No. 97, § 1, 7-15-15; H.B. No. 396, §§ 2-4, 7-1-18) 
Sec. 10. - Taxation; tax limit. 
10.1  Taxation. The town council is authorized to levy and collect from the taxables of the town, according to the terms and provisions of this Act, such sum of money as may be deemed by the town council as necessary and proper for the general municipal needs of the town, including sufficient monies to pay interest and principal on any municipal bond issued by the town pursuant sections 13.1, 13.2, and/or 13.3 of this Charter, or pursuant to any special act of the General Assembly. 
10.2  Levy of tax; supplemental tax bill. After the valuations and assessments have been examined, adjudged, and approved by the town council as provided in section 9.7.2, the town manager shall proceed immediately to collect all taxes and other amounts set forth on the approved assessment list (each and all of which shall hereafter be referred to as "taxes" for sake of convenience) as hereinafter provided. Whenever a change occurs in the assessed value of any taxable property as a result of a supplemental assessment under section 9.4.1 (b), the town manager shall issue a supplemental tax bill based upon the revised assessment, pro-rated for the remainder of the then-current tax year. The amount shown on the supplemental tax bill shall be due by the later of September 30th of the year in which the original tax bill was sent or 60 days from the date of the supplemental tax bill; any supplemental tax bill not paid by the due date as provided herein shall be delinquent and subject to the same penalties and collection remedies as any other delinquent tax bill. 
10.3  Savings clause. Nothing contained in this Charter shall be construed to affect or impair in any way the validity of any tax, fee, assessment or other charge lawfully levied, assessed or due the Town of Smyrna under the existing laws in reference to said town and the same are hereby declared to be valid, binding and vested in the Town of Smyrna created hereby. 
10.4  Limitation on taxes. The total amount of money to be raised by real property taxes and utility fixture taxes shall in no year exceed one percent of the total assessed valuation of all taxable real estate (and improvements thereon) in the town; provided however, that this limit on taxes for general town purposes shall not limit or prohibit the town from levying and collecting such further and additional taxes or sums of money in any year as may be necessary or expedient to pay the interest on, or to retire the principal of, any bonds or certificates of indebtedness issued by the town pursuant to sections 13.1, 13.2, and/or 13.3 as the same become due, or before they become due; or to create an adequate sinking fund reserve for the retiring of such indebtedness either before or at the time they become due. 
Sec. 11. - Collection of taxes. 
11.1  Collection by town manager. The town manager shall, as soon as the town council shall have adopted the resolution approving the final assessment list pursuant to § 9.7.2 or the resolution approving the final supplemental assessment list pursuant to § 9.7.3 (as applicable), proceed at once to collect the taxes so levied. 
11.2  Lien. All taxes so laid or imposed by the Town of Smyrna shall be and constitute a lien for a period of ten (10) years from the date so levied, upon the real estate against which such taxes are laid and imposed; provided that if the real estate remains the property of the person(s) or legal entity(s) who was/were the owner(s) at the time it was so assessed, the lien shall continue until the same is collected in full. In the case of a life estate, the interest of the life tenant shall first be liable for the payment of any taxes so levied. Such lien shall have preference and priority to all other liens on such real estate as aforesaid, created or suffered by the said taxable, although such lien or liens be of a time and date prior to the time of the attaching of such lien for taxes. 
11.3  Due date; deposit. All taxes shall be deemed levied, and shall be due and payable at and from the time the resolution approving the final assessment list is adopted under § 9.7.2 or the resolution approving the final supplemental assessment list is adopted under § 9.7.3 (as applicable). All taxes, when and as collected by the town manager, shall be paid to or deposited to the credit of the Town of Smyrna, in such financial institutions as directed by the town council. 
11.4  Place of payment. All taxes shall be payable at the town office of the Town of Smyrna during the regular business hours of that office. 
11.5  Discount for prompt payment; penalty for late payment; collection fee. To all taxes paid on or before July 1st next following the levy, there may be applied a discount as established, from time to time, by resolution of the town council. On all taxes paid on or after September 30th of each year, there shall be added a penalty to be determined by council for each month or fraction thereof such taxes shall remain unpaid, said penalty to be effective on the thirtieth day of September, and said penalty shall be collected in the same manner as the original amount of the tax. The town council shall have the power to make just allowances for delinquencies in the collection of taxes. All taxes unpaid on September 30th of each year shall be considered delinquent. In effecting a collection of any delinquent tax, the town council may impose a collection charge reasonably calculated to recover the costs of collection, including all court costs, sale costs, reasonable and necessary out-of-pocket expenses, and reasonable attorneys fees incurred by the town in such collection proceedings. 
(H.B. No. 318, § 21, 5-1-12; S.B. No. 97, § 1, 7-15-15) 
Sec. 12. - Remedies, powers, and methods for collection of delinquent taxes and other charges due to the town. 
12.1  Notice Prior to Exercise. Before instituting any legal action for the collection of taxes, written notice of the amount due shall be sent to the taxable at his/her last known address. 
12.2  Town Manager to Have Tax Collection Powers. In the collection of delinquent taxes (including any and all charges, costs, or other assessments owed to the Town and added to the assessment list pursuant to subsection 9.5), the Town Manager shall have all of the same powers, remedies, and authority, including the monition method of the collection of taxes, as conferred by Title 9 of the Delaware Code, as the same may from time to time hereafter be amended, or in accordance with any future corresponding provision of law, upon those individuals and/or departments authorized to collect delinquent taxes in Kent County and New Castle County. 
(H.B. No. 318, § 22, 5-1-12) 
Sec. 13. - Borrowing powers. 
13.1  Short-term borrowings by Town Council without voter approval; limit on borrowing; tax exempt. The Town Council shall have the power to borrow money on the full faith and credit of the Town without approval of the voters and without regard to the provisions of sections 13.2 or 13.3 of this Charter, such sum or sums not exceeding in the aggregate one and one-half percent of the total assessed valuation of all taxable property in the Town, for any municipal or public purpose when, in the opinion of the majority of the Town Council elected, the needs of the Town require it; provided, however, that any new borrowings under this section 13.1 made after the effective date of this act shall, by their terms, be repayable in full within fifteen (15) years of the date of each such borrowing. Any sum or sums so borrowed shall be secured by a promissory note or notes or other evidence of indebtedness of the Town Council duly authorized by resolution of the Town Council and signed by the Mayor and attested by the secretary of the Town Council with the Town seal affixed. Any sum(s) of money borrowed on the full faith and credit of the Town shall be paid from the general funds of the Town. The aggregate amount of outstanding principal from any such borrowing or borrowings under this section 13.1 shall at no time exceed one and one-half percent of the total assessed valuation of all taxable property in the Town. Town expenditures that are not general obligations of the Town secured by the full faith and credit of the Town are exempt from the borrowing provisions in section 13. Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, the Town Council may, by ordinance, authorize the Town Manager to borrow up to an aggregate amount one hundred thousand dollars ($100.000) for any municipal or public purpose without a Resolution of the Town Council authorizing the borrowing, provided that any such sums so borrowed by the Town Manager shall be included in the aggregate amount of short term borrowings for purposes of calculating the short term borrowing limit of one and one-half percent (11/2%) as further outlined herein. 
13.2  Long-term borrowings for certain projects without voter approval; public hearing and super-majority vote of town council required. 
13.2.1  Limit on borrowing and aggregate indebtedness without voter approval; super-majority vote. Subject to the provisions of this section 13.2, the town council shall have the power to borrow money on the full faith and credit of the town for the payment of principal thereof and interest due thereon, without approval of the voters and without regard to the provisions of section 13.3 of this Charter, such sum or sums not exceeding in the aggregate four and one and one-half percent of the total assessed valuation of all taxable property in the town, for those specific municipal purposes specified in section 13.2.3, when, in the opinion of at least five members of the town council, the needs of the town require it; provided, however, that any new borrowings under this section 13.2 made after the effective date of this act shall, by their terms, be repayable in full within 40 years of the date of each such borrowing. Any sum or sums so borrowed shall be secured by a promissory note or notes or other evidence of indebtedness of the town council duly authorized by resolution adopted by at least five members of the town council and signed by the mayor and attested by the secretary of the town council with the town seal affixed. Any sum(s) of money borrowed on the full faith and credit of the town shall be paid from the general funds of the town. The aggregate amount of outstanding principal from any such borrowing or borrowings under sections 13.1 and 13.2 shall at no time exceed four and one-half percent of the total assessed valuation of all taxable property in the town. 
13.2.2.  Procedure: notice, hearing. In order to proceed under the power granted in this section 13.2, the town council shall authorize such borrowing in the following manner: 
(a)  The town council by resolution shall give notice to the residents and property owners of the town that the town council proposes to borrow a sum of money, not to exceed a stated amount, for a stated municipal purpose authorized under section 13.2.3. The resolution shall state the amount of money desired to be borrowed (which may be stated as a "not to exceed" amount), the purpose for which it is desired, the manner of securing same, and such other facts relating to the loan which are deemed pertinent by the town council and in their possession at the time of the passage of the resolution; and shall fix a time, date and place for a public hearing on the said resolution. 
(b)  (1)  Notice of the time, date, and place of the hearing on the resolution authorizing said loan shall be published in two newspapers of general circulation in the town not less than 14 days, nor more than 60 days, prior to the date set for the public hearing. Such notice shall be in bold print or bordered in black so as to call attention thereto. In addition to the time, date, and place of the public hearing such notices shall contain the same information as required under section 13.2.2(a) above. 
(2)  In addition to publication as herein provided, the town council shall, not less than 14 days nor more than 60 days prior to the date set for the hearing, cause a public notice containing the information required above to be posted in at least five public places in the town. In the event the publications and/or postings do not appear on the same date, the date of the first publication or posting shall control. 
(c)  If, at any time following the public hearing, the town council determines to proceed with the proposed borrowing, it shall pass a second resolution, by the affirmative vote of at least five members of the town council, to proceed with the proposed borrowing. 
13.2.3  Municipal purposes for which town council may make long-term borrowings without voter approval. The power and authority of the town council to incur long-term indebtedness on the full faith and credit of the town without voter approval under section 13.2 shall be limited to the following: 
(A)  Erecting, enlarging, repairing, or replacing any plant, building, structure, machinery, or equipment for the production, treatment, collection, storage, supply, distribution or disposal of water, electricity, sanitary sewage, or storm-waters, or any of them, and the condemning or purchasing of any lands, easements, and rights-of-ways which may be required therefor. 
(B)  Laying-out, constructing, paving, widening, or extending streets, lanes, alleys and public ways, curbs and gutters, including storm sewers along the same, and the condemning or purchasing of lands, easements or rights-of-ways which may be required therefor. 
(C)  Erecting, enlarging, repairing, or replacing any municipal building including, by way of example, a town hall, a Police Department Building, a municipal warehouse, and the condemning or purchasing of lands, easements or rights-of-ways which may be required therefor. 
(D)  Paying all expenses deemed necessary by the town council for the issuance of said bonds or certificates of indebtedness, including bond discount and legal expenses of bond counsel. 
13.3  Long-term borrowings; voter approval required. In addition to other borrowing powers granted to the town under this Charter or by special act, the town council shall have authority to borrow money for any proper municipal purpose through the issuance of bonds or certificates of indebtedness to secure the repayment thereof, on the full faith and credit of the town for the payment of principal thereof and interest due thereon. 
13.3.1  Proper municipal purpose. By way of illustration and not in limitation, "any proper municipal purpose" includes, but is not limited to: 
(A)  Erecting, extending, enlarging, maintaining, repairing, or replacing any plant, building, structure, machinery, or equipment for the production, treatment, collection, storage, supply, distribution or disposal of water, electricity, sanitary sewage, or storm-waters, or any of them, and the condemning or purchasing of any lands, easements, and rights-of-ways which may be required therefor. 
(B)  Laying-out, constructing, paving, widening, or extending streets, lanes, alleys and public ways, curbs and gutters, including storm sewers along the same, and the condemning or purchasing of lands, easements or rights-of-ways which may be required therefor. 
(C)  Erecting, enlarging, repairing, or replacing any municipal building including, by way of example, a town hall, a police department building, a municipal warehouse, and the condemning or purchasing of lands, easements or rights-of-ways which may be required therefor. 
(D)  Constructing, laying-out, widening, extending, repairing, and maintaining boardwalks, piers, jetties, bulkheads, dams, sidewalks, cross walks, or embankments, or any of them, and the condemning or purchasing of any lands, easements, or rights-of-ways which may be required therefor. 
(E)  Defraying the costs to the town of any other municipal improvement provided for or authorized or implied by the provisions of this Charter. 
(F)  Paying all expenses deemed necessary by the town council for the issuance of said bonds or certificates of indebtedness, including bond discount and legal expenses of bond counsel. 
13.3.2  Limit of aggregate indebtedness. In no event shall the total outstanding indebtedness of the Town of Smyrna, authorized by sections 13.1, 13.2, and 13.3 at any one time exceed, in the aggregate, 12 percent of the assessed valuation of all real property within the corporate limits of the Town of Smyrna and subject to assessment for the purpose of levying the annual town taxes as provided in this Charter. 
13.3.3  Procedure: notice, hearing, election. In order to proceed under the power granted in this section 13.3, the town council shall authorize such borrowing in the following manner: 
(A)  The town council by resolution shall give notice to the residents and property owners of the town that the town council proposes to borrow a sum of money, not to exceed a stated amount, for a stated municipal purpose. The resolution shall state the amount of money desired to be borrowed (which may be stated as a "not to exceed" amount), the purpose for which it is desired, the manner of securing same, and such other facts relating to the loan which are deemed pertinent by the town council and in their possession at the time of the passage of the resolution; and they shall fix a time, date and place for a hearing on the said resolution. 
(B)  (1)  Notice of the time, date, and place of the hearing on the resolution authorizing said loan shall be published in two newspapers of general circulation in the town not less than 14 days, nor more than 60 days, prior to the date set for the public hearing. Such notice shall be in bold print or bordered in black so as to call attention thereto. In addition to the time, date, and place of the public hearing such notices shall contain the same information as required under section 13.3.3(A) above. 
(2)  In addition to publication as herein provided, the town council shall, not less than 14 days nor more than 60 days prior to the date set for the hearing, cause a public notice containing the information required above to be posted in at least five public places in the town. In the event the publications and/or postings do not appear on the same date, the date of the first publication or posting shall control. 
(C)  If, at any time following the public hearing, the town council determines to proceed with the proposed borrowing, it shall pass a second resolution ordering a special election to be held, upon not less than 14 nor more than 60 days public notice, for the purpose of voting for or against the proposed borrowing. The passage of the second resolution shall ipso facto be considered a determination by the town council to proceed with the matter in issue; provided however, that the town council may, at any time subsequent thereto, and based upon a significant change in the relevant circumstances, act by resolution to cancel the special election and abandon the proposed borrowing. 
(D)  (1)  The notice of the time and place of holding the said special election shall be printed in two newspapers of general circulation in the town, not less than 14 days nor more than 60 days prior to the date set for the special election. In addition to the time, date and place of the election, such notice shall contain the same information as required under section 13.3.3(A). Such notice shall be in bold print or bordered in black so as to call attention thereto. 
(2)  In addition to such publication as herein provided, the town council shall, not less than 14 days nor more than 60 days before the date set for the election, cause public notice, containing the information set out in subsection (D)(1) above (using date of "posting" for date of "publication"), to be posted in at least five public places in the town. In the event the publications and/or postings do not appear on the same date, the date of the first publication or posting shall control. 
(E)  (1)  At such special election, any person(s) or artificial entity(s) (e.g. partnership, corporation, limited liability company) owning record title to real property in the town shall be entitled to cast one vote for each separate parcel of real property (identified as such on the tax maps of the governing jurisdiction) owned (but not more than one vote shall be cast for any one property, however, the owner of more than one parcel in an unfinished subdivision or unfinished phase of a subdivision where the public improvements have not dedicated to the Town shall not have more than one vote for all the parcels located within the subdivision or subdivision phase); and any resident of the town who does not own record title to real property in the town who would be entitled to vote in the annual town election if it were held on that day, shall be entitled to one vote. (For purposes of this section, "entitled to vote" shall include "registered to vote" if voter registration is required for the annual town election.) 
(2)  Any natural person entitled to vote may cast his/her vote by a duly executed and acknowledged power of attorney. Any legal entity (other than a natural person) entitled to vote must cast its vote by a duly executed and acknowledged power of attorney. Such Power of Attorney shall be surrendered to the board of special election which shall file same in the office of the town manager. Such power of attorney so filed shall constitute conclusive evidence of the right of said person to vote in the special election on behalf of the person or legal entity granting the power. 
(3)  Any special election held pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be conducted by voting machines, electronic voting systems, or printed ballots as permitted by law which shall have the following designation: 
[ ]  For the proposed borrowing. 
[ ]  Against the proposed borrowing. 
The voter shall be instructed to mark the box for which he/she casts his/her vote. The Board of Elections established pursuant to subsection 5.5.5(f) of this Charter shall act as a Board of Special Election. The polling places shall be opened for a minimum of six (6) hours as specified by resolution of the Town Council. Persons in the polling place at the time appointed for closing of the polls shall be entitled to vote. 
(F)  The board of special election shall be the sole and final judges of the legality of the votes offered at such special election. It shall keep a true and accurate list of all persons voting. It shall count the votes for and against the proposed borrowing and shall announce the result thereof. The board of special election shall make a certificate under their hands of the number of votes cast for and against the proposed borrowing and the number of void votes and shall deliver the same to the town council which said certificate shall be retained by the town council with the other papers of the town. 
(G)  If a majority of the votes cast at such special election shall be in favor of such borrowing, the town council shall proceed with the issuance of the said bonds or certificates of indebtedness; provided, however, that the town council may, at any time prior to entering into a binding agreement for the public or private sale of such bond(s) or evidence(s) of indebtedness, abandon the proposed borrowing. 
13.4  Refunding bonds or certificates of indebtedness. The town council may, by resolution adopted by a simple majority of the entire town council, authorize the issuance of bonds or other obligations under sections 13.1, 13.2, and/or 13.3 for the purposes of refinancing any outstanding bonds or obligations of the town without the necessity of a public hearing or a special election as would otherwise be required under sections 13.2 and/or 13.3, provided that the outstanding principal amount of the refunding bonds or other evidence(s) of indebtedness does not exceed the face amount refunded, plus the cost of refunding (including all bond premiums and transaction fees), and results in a present value savings to the town. Present value savings shall be determined by using the effective interest rate on the refunding obligations as the discount rate calculated based on the internal rate of return. 
13.5.  Provision for payment: special tax, sinking fund. The town council shall provide for the payment of interest on and principal of any bonds or certificates of indebtedness issued under section 13.1, 13.2, and/or 13.3 at the maturity thereof. The said town council is authorized and empowered, at its discretion, to levy a special tax upon all the real estate within the town or only upon such real estate as is directly benefited by the improvements paid for by the proceeds of such borrowing to pay interest on said bonds and/or principal; and at their discretion, to establish a sinking fund adequate to the redemption, at or before maturity, of all bonds or certificates of indebtedness which may be issued under the provisions of sections 13.1, 13.2, and/or 13.3; provided, that the amount to be raised under any special tax for this purpose shall not in any one year exceed the total amount necessary to pay all currently due principal amounts of the bonded indebtedness together with all interest currently due thereon within that year, or such amounts as necessary to enable a sinking fund to accomplish its specified purpose. The special tax provided for in this section 13.5 shall be collected from the owners of real estate in the same manner as the other taxes levied by the said town council are collected. The town council may also appropriate and set aside for such sinking fund so much of the general funds of said town as they may from time to time think advisable. The sinking fund provided for by this section 13.5 shall be deposited in federally insured deposits in a bank, trust company, or other banking institution until such time as it may be needed for the redemption of the bonds. 
13.6  Full faith and credit unless otherwise stated. Unless any such bond(s) or certificate(s) of indebtedness shall provide otherwise, the full faith and credit of the Town of Smyrna shall deemed to be pledged for the due payment of any bonds or certificates of indebtedness and the interest thereon issued under the provisions of sections 13.1, 13.2, and/or 13.3 when the same shall have been properly executed and delivered for value notwithstanding any other provision of this Charter. 
13.7  Revenue bonds without voter approval; public hearing and super-majority vote of town council required. 
13.7.1  Authority to issue; super-majority vote. In addition to the power of the town council to borrow money and issue bonds or certificates of indebtedness under sections 13.1, 13.2, and/or 13.3, the town council shall have the power and authority (subject to the provisions of this section 13.7) to borrow money and issue bonds or certificates of indebtedness, and to secure payment thereof, by pledging the revenues derived from the operation of any project for which bonds may be issued pursuant to this section 13.7, without approval of the voters and without regard to the provisions of section 13.1, 13.2, or 13.3 of this Charter when, in the opinion of at least five members of the town council, the best interests of the town will be served thereby; provided, however, that any borrowing under this section 13.7 shall not obligate the full faith and credit of the town, but shall be payable solely from the revenues of such project which are pledged, according to the terms of the bonds or certificates of indebtedness issued for the payment thereof. Any bonds or other evidence of indebtedness issued under this section 13.7 shall be duly authorized by resolution adopted by at least five members of the town council and signed by the mayor and attested by the secretary of the town council with the town seal affixed. Any sum(s) of money borrowed pursuant to this section 13.7 shall be paid solely from the revenues of the project pledged for the payment thereof and not from the general revenues of the town. The project to be funded with the proceeds of indebtedness issued under this section may be accomplished by a loan of the proceeds from the bond or certificate of indebtedness from the town to any for-profit or not-for-profit entity. 
13.7.2.  Purposes. The funds derived from the sale of bonds issued pursuant to this section may be used for any or all of the following purposes, including incidental expenses incurred in connection therewith: 
(A)  The erection, extension, enlargement, purchase, repair, or replacement of any plant, machinery, appliances, or equipment for the supply or manufacture and distribution of electricity or gas for light, heat, or power purposes; for the furnishing of water to the public; or for the furnishing of sanitary sewer collection and treatment services to the public; 
(B)  The acquisition, construction, reconstruction, repair, alteration, improvement, extension, financing, or refinancing of any commercial, industrial, agricultural, educational, or healthcare facility, and equipment therefore, to be operated by any for-profit or not-for-profit entity; 
(C)  The purchase of land in the planning and development, including construction, erection, or installation of buildings for an industrial complex or office park when the land or buildings or both, at the discretion of the town council, may be sold or leased by the town to private enterprise where such buildings are all-purpose buildings suitable for sale or rental for general manufacturing use or office use or general retail use or any combination thereof; 
(D)  All transaction costs, redemption premium, interest during construction, and working capital for any project described in sub-sections (a) through (c) above. 
(E)  The refunding, from time to time, of any bonds issued pursuant to the provisions of this section 13.7 by the issuance of new bonds, whether the bonds to be refunded have or have not matured, or be subject to redemption, and the town council may issue new bonds (pursuant to this section 13.7) in sufficient amounts to provide: 
(i)  The principal amount of the obligations being refunded; 
(ii)  Any applicable redemption premiums thereon; 
(iii)  Unpaid interest on such obligations to the date of delivery of the refunding bonds and interest to accrue on such obligations being refunded from the date of delivery of the refunding bonds to the first of any subsequently available redemption date or dates selected by the town council; and 
(d)  Any expenses, including bond discount, deemed by the town council to be necessary for the issuance of the refunding bonds. 
13.7.3.  Procedure: notice, hearing. In order to proceed under the power granted in this section 13.7, the town council shall authorize such borrowing in the following manner: 
(A)  The town council by resolution shall give notice to the residents and property owners of the town that the town council proposes to borrow a sum of money, not to exceed a stated amount, for a stated project pursuant to this section. The resolution shall state the amount of money desired to be borrowed (which may be stated as a "not to exceed" amount), the purpose for which it is desired, the manner of securing same, the fact that the full faith and credit of the town is not pledged as security, and such other facts relating to the loan which are deemed pertinent by the town council and in their possession at the time of the passage of the resolution; and they shall fix a time, date and place for a hearing on the said resolution. 
(B)  (1)  Notice of the time, date, and place of the hearing on the resolution authorizing said loan shall be published in two newspapers of general circulation in the town not less than 14 days, nor more than 60 days, prior to the date set for the public hearing. Such notice shall be in bold print or bordered in black so as to call attention thereto. In addition to the time, date, and place of the public hearing such notices shall contain the same information as required under section 13.7.3(A) above. 
(2)  In addition to publication as herein provided, the town council shall, not less than 14 days nor more than 60 days prior to the date set for the hearing, cause a public notice containing the information required above to be posted in at least five public places in the town. In the event the publications and/or postings do not appear on the same date, the date of the first publication or posting shall control. 
(C)  If, at any time following the public hearing, the town council determines to proceed with the proposed borrowing, it shall pass a second resolution, by the affirmative vote of at least five members of the town council, to proceed with the proposed borrowing. 
13.7.4  Disclaimer. The issuance of bonds or other certificates of indebtedness pursuant to this section 13.7 shall not constitute a debt of the town nor a pledge of its credit or taxing power and such bonds or certificates of indebtedness shall contain on the face thereof a statement to the following effect: 
"Neither the faith and credit nor the taxing power of the Town of Smyrna is pledged to the payment of the principal of, premium, if any, or interest on the Bond (Certificate of Indebtedness), nor is the Town of Smyrna in any manner obligated to make any appropriation for payment thereof." 
13.7.5.  Provisions of resolution may be part of contract. Any resolution or resolutions authorizing any bonds or certificates of indebtedness under this section 13.7 may contain provisions which shall be part of a contract with the holders of the bonds thereby authorized as to any matter relating to the repayment of the bonds or certificates of indebtedness, the security therefor, the operation of the project, and any other matter or course of conduct that affect the foregoing. 
13.7.6  No limit on amount; not counted towards town's maximum indebtedness. There shall be no limitation on the amount of bonds to be issued pursuant to this section 13.7 and the indebtedness created by any bonds or certificates of indebtedness created by the town pursuant to this section 13.7 shall not be used in computing the maximum indebtedness which may be created by the town council under sections 13.1, 13.2, or 13.3; nor shall the town be required to levy taxes to pay the principal of or interest on any indebtedness created by this section 13.7. 
13.7.7.  Disposition of property acquired through revenue bonds; application of proceeds. At its discretion, the town council may dispose of any real property and any personal property acquired by the issuance of bonds or certificates of indebtedness issued pursuant to this section 13.7 to a private individual, firm, or corporation at public or private sale, for cash or on credit, and under such other terms and conditions as the town council may deem to be in the best interest of the town without regard to any other provision of this Charter; provided that the revenue received from any such disposition shall be used to retire any outstanding bonds or certificates of indebtedness under this section 13.7, but if none be outstanding, the revenue derived from such disposition may be used for any municipal purpose. 
13.8.  Form of bonds. The form of the bonds or certificates of indebtedness authorized under sections 13.1, 13.2, 13.3 and/or 13.7 and the thereunto attached coupons, if any, the time or times of payment, the interest rate, the classes, the series, the maturity, the registration, any callable or redeemable feature, the denomination, the name thereof and any other relative or appurtenant matter pertaining thereto shall all be determined by the town council after the final action required to authorize the issuance of such bonds or certificates of indebtedness has been completed (i.e. a majority vote of the town council under section 13.1; a super-majority vote following the holding of a public hearing under section 13.2 or 13.7; or a favorable vote of those natural persons and legal entities entitled to vote following the public hearing and special election procedures under section 13.3); provided, however, that the Town Council may delegate the authority to make all or any of the determinations described herein to the Town Manager, Mayor, or such special committee as he Town Council may appoint. 
13.9  Council-members not liable. No member of the town council, nor any person executing any bonds or other obligations issued pursuant to sections 13.1, 13.2, 13.3, and/or 13.7, shall be personally liable on the bonds or other obligations, or be subject to any personal liability or accountability by reason of the issuance thereof, provided that he/she is authorized to act by resolution of the town council. 
13.10  Exempt from taxation. All bonds or other kinds or forms of certificates of indebtedness issued by the town pursuant to the provisions of sections 13.1, 13.2, 13.3, and/or 13.7, and the interest thereon, shall be exempt from taxation by the State of Delaware or by any political subdivision or agency thereof. Any property acquired and held by the town from the proceeds of bonds or certificates of indebtedness issued pursuant to sections 13.1, 13.2, 13.3, and/or 13.7 shall be exempt from taxation by the State of Delaware or any political subdivision thereof. 
13.11  Public or private sale. Any bonds or certificates of indebtedness authorized under sections 13.1, 13.2, 13.3 and/or 13.7 may be sold or issued at either public or private sale. If the bonds shall be offered for public sale they shall be sold to the best and most responsible bidder(s) therefore after advertisement in a manner to be prescribed by the town council for at least 15 days before offering the same for sale. All bonds or certificates of indebtedness issued pursuant to section 13.1, 13.2, 13.3. and/or 13.7 shall be deemed to be legal investments by any bank, trust company, insurance company, executor, administrator, curator, trustee, or other fiduciary. 
13.12  Statute of limitations, 60 days. No action contesting any proceedings conducted, or action taken, by the town council hereunder regarding the authorization of any bonds or certificates of indebtedness issued under this section 13 shall be brought after the expiration of 60 days from the publication of a notice in at least two newspapers, one of which shall be of general circulation in the Town of Smyrna and one of which shall be of general circulation in the State of Delaware, which notice shall announce the following information: 
(A)  That the town council has determined to borrow a certain sum of money and to issue bonds or certificates of indebtedness therefor; 
(B)  That the proposal has been approved (as appropriate) by a majority of the town council (if the borrowing has proceeded under section 13.1), by a super-majority of the town council (if the borrowing has proceeded under section 13.2 or 13.7), or by a majority of those casting votes at a special election in the town called for the purpose of voting for or against the borrowing (if the borrowing has proceeded under section 13.3.) 
(C)  The amount of money to be borrowed, which may be stated as a "not-to-exceed" amount. 
(D)  The purpose for which it is to be borrowed. 
(E)  The security for such borrowing 
(F)  That any person desiring to challenge the authorization of such bond(s) or certificate(s) of indebtedness must bring his/her or her action within 60 days from the date of publication of such notice or forever be barred from doing so. 
(G)  Such notice shall be in bold print or bordered in black in such manner as to call attention thereto. In addition to publication as herein provided, the town council shall cause a public notice, containing the information set out in subsections (A) through (F) above (using date of "posting" for date of "publication") to be posted in at least five public places in the town. In the event the publications and/or postings do not appear on the same date, the date of the first publication or posting shall control. 
(H.B. No. 116, § 1, 4-6-09; H.B. No. 318, §§ 23, 24, 26, 5-1-12; H.B. No. 396, § 5, 7-1-18) 
Sec. 14. - Police force. 
14.1  Establishment of police force. The town council shall have the authority to establish and fund a municipal police force, and to employ such personnel as necessary to fill those positions within the police force as authorized and funded by the town council. All police officers with the authority to carry firearms and/or to make arrests with or without an arrest warrant shall meet such standards and hold such certifications as required by and in accordance with state law. 
14.2  Power and duties. Each member of the police force shall be vested with all power and authority, within the town limits, and within one mile of said limits, of a state peace officer. They shall be conservators of the peace and shall suppress all acts of violence and enforce all laws relating to the safety and protection of persons and property. The police force shall preserve peace and order and enforce all ordinances enacted by the town council of the Town of Smyrna within the limits of the town, and shall have the authority to enforce all criminal and motor vehicle laws enacted by the State of Delaware both within the limits of the town and within one mile of the limits of the town. Members of the police force shall have the power to issue summons, to arrest pursuant to a warrant issued by any court of competent jurisdiction, and to arrest without a warrant upon view of any violation of state law or of any ordinance of the town relating to peace and good order. The police force shall execute all warrants issued by any court of competent jurisdiction directed to such officers. In the case of a pursuit of an offender, the power and authority of the police force shall extend outside the territorial limits of the town to any part of the state. 
14.3  Temporary holding facilities. The town shall have full power and authority to construct, acquire, and maintain in the town suitable facilities for the temporary jailing of any person arrested and taken into custody pending further disposition. 
Sec. 15. - Subdivision and land development. 
15.1  Power to regulate. In order to provide for the orderly growth and development of the town, to promote the health, safety, prosperity, and general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the town, to insure the conservation of property values and natural resources, including the protection of the town's open lands, water resources, and recreational potential, and to afford adequate provision for public utilities, water supply, drainage, sanitation, vehicular access, educational and recreational facilities, parkland and open space, among other and related activities, the town may regulate the subdivision and development of all land in the town. Such regulation may, through ordinance, include: 
(1)  Varying procedures for insuring the processing of combining, partitioning, or land subdivision and site plans, within a reasonable period of time, relative to the number of lots or parcels and the extent of improvements required. 
(2)  Procedures for insuring that the arrangement of the lots or parcels of land or improvements thereon shall conform to the existing zoning at the time of recordation and that streets, or rights-of-way, bordering or within subdivided or developed land shall be of such widths and grades and in such locations as may be deemed necessary to accommodate prospective traffic, that adequate easements or rights-of-way shall be provided for drainage and utilities, that reservations of areas designed for their use as public grounds shall be of suitable size and location for their designated uses, that sufficient and suitable monuments and signage shall be required, that land which might constitute a menace to safety, health or general welfare shall be made safe for the purpose for which it is subdivided or developed, and that adequate provision for public utilities (e.g. water supply, fire protection, sanitary sewage collection, electric distribution, telephone, and cable) is made. 
(3)  Procedures for encouraging and promoting flexibility and ingenuity in the layout and design of subdivisions and land development, and for encouraging practices which are in accordance with contemporary and evolving principles of site planning and development. 
(4)  Requiring, through dedication of land, money in lieu of land, "impact fees," or otherwise, those subject to such regulation to provide, at their own expense, such municipal or public improvements (including enlargement, expansion, improvement, or enhancement of existing municipal or public improvements) which have a rational nexus to the proposed land subdivision, combining, or partitioning, or development, including, by way of example and not in limitation, the paving of streets, installation of sidewalks, curbs, storm sewers, water lines, sanitary sewer lines, electric distribution lines, street signs, access roads, playgrounds, parks, and open areas. In imposing such requirements, the town may consider and take into account future as well as immediate needs, and potential as well as present population factors affecting the neighborhood in question. 
(5)  Procedures for insuring that any improvements to be constructed on such lands are in compliance with all appropriate town ordinances and that the placement and location of such improvements will not have a significant negative impact on adjoining properties. 
(6)  Procedures for securing financial guarantees from the developers of such lands to insure satisfactory completion of all such required improvements, which may include extending the term of such guarantee for a reasonable period of time (not exceeding three years) beyond the actual completion of such improvements by the developer or acceptance of such improvements by the town. 
15.2  Recording unapproved plans. In the event an ordinance of the town so provides, no plat, plot, or plan of land shall be received for filing or recording by the recorder of deeds in and for Kent and New Castle Counties unless and until such plat, plot, or plan shall have been approved by the town body so authorized to grant such approvals and the fact of such approvals shall have been endorsed in writing on such plan. Any plat, plot, or plan recorded in violation of such ordinance shall be void and of no legal force or effect. 
Sec. 16. - Streets and alleys. 
16.1  Power to lay out, locate, open, widen, alter, close, vacate or abandon. The town council shall have the power and authority to lay out, locate, and open new streets or alleys, or to widen or alter existing streets or alleys, or parts thereof, and to close, vacate, or abandon existing or proposed streets or alleys or parts thereof, whenever the town council shall deem it in the best interest of the town. 
16.2  Initiation of proceedings. The procedures set forth in this Charter to lay out, locate, open, widen, alter, close, vacate, or abandon a street or alley in the Town of Smyrna may be commenced by resolution of the town council. 
16.3  Resolution proposing change: notice; hearing. Any such resolution shall contain a description of the proposed change and shall fix a time, date, and place when the town council shall sit to hear comments and objections concerning the proposal. At least 14 days before the date set for such hearing, the resolution adopted by the town council shall be printed in a newspaper having a general circulation in the Town of Smyrna and shall be posted in five public places in the town. 
16.4  Notice to affected property owners. The town council shall cause to be sent, certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner(s) of record of the real estate through, over, or abutting which such street or alley may run. Notice to one co-owner shall be effective as to all. If the address of the owner be unknown, a copy shall be delivered to any persons occupying the premises, or if none, posted thereon. Notice to affected property owners under this section 16.4 shall be provided at least 14 days before the date set for the hearing. 
16.5  Hearing. At the time and place in the resolution, the town council shall hear such residents or taxables of the town or owners of the property affected thereby, as shall attend the hearing. After hearing all comments, the town council shall, at said meeting, or at a subsequent date, as it may deem proper, adopt a resolution to proceed with, or abandon, the proposed locating, laying-out, widening, altering, closing, vacating, or abandoning of any street(s) or alley(s) or parts thereof contemplated in its aforementioned prior resolution. The town council shall, within five days following the adoption of the aforesaid resolution, cause a copy of such resolution to be provided to all affected property owners in the same manner as the notice provided under section 16.4. 
16.6  Payment of compensation; acquisition of title. 
16.6.1.  Where lands taken. Whenever the town council determines to proceed with the opening of a new street or alley, or the widening of an existing street or alley, the town may acquire title to the lands necessary in accordance with 29 Del. C. ch. 29 by negotiation and purchase or by condemnation in accordance with the provisions of 10 Del. C. ch. 61, as hereafter amended or in accordance with any future corresponding provisions of law. 
16.6.2.  Where street or alley closed, vacated, or abandoned. Whenever the town council determines to proceed with the closing, vacating, or abandoning of any existing street or alley, or any part thereof, no compensation shall be paid to any property owner unless such closing, vacating, or abandoning deprives a property of all reasonable vehicular access directly between any public street or public alley and an existing garage, carport or improved off-street parking area located on such property such that the property owner effectively loses the use thereof for off-street parking and/or temporary storage of motor vehicles. Any property owner claiming such deprivation shall notify the town in writing of such claim within 15 days of the resolution adopted pursuant to section 16.5. Upon receipt of such notice, the town council shall proceed to pay compensation for such damages in the same manner as in section 16.6.1. 
16.6.3  Disposal of abandoned and vacated street lands. Whenever the land comprehended or included in any street or alley or part thereof is vacated or abandoned under this section be owned by the town, the town council may, in its discretion, sell such land at public or private sale and for such consideration as the town council shall deem proper; provided that such lands shall first be offered equally to the owners abutting on each side. The town council shall have the right and power to convey to the purchaser or purchasers thereof, a good and sufficient title thereto for whatever estate the town may have therein. 
16.6.4  "Street" defined. For all purposes of this section 16, the word street" shall be deemed and held to comprehend the entire right-of-way, whether or not improved, including sidewalks, curbs, lanes, alleys, roadways, streets, or other highways owned by, titled in the name of, or under the jurisdiction and control of the town. "Street" shall not include any road, street, highway, or other public way under the jurisdiction and control of the Delaware Department of Transportation (or any successor state agency). 
Sec. 17. - Constructing, paving, and repairing of streets. 
    The town council shall have full power and authority to re-grade, re-surface, redress and otherwise repair and rebuild all existing streets, lanes, alleys and other public thoroughfares in the town and, to construct, build, pave, and in any manner improve all new and existing streets, lanes, alleys and other public thoroughfares now open or to be hereafter opened for public use in the town, and in so doing, may employ such contractors, engineers, inspectors, and others as the council shall deem expedient. To this end the town council shall have full power and authority to enter into contracts or agreements with the Delaware department of transportation, or any successor agency, for the construction, or permanent or temporary maintenance, repair and up-keep, of any street, lane, alley, highway, or other public thoroughfare within the town limits. 
Sec. 18. - Sidewalks, gutters, and curbs. 
    The town council shall have the authority to adopt ordinances governing the installation, construction, improvement, repair, replacement, or removal of any sidewalk, curb, or gutter located in any public street or alley, or on private property abutting any public street or alley, or any portion thereof. Such ordinance may require the owner(s) of any private lands upon which, or abutting which, such sidewalk, curb, or gutter is located to: (a) permit the town (or its agents or contractors) to go upon their private lands to perform such work, (b) pay all or such part of the town's cost to perform such work as reasonably and equitably determined by the town, or (c) perform such work as required by the town, in accordance with standards and specifications established by the town, at their own expense. Such ordinance shall provide for the following: 
18.1  Resolution. The town council shall adopt a resolution describing the work proposed to be done and identifying the streets or alleys, or portions thereof, in, on, along, or abutting which such sidewalks, curbs, or gutters are located. Such resolution shall identify the property address and owner of each property on, adjoining, along, or in front of which said proposed work will take place, and the amount, if any, proposed to be assessed against such property for such work. Such resolution shall establish a date, place, and time for the holding of a public hearing to receive public comment on the proposed work and assessments. At least 14 days prior to the hearing, such resolution shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the town, posted in five public places in the town, and mailed or delivered to the owners of all affected property owners at their address as shown on the town's tax records. 
18.2.  Determination to proceed. At the conclusion of such public hearing, or at a subsequent regular or special meeting, the town council shall decide whether or not to proceed with all or any portion of the improvements referred to in said resolution, and if it shall determine to proceed, the town council shall determine whether the whole or some specified portion of the costs thereof shall be assessed to the owners of those properties upon which, adjoining, along, or in front of which said proposed work will take place. The amount to be paid by the owner of each parcel for their property affected shall be determined according to the lineal footage of their parcel(s) upon which, adjoining, along or in front of which the improvement or improvements are made. 
18.3  Property owner's option to perform work at property owner's expense. The town council may, but shall not be required to, provide the affected property owners the option to have the work done at their own expense, utilizing their own contractor or the town's contractor in accordance with all town standards and specifications. In such event, any property owner electing to do so shall have all work completed to the satisfaction of the town within such period of time (not exceeding one year) as specified by the town in writing. In the event the property owner declines the option to have the work done at the property owner's expense, or, having elected that option, fails to do so, the town may immediately proceed to have the work properly completed by the town's staff and/or agents or contractors and assess the entire cost thereof against the property owner. 
18.4  Notice; assessment and collection of costs; lien. The town council shall give written notice to the owner(s) of each property subject to assessment under section 18.2 of the work to be done, the amount(s) assessed, the due date for payment, the terms of any payment arrangements offered by the town, and (if applicable) the property owner's option to have the work performed at his/her expense (specifying the terms that will govern such election). Such notice shall also inform the property owner(s) that if the town performs the work, the cost thereof shall constitute a lien against the property which may be enforced in the same manner as a tax lien. If such owner or owners shall fail to pay the amount assessed by the date specified in the assessment notice or in accordance with any payment terms offered by the town, or (if appropriate) shall fail to have such work properly completed by the date specified in the notice and the town performs the work, such amount(s) together with interest and costs, (including reasonable attorney's fees) may be collected by the same procedures as are set forth in this Charter for the collection of taxes. The amount so assessed shall be and constitute a lien upon all the property upon which, adjoining, along, or in front of which the said work was accomplished for a period of ten years from the date of mailing of the notice of assessment. In the case of a life estate, the interest of the life tenant shall first be liable for the payment of any taxes so levied. Such lien shall have preference and priority to all other liens on such real estate as aforesaid, created or suffered by the said taxable, although such lien or liens be of a time and date prior to the time of the attaching of such lien for taxes; provided that if the real estate remains the property of the person(s) who was/were the owner(s) at the time it was so assessed, the lien shall continue until the same is collected in full. 
18.5  Notice. Whenever written notice is required to be given to any "owner" by this section 18, notice to one co-owner shall be notice to all. Notice may be given by mailing same, certified mail, return receipt requested, proper postage affixed, to said owner at his or her last known address as shown on the town's tax records; provided however, that the failure of any owner to actually receive such notice (being returned as, among other reasons, "unclaimed", "refused to accept", "moved, no forwarding address") shall not invalidate any action taken under this section 18. Notice may also be given by personal delivery to the property owner at the last address shown on the town's tax records by leaving a copy of such notice with an adult person residing within the premises. 
18.6  Change in ownership. The word "owner" as used in this section shall be deemed to mean the owner(s) of record of the property at the time of the resolution adopted under section 18.1, and any change in ownership thereafter shall not be deemed or held to affect any of the proceedings described in this section. 
18.7  Construction supervision, standards. The town council in exercising the authority granted by this section may employ such contractors, engineers, inspectors and others as the town council may deem expedient, and may use or require the use of such materials and substances and such methods of construction as the town council shall deem appropriate, in accordance with sound design, engineering, and construction methods. 
Sec. 19. - Jetties, bulkheads, dams, embankments and boardwalks. 
    The town council shall have the power and authority to locate, lay-out, construct, widen, extend, improve, repair, replace, vacate or abandon jetties, bulkheads, dams, groins and embankments for the preservation of any lake, pond, stream, canal, beach or strand within the limits of the town or contiguous thereto to the ends that the same may be preserved and property may be protected, or boardwalks and piers, to the end that the general public might enjoy the use thereof. In the locating, laying-out, constructing, widening, extending, improving, repairing, replacing, vacating or abandoning of any such jetties, bulkheads, dams, groins and embankments, boardwalks and piers, the town council shall have full power and authority to use such materials and substances and such methods of construction and shall employ such contractors, engineers, inspectors, and others the town council shall deem expedient and advisable; subject, nevertheless, to any controlling federal or state statutes or administrative regulations. 
    The town council may, by condemnation proceedings, take private lands or the right to use private lands for any of the purposes mentioned in this section. The proceedings by condemnation under this section shall be substantially the same as prescribed in section 16 of this Charter for the opening and laying-out of new streets or the vacating or abandoning of streets, and the resolutions referred to in said section 16 shall be changed and modified to cover cases contemplated by this present section. 
Sec. 20. - Drainage. 
    Subject to any governing federal or state statutes, and subject to the regulations of any federal or state agency or political subdivision having exclusive or concurrent jurisdiction thereof, the town shall have the full jurisdiction and control, within the limits of the town, of the drainage of all water thereof, together with the right to alter and change the course and direction of any of the natural water courses, runs and rivulets within the limits of the town; and the town council may pass ordinances for the opening of gutters, surface water and underground drains and stormwater sewers within the limits of the town. The town shall also have full power to regulate, maintain, clean and keep the natural water courses, runs and rivulets within the town limits open and clean and unobstructed and for that purpose may authorize the entry upon private lands and take, condemn and occupy the same in the same manner and by substantially the same condemnation proceedings as hereinbefore provided by section 16 of this Charter which is concerned with the opening and laying-out of any streets. By like proceedings the town shall also have the power and authority to enter upon private lands and take, condemn and occupy the same for the purpose of laying-down gutters, surface water and underground storm-water drains or sewers, or any of them, within the town limits. 
Sec. 21. - Water systems. 
    Subject to any governing federal or state statutes, and subject to the regulations of any federal or state agency or political subdivision having exclusive or concurrent jurisdiction thereof: 
21.1  Power to operate water system. The town shall have full power and authority to provide an ample supply of potable water for the town and the inhabitants thereof. To this end, it shall have full power and authority to purchase, acquire by grant or gift, lease, erect, construct, maintain, operate, extend, enlarge, re-new, replace and control wells, reservoirs, pumping machines and stations, tanks, stand-pipes, water mains, fire hydrants and all other instruments for the collection, storage, purification, treatment, conveyance and distribution of water, over, on, under or through the lands controlled by the town or belonging to any private individual(s). The town council shall have the power to make contracts for the purchase of water and to distribute the same to users within or without the said town with the same full powers as if such water had been initially reduced to usefulness by the town itself. 
21.2  Rules, regulations. The town council shall have power to enact ordinances, rules and regulations in regard to the use for public or private purposes of water furnished by the town; requiring that all properties within the town be connected to the town's water distribution system within such time and under such circumstances as deemed reasonable by the town council, the amounts to be paid by the users thereof; the means or methods whereby the same shall be collected, and the fixing of fines, or penalties, or both, for any willful or negligent injury or damage to or interference with the water system or equipment of the town. 
21.3  Furnishing water outside town limits. The town council may, at its option, furnish water from the town system to places and properties outside the town limits upon such special terms, charges and conditions as it shall deem wise. The town council shall have the power to enter contracts for the sale of water outside the limits of the town upon such terms and conditions as the town council shall, in the exercise of its sound discretion deem best; and also to enter into mutual aid agreements with other water suppliers conducting operations near the limits of the town upon such terms and conditions as town council shall deem best. 
21.4  Franchises. The town council shall have power to enact ordinances granting franchises for such term or terms of years as shall seem wise to the town council to allow the use of the present or future streets, squares, alleys, lanes and beach strand of the town for the purpose of furnishing water to the town and to the persons, firms or corporations residing therein, and for the purpose of transmitting the same through, over, across or under said streets, squares, alleys, lanes and beach strands to points outside the town limits, any such franchise or franchises, to contain such restrictions, conditions, and stipulations as shall, to the said town council, seem wise. 
21.5  Eminent domain. The town may, by condemnation proceedings, take private land and property, or the right to use private land and property, for the proper furnishing of an ample supply of potable water or the creation, construction, extension, maintenance of a proper water system, or the distribution thereof as above provided. The proceedings by condemnation under this section shall be substantially the same as prescribed by section 16 of this Charter, which is concerned with the opening and laying-out of new streets. 
Sec. 22. - Sanitary sewage systems. 
    Subject to any governing federal or state statutes, and subject to the regulations of any federal or state agency or political subdivision having exclusive or concurrent jurisdiction thereof: 
22.1  Power to operate sanitary sewage system. The town shall have full power and authority to operate a system for the collection, transfer, and/or treatment of sanitary sewage for the town and the inhabitants thereof. To this end, it shall have full power and authority to purchase, acquire by grant or gift, or lease, and to erect, construct, maintain, operate, extend, enlarge, re-new, replace and control sanitary sewer lines, lift stations, holding and/or treating tanks and lagoons, spray irrigation disposal facilities, and all other instruments for the collection, storage, treatment, transmission, and disposal of sanitary sewage, over, on, under or through the lands controlled by the town or belonging to any private individual(s). The town council shall have the power to enter into contracts with the Kent County levy court (or its successors) or with the Government of New Castle County (or its successors) with regard to any or all of the foregoing. 
22.2  Rules, regulations. The town council shall have power to enact ordinances, rules and regulations governing the collection and treatment of sanitary sewage from the residents and properties in the town, requiring that all properties within the town be connected to such system within such time and under such circumstances as deemed reasonable by the town council, the amounts to be paid by the users of such services; the means or methods whereby the same shall be collected, and the fixing of fines, or penalties, or both, for any willful or negligent injury or damage to or interference with the water system or equipment of the town. 
22.3  Furnishing sanitary sewage collection services outside town limits. The town council may, at its option and subject to any contract with the Kent County levy court (or its successors) or with the Government of New Castle County (or its successors),furnish sanitary sewage collection service to places and properties outside the town limits upon such special terms, charges and conditions as it shall deem wise. 
22.4  Franchises. The town council shall have power to enact ordinances granting franchises for such term or terms of years as shall seem wise to the town council to allow the use of the present or future streets, squares, alleys, lanes and beach strand of the town for the purpose of providing sanitary sewer service to the town and to the persons, firms or corporations residing therein, and for the purpose of transmitting the same through, over, across or under said streets, squares, alleys, lanes and beach strands to points outside the town limits, any such franchise or franchises, to contain such restrictions, conditions, and stipulations as shall, to the said town council, seem wise. 
22.5  Eminent domain. The town may, by condemnation proceedings, take private land and property, or the right to use private land and property, for the proper furnishing of sanitary sewer services, or the creation, construction, extension, maintenance of a proper sanitary sewer system, as above provided. The proceedings by condemnation under this section shall be substantially the same as prescribed by section 16 of this Charter, which is concerned with the opening and laying-out of new streets. 
Sec. 23. - Electric generation and distribution system. 
23.1.  Power to operate. The town council shall have the full power and authority to erect, construct, equip, maintain, repair, replace, lease, and operate plants, facilities, and systems for the generation and distribution of electric power and energy, including, but not limited to, renewable energy facilities, such as solar power: (a) for the use and benefit of the inhabitants and properties of the town, (b) for the use and benefit of persons and properties lying outside the town limits of the town but within such proximity of the town as to make provision of such service reasonable in the discretion of the town council, subject always to the authority of any governing state agency to regulate the service territories of electric distribution systems, and (c) for sale to other providers of electric capacity and energy through the Delaware Municipal Electric Company ("DEMEC"), its successors or assigns. The town council shall have the power to make contracts for the purchase of electric capacity and energy with any responsible persons, firms, or corporations, and to distribute the same to users within or without the said town with the same full powers as if such electric energy and/or capacity had been initially generated or provided by the town. 
23.2.  Rules, regulations. The town council shall have power to enact ordinances, rules, regulations and tariffs regarding the connections and use of electric capacity and energy furnished by the town; the rates and amounts to be paid by the users thereof; the means or methods whereby the same shall be collected, and the fixing of fines, or penalties, or both, for any willful or negligent injury or damage to or interference with the electric distribution system or equipment of the town; provided that such ordinances, rules, and regulations shall not be discriminatory nor confiscatory. 
23.3  Furnishing electric distribution and supply services outside town limits. Subject always to the regulatory authority of any state agency having jurisdiction over the service territories of electric distribution service suppliers, the town council may, at its option, elect to furnish electric distribution and supply service from the town system to places and properties outside the town limits in accordance with the same ordinances, rules, regulations, and tariffs governing service to properties within the town. The town council shall have the power to enter into joint operating, back-up, or mutual aid agreements with other electric distribution and/or supply companies conducting operations near the limits of the town upon such terms and conditions as town council shall deem best. 
23.4  Franchises. The town council shall have power to enact ordinances granting franchises for such term or terms of years as shall seem wise to the town council to allow the use of the present or future streets, squares, alleys, lanes and beach strand of the town for the purpose of furnishing electric distribution services and/or energy to the town and to the persons and properties within the town, and for the purpose of transmitting the same through, over, across or under said streets, squares, alleys, lanes and beach strands to points outside the town limits, any such franchise or franchises, to contain such restrictions, conditions, and stipulations as shall, to the said town council, seem wise. 
23.5  Eminent domain. The town may, by condemnation proceedings, take private land and property, or the right to use private land and property, for the purpose of erecting, constructing, extending, enlarging, maintaining, replacing, or removing any plant, facilities, or equipment used by the town in the generation, transmission, and/or distribution of electrical energy and capacity as authorized by section 23.1. The proceedings by condemnation under this section shall be substantially the same as prescribed by section 16 of this Charter, which is concerned with the opening and laying-out of new streets. 
(H.B. No. 318, § 25, 5-1-12) 
Sec. 24. - Actions or suits. 
    No action, suit, or proceeding shall be brought or maintained against the Town of Smyrna, its officers (including the members of any board, commission, or agency), employees, or agents, whether now, hereafter, or previously serving as such, and no judgment, damages, penalties, costs, or other money entitlement shall be awarded or assessed against the town, its officers, (including the members of any board, commission, or agency) employees or agents, whether now, hereafter or previously serving as such, in any civil suit or proceeding at law or in equity, or before any administrative tribunal, arising out of, connected with, or on account of any physical injury or injuries, death, or any other type of personal injury, (including libel or slander), or injury to property (whether real or personal) unless the person by or on behalf of whom such claim or demand is asserted, within one year from the happening of the incident giving rise to such injury, shall notify the Town of Smyrna in writing of the time, place, cause, character and extent of the injury sustained or damages suffered. Such notice shall be directed to the mayor of the Town of Smyrna by certified mail with return receipt requested and postage prepaid. 
Sec. 25. - Compendium. 
    It shall be the duty of the town council, at reasonable time or times, to compile the ordinances, current regulations, orders and rules of the Town of Smyrna. The town council shall have a reasonable number of copies printed for the use of the officials of the town and for public information. From time to time, upon the enactment of new ordinances, current rules and regulations, or upon the enactment of amendments to same, the town council shall enroll the same in the minutes of the town council and shall keep copies of the same in a book or file to be provided for that purpose so that the same may be readily examined. It shall furnish the members of the town council copies thereof as they are enacted and therefrom may cause supplements to be compiled and printed to any compendium thereof theretofore printed as above provided. 
Sec. 26. - Survival of powers and validating section. 
26.1  All powers conferred upon or vested in the town council of Smyrna by any act or law of the State of Delaware not in conflict with the provisions of this Charter are hereby expressly conferred upon and vested in the Town of Smyrna and/or the town council of Smyrna precisely as if each of said powers was expressly set forth in this Charter. 
26.2  All powers and authority of a "home rule" municipality conferred upon, vested in, or delegated to the Town of Smyrna by virtue of having previously qualified for home rule charter status under 22 Del. C. § 836, shall continue to be conferred upon, vested in, or delegated to the town, and the Town of Smyrna shall continue to be qualified as a home rule municipality under this Act until such status is lawfully terminated pursuant to 22 Del. C. § 825, as it may from time to time hereafter be amended, or by any future corresponding provision of law. 
26.3  All ordinances adopted by the town council of Smyrna and in force at the time of approval, acceptance and going into effect of this Charter are continued in force until the same or any of them shall be repealed, modified or altered by the town council of Smyrna under the provisions of this Charter. 
26.4  All of the acts and doings of the town council of Smyrna or of any official, or of the mayor, or the town which shall have been lawfully done or performed under the provisions of any law of this state or of any ordinance of the Town of Smyrna under any provision of any prior Charter of the Town of Smyrna, prior to the approval, acceptance and going into effect of this Charter, are hereby ratified and confirmed, unless otherwise provided herein. 
26.5  All taxes, assessments, license fees, penalties, fines, liens, forfeitures, and other charges due to the Town of Smyrna shall be and remain due to the Town of Smyrna and all debts due from the Town of Smyrna shall remain unimpaired until paid by the Town of Smyrna. 
26.6  All powers granted by this Charter in respect to the collection of taxes, license fees, assessments or other charges or amounts owed to the town shall be deemed to apply and extend to all unpaid taxes, license fees, assessments or other charges heretofore lawfully imposed by the Town of Smyrna. 
26.7  The bonds given by or on account of any official of the Town of Smyrna shall not be impaired or affected by the provisions of this Charter. 
26.8  Each member of the town council who holds office at the time of approval of this Act shall continue to serve until the expiration of his/her term of office, and until his/her successor is duly elected and qualified. 
26.9  All acts or parts of acts inconsistent with or in conflict with the provisions of this Charter shall be and the same are hereby repealed to the extent of any such inconsistency. 
Sec. 27. - Separability. 
    If any provision, section, sub-section, paragraph, sentence, or clause of this Charter shall be held to be unconstitutional, unenforceable, or invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not be deemed to invalidate the remaining provisions, sections, sub-sections, paragraphs, sentences or clauses of this Charter, but the same shall remain in full force and effect. 
Sec. 28. - Special act. 
    This Charter shall be taken as and deemed to be a special act of the State of Delaware. 
Sec. 29. - Effective date. 
    This Charter shall take effect as of July 1st, 2003. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - DELAWARE LAWS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Del. L. 
Volume Chapter Section  Section 
this Charter 67 146 1 3 2 2 196 2, 3 3 62 339 1 5 2 7(a)(3) 3 6(a)(4) 4 6(b)(2) 5       Dltd 6(c) 6 20(a) 7, 8 4(b)(1), (2) 9 6(a)(3) 10 11, 12, 18 Amd. of 1 1(b)(1) 2       Added 1(b)(7)       Rnbd 1(b)(7), (8)       as 1(b)(8), (9) 3 3(d)(2) 4 4(d) 5 6(b)(2) 6 7(a)(4) 7 7(c) 8 8(c)(2) 9       Added 8(c)(3) 10 19(a) 11, 12 20(b), (c) 13       Rnbd 21       as 22       Added 21 Amd. of 1 6(a)(1) 2 6(b)(2)  
H.B. 
Number Date Section  Section 
this Charter 191  7-17-03       Rpld 1-22       Added 1-29 116  4- 6-09 1 13.2.1 318  5- 1-12 1 2 2 3.1, 3.2 3.2.1-3.2.7 3 4.2.31 4       Added 4.2.49 5 5 6 6.1 7 6.2.1 8       Rpld 6.3.2 9 6.6.2 10 7.1.1 11 7.4.1 12 8.3 13 8.3.2(e) 14 8.4 15 9.2.1 16 9.4.2 17 9.5 18 9.7.1 19 9.7.2 20 9.7.3 21 11.5 22 12.2 23 13.3.3(E)(3) 24 13.8 25 23.1 26 13.3.3(E)(1) 396  7- 1-18 1 7.4.1 2 9.1, 9.2 3 9.4, 9.5 4 9.7 5 13  
S.B. 
Number Date Section  Section 
this Charter 97  7-15-15 1 8.3 9.7.2, 9.7.3 11.1, 11.3 11.5  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances and resolutions embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Smyrna Town Code" and may be so cited. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction generally. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all other ordinances of the town, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless the context clearly requires a different meaning, or unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the town council: 
    Generally. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that their true intent and meaning may be fully carried out. 
    In the interpretation and application of any provisions of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than another, more general, provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
    In the case of any different meaning or implication between text and any caption, illustration, summary table or illustrative table, the text shall control. 
    Words and phrases shall be read with their context and shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the English language. Technical words and phrases, and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law, shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
    Charter. "Charter" means the municipal charter of the Town of Smyrna, Kent County, Delaware. 
    Code. "Code" means the Smyrna Town Code as designated in section 1-1 of this Code. 
    Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this Code, town ordinance or by order of any town officer or town employee, the day of the act, event or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, in which event the period shall run until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than 11 days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
    Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either...or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  And indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)  Or indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  Either...or indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination. 
    Council, town council. "Council" or "town council" means the council of the town. 
    County. "County" means Kent County, Delaware. 
    Del. C. "Del. C." means the Delaware Code as it existed at the time of this codification, and includes all amendments thereto, or any future corresponding provision of law. A number appearing before "Del. C." refers to a title of the Delaware Code. 
State Law reference- Citation of state code, 1 Del. C. § 101. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or some other town officer to do some act or perform some duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer (including elected or appointed officials) to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or perform the duty. 
    Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
    Includes. "Includes" does not limit a term to the specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
    Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons. 
    May. "May" is to be construed as being permissive. 
    May not. "May not" has a prohibitory effect and shall state a prohibition. 
    Month. "Month" means a calendar month. 
    Must. "Must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing; a word importing the plural number only may extend and be applied to one person or thing, as well as to several persons or things. 
    Oath. "Oath" includes affirmation in all cases where an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and "sworn" includes affirmed; and the forms shall be varied accordingly. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 1 Del. C. § 302(15). 
    Officers, departments and employees, generally. Whenever any department, officer or employee is referred to by title, such as "town solicitor" or "chief of police," such references are to be construed as if followed by the words "of the Town of Smyrna." 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, equitable owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, cestui que trust or beneficial owner, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. "Person" and "whoever" include corporations, companies, associations, firms, partnerships, societies and joint stock companies, as well as individuals. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 1 Del. C. § 302(16). 
    Preceding, following. "Preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. "Property" includes real and personal property. 
    Real estate or real property. "Real estate" or "real property" is synonymous with the phrase "lands, tenements and hereditaments." 
    Shall. "Shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. "Sidewalk" (including footways) means any portion of a street between the curbline, or the lateral lines of a roadway where there is no curb, and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    State. "State" means the State of Delaware. 
    Street. "Street" includes avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, squares, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto and all other public thoroughfares in the town and shall mean the entire width thereof between abutting property lines; and it shall be construed to include a sidewalk or footpath, unless the contrary is expressed or unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council. The word "street" shall not include "freeways," "throughways," "expressways" or any other "controlled access facility" as authorized by 17 Del. C. §§ 171-180. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Town. "Town" means the Town of Smyrna, Kent County, Delaware. 
    Written and writing. "Written" and "writing," respectively, include printing and typewriting and reproductions of visual symbols by photographing, lithographing, multigraphing, multilithing, mimeographing, manifolding or otherwise, but in all cases where the written signature of any person is required by law, it shall be the proper handwriting of such person, or if he cannot write his name, his mark. 
    Year. "Year" means a calendar year, and is equivalent to the words "year of our Lord." 
State Law reference- General definitions and rules of construction for state statutes, 1 Del. C. § 301 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; effect of history notes, cross references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Cross references, charter references, and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles or sections are to the chapters, articles and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified. 
Sec. 1-4. - Designation of legal holidays. 
(a)  The following days shall be legal holidays in this town: New Year's Day; the third Monday in January, known as Martin Luther King, Jr.'s Birthday; the third Monday of February, known as Presidents' Day; Good Friday; the last Monday in May, known as Memorial Day; the fourth day of July; the first Monday in September, known as Labor Day; the second Monday in October, known as Columbus Day; the 11th day of November, known as Armistice or Veterans' Day; the fourth Thursday in November, known as Thanksgiving Day, and the day following; Christmas; Saturdays; and the day of the general election as it biennially occurs. 
(b)  If any of the legal holidays falls on Sunday, the Monday following shall be a legal holiday. If any of the legal holidays other than Saturday falls on Saturday, the Friday preceding shall be a legal holiday. 
State Law reference- Legal holidays generally, 1 Del. C. § 501; Saturday to be legal holiday for certain city officers and employees, 9 Del. C. § 9106. 
Sec. 1-5. - Complaint and summons form. 
    The form of the complaint and summons shall be as prescribed by court rule. 
Sec. 1-6. - Revision of Code-Powers and duties of town. 
(a)  The town or town manager shall prepare or cause to be prepared supplements or otherwise revise this Code, noting the sections that have been repealed, generally updating this Code, and including, in the discretion of the town or town manager, citations to other laws. 
(b)  The town or town manager may make and enter into all contracts and execute, acknowledge and deliver all instruments necessary or incidental to the performance of duties under this section. 
Sec. 1-7. - Same-Scope of editorial revision; omissions. 
(a)  In performing duties and powers as Code revisor, the town manager, or the person designated by the town, shall not alter the sense, meaning or effect of any act of the council, but may: 
(1)  Renumber and rearrange sections or parts of sections. 
(2)  Transfer sections or divide sections so as to give distinct subject matters a separate section number, but without changing the meaning. 
(3)  Insert or change the wording of headnotes. 
(4)  Change reference numbers to agree with renumbered chapters or sections. 
(5)  Substitute the proper section or chapter number for the terms "this ordinance," "the preceding section" and the like. 
(6)  Strike out figures where they are merely a repetition of written words and vice versa. 
(7)  Change capitalization for the purpose of uniformity. 
(8)  Correct manifest typographical and grammatical errors. 
(9)  Make any other purely formal or clerical changes in keeping with the purpose of the revision. 
(b)  The town manager shall omit all titles of acts, all enacting, resolving and repealing clauses, all appropriation measures, all temporary ordinances, all declarations of emergency and all validity, declaration of policy and construction clauses, except when the retention thereof is necessary to preserve the full meaning and intent of the law. 
Sec. 1-8. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the town council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Provisions, continuations of existing ordinances, resolutions. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are in substance the same as those of all ordinances and resolutions heretofore adopted and included in this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-10. - Continuation of existing institutions, rights and liabilities. 
(a)  The repeal of prior ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations provided for in the ordinance adopting this Code shall not affect any act done, or any cause of action accruing or accrued, or established, or any suit or proceeding had or commenced in any civil action, nor any plea, defense, bar or matter subsisting before the time when such repeal shall take effect; but the proceedings in every such case shall conform with the provisions of this Code. 
(b)  All the provisions of ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations repealed by the ordinance adopting this Code shall be deemed to have remained in force from the time when they began to take effect, so far as they may apply to any department, agency, office or trust, or any transaction, or event, or any limitation, or any right, or obligation, or the construction of any contract already affected by such ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations, notwithstanding the repeal of such provisions. 
(c)  No offense committed, and no penalty or forfeiture incurred, under any of the ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations repealed by the ordinance adopting this Code, and before the time when such repeal shall take effect, shall be affected by such repeal. 
(d)  No action or prosecution, pending on the effective date of the repeal provided in the ordinance adopting this Code, for any offense committed or for the recovery of any penalty or forfeiture, incurred under any of the ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations repealed by such section, shall be abated or affected by such repeal; except, that the proceedings in such action or prosecution shall conform with the provisions of this Code. 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, "violation of this Code" shall mean: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful or an offense, either by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed, either by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)  Failure to perform an act, if the failure is declared an offense or unlawful, either by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, "violation of this Code" shall not include the failure of a town officer or town employee to perform an official duty unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)  Any violation of this Code shall be either a "civil" violation or a "criminal" violation. Unless otherwise designated as a "criminal" violation (such as by identifying such violation as a "criminal" offense or violation, as a "misdemeanor," or by providing incarceration as a possible penalty), any action brought by the town (whether in the name of the town or in the name of the state) shall be in the nature of a civil action for the imposition of a civil monetary penalty and not a criminal proceeding. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided, each person convicted of a violation of this Code, whether such violation be "civil" or "criminal" in nature, shall be punished by a fine up to but not exceeding $1,000.00. With respect to any violation of this Code that is continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues shall be a separate offense unless otherwise stated herein. 
(e)  The imposition of any civil or criminal fine or penalty shall not preclude revocation or suspension of any license, permit, or franchise held by the person convicted and/or directly related to the violation for which such person was convicted. 
(f)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time may be abated by mandamus, injunction, or other equitable relief. The imposition of any civil or criminal fine or penalty shall not preclude equitable relief or other civil enforcement of a violation of this Code. 
(Ord. of 6-4-01, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 8-5-02, §§ 1-4) 
Charter reference- Authority, § 2(b)(22). 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages generally, ch. 6; civil emergencies, ch. 22; law enforcement, ch. 34; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 42; traffic and vehicles, ch. 66. 
Sec. 1-12. - Payment of penalties by mail authorized for violation of certain ordinances. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Payment means the total amount of the fine and of the costs as provided in this section. 
    Voluntary assessment agreement means the written agreement or document signed by the violator wherein he agrees to pay by mail the penalty for the violation described therein together with costs. The voluntary assessment agreement shall be substantially in the form as established by the council from time to time. 
(b)  Applicability. Any police officer or administrative code enforcement official of the town who charges any person with a violation of any of the town ordinances designated in subsection (n) of this section may, in addition to issuing a summons or citation for such violation, provide the violator with a voluntary assessment agreement. Such voluntary assessment agreement, when properly executed by the police officer or code enforcement official and the violator, shall allow the violator to dispose of the charge without the necessity of personally appearing in the court to which the summons is returnable. 
(c)  Place. Payments made pursuant to this section shall be submitted to "Town of Smyrna, 27 South Market Street Plaza, P.O. Box 307, Smyrna, DE 19977, Attn: Town Manager-Mail-in Fines Section." 
(d)  Time. Payments made pursuant to this section must be received at the town hall within ten days from the date of issuance of the summons or citation (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays) and shall be paid only by check or money order. 
(e)  Offer and acceptance. At the time of issuing a summons or citation for any violation subject to this section, the police officer or code enforcement official may offer the alleged violator the option of accepting a voluntary assessment. The alleged violator's signature on the voluntary assessment form constitutes an acknowledgement of guilt of the violation stated in the form and an agreement to pay the penalty as provided in this section, together with costs, within ten days from the date of such summons or citation (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays), during which time payment must be received at the town hall. 
(f)  Withdrawal of acceptance, request for hearing. The alleged violator, after signing and receiving the voluntary assessment form, may withdraw his acceptance of the voluntary assessment and request a hearing on the charge stated in such form, provided the alleged violator, within ten days from the date of such summons or citation (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays), personally or in writing notifies the town manager at the town hall that he wishes to withdraw his acceptance of the voluntary assessment and request a hearing on the charge stated in the voluntary assessment form. If the alleged violator notifies the town manager of such withdrawal and request for hearing as aforesaid, he shall be prosecuted for the charge stated in the voluntary assessment form as if such form has not been issued. 
(g)  Penalty. If an alleged violator elects the option of accepting a voluntary assessment in accordance with subsection (f) of this section, the penalty for violation of an ordinance subject to voluntary assessment shall be the minimum monetary amount established for each specific violation charged; and penalties shall be cumulative if more than one violation is charged. 
(h)  Administrative costs. In lieu of any other court costs, and provided the offense is not subject to other proceedings under this section, each penalty for a violation under this section shall be subject to an assessment for administrative costs of $2.50. 
(i)  Payment as complete satisfaction. Payment of the prescribed penalty and administrative costs shall be a complete satisfaction of the violation. 
(j)  Removal from applicability of this section. If a payment due pursuant to this section is not received by the town hall within ten days from the date of such summons or citation (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays), the violation shall be prosecuted for the charge on the voluntary assessment form in a manner as if a voluntary assessment form had not been issued. Upon conviction in such prosecution, the court to which the summons or citation is returnable shall impose penalties as provided by the ordinance for the particular violation charged, and the provisions of this section as to payment of fines under voluntary assessments shall not apply. In addition to the penalties provided for in subsection (g) of this section, any violator who has elected to make payment pursuant to subsection (e) of this section but who has failed to do so (and who has failed to request a hearing under subsection (f) of this section), within ten days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays) from the date of the summons or citation, may be prosecuted for violating subsection (o) of this section. 
(k)  Procedure. After issuing the voluntary assessment agreement and summons or citation, the police officer or code enforcement official shall deliver the same forthwith to the town manager's office, which shall record the date of receipt thereof, the name of the alleged violator, the charge, the summons or citation number and the date by which such penalty is due. The summons or citation need not be sworn at the time of delivery to the town hall, provided that the charge recorded on the summons or citation may be dismissed by the court, upon motion, if such summons or citation is not sworn to by the police officer or code enforcement official prior to trial. If a payment due pursuant to this section is not received by the town hall within ten days from the date of issuance of such summons or citation (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays), the town manager's office shall, after entering the pertinent information in a log maintained by it, return all papers delivered to it pursuant to this subsection (k) to the police officer or code enforcement official to return forthwith the proper papers to the court to which the summons or citation is returnable at which time he may swear out a warrant for the violator's arrest for violation of subsection (o) of this section. 
(l)  Effect of late payment. Should the town manager's office receive payment from the violator after returning the papers to the police officer or code enforcement official but before the date set for trial and before an arrest is made on the warrant, the payment shall be accepted by the town manager's office, which shall prepare in a mail-in disposition slip consisting of an original and two copies. The original shall remain with the town manager's office. Both copies shall be forwarded to the police officer or code enforcement official. Any warrant charging failure to make payment or request a hearing under this section shall be withdrawn. 
(m)  Nonexclusive procedure. The procedure prescribed in this section is not exclusive of any other method prescribed by law for prosecution of persons violating any ordinances subject hereto. 
(n)  Ordinances subject to voluntary assessment. The following ordinances shall be subject to the voluntary assessment agreement procedure set forth in this section: 
(1)  Code sections 54-26 through 54-65, relating to solid waste collection and disposal. 
(2)  Code sections 58-106 through 58-109 relating to snow removal. 
(3)  Code section 54-1, relating to the deposit of grass clippings, leaves, branches and other lawn, garden, tree or shrub waste in the town streets. 
(4)  Code sections 14-26 through 14-35 relating to dogs. 
(5)  Code sections 66-77 through 66-79 relating to loud sound amplification systems in motor vehicles. 
(o)  Violations. Any person who fails to either pay the appropriate fine by the due date or fails to request a hearing by the due date under any voluntary assessment agreement issued by any town police officer or code enforcement official for any violation of the ordinances of the town shall be guilty of a criminal violation and shall be fined, upon conviction, not less than $10.00 nor more than $25.00, plus costs, and, for each subsequent offense, he shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $50.00. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 29, §§ 1-5, Tit. 30; Ord. of 5-6-96(1), § 1; Ord. of 8-5-02, §§ 5, 6) 
Sec. 1-13. - Certain ordinances or resolutions not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance or resolution not in this Code: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the town, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the town or any evidence of the town's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the town. 
(2)  Granting any right or franchise. 
(3)  Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the town. 
(4)  Making any appropriation. 
(5)  Adopting a budget or amending same. 
(6)  Levying or imposing taxes not codified. 
(7)  Establishing or prescribing grades of any street. 
(8)  Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(9)  Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the town. 
(10)  Extending or contracting the boundaries of the town. 
(11)  Prescribing the number, classification, benefits or compensation of any town officers or employees, or any other personnel regulations. 
(12)  Adopting or amending zoning maps or master plans. 
(13)  Prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations. 
(14)  Any ordinance establishing curfew regulations for minors. 
(15)  Which is temporary, although general in effect. 
(16)  Which is special, although permanent in effect. 
(17)  The purpose of which has been accomplished. 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the town clerk's office. 
Sec. 1-14. - Good standing requirements. 
(1-14.1)  Definitions. 
(a)  Applicant. Any person, partnership, LLP, LLC, firm, corporation or other legal entity requesting a town service, a town license or permit, or seeking to engage in business dealings with the town. 
(b)  Business affiliation. A significant business association including by way of example, a parent or subsidiary business entity, a joint venture, or any business management arrangement under which the owners, operators, or managers of one legal entity substantially control another legal entity. 
(c)  Business dealings. Any business arrangement between an applicant and the town, including, but not limited to, any contractual agreement with the town and/or the submission of any bid proposal. 
(d)  Financial interest in. An applicant has a financial interest in another legal entity when it owns in excess of 51 percent of the stock, partnership interests, or equity of such entity. 
(e)  Good standing. A property owner and an applicant shall be in "good standing" where the property owner, the applicant, and any legal entity the applicant has a financial interest in or a business affiliation with, are: 
(1)  Current in the payment of all monies owed to the town, including, but not limited to: 
(i)  Property taxes. 
(ii)  Escrow payments. 
(iii)  Public utility (e.g. electric, water, sewer, trash) charges, and/or connection and/or disconnection charges, etc. 
(iv)  License fees. 
(v)  Permit fees, including building permits, building code and inspection fees. 
(vi)  Liens placed on properties. 
(vii)  Special assessments. 
(viii)  Interest, penalties, court costs and/or attorney's fees if applicable in any of the above listed obligations. 
(2)  Not in breach of any contractual obligation with the town. 
(3)  Not in violation of any town ordinance or regulation. 
(f)  Property owner. The owner of record on the deed validly recorded in the New Castle County or Kent County Office of the Recorder of Deeds for the property where a town service is being requested. 
(g)  Town service. Town services include, but are not limited to: (a) any town permit, license, or approval, including, but not limited to, any site plan or subdivision plan review, a building permit, certificate of occupancy, construction inspection, building code plan review, and/or license, annexation request, connection or installation of utilities, and/or approval of a subdivision, rezoning, conditional use, variance, and/or special exception; and (b) any public utility or other service provided by the town including but not limited to electric, water, sewer, or solid waste removal. 
(1-14.2)  Disclosure requirements. An applicant shall disclose the names of all legal entities or properties in which the applicant has any financial interest or business affiliation with, including any other information necessary to enable the town staff to determine that the applicant is in good standing. The applicant shall disclose all names he/she may have previously used when doing business with or within the town. 
(1-14.3)  Issuance of town approvals dependent on being in good standing. Except as provided in subsection (1-14.8), an applicant and property owner must be in good standing before the applicant or property owner can receive any town service or enter into a business dealing with the town. Good standing shall not be found unless the obligations required for good standing in subsection (1-14.1) have been satisfied in full. Good standing may be found where a binding agreement that is acceptable to the town has been entered into between the town and the applicant and/or property owner for the payment of all outstanding obligations. 
(1-14.4)  Breach of contractual obligations with the town; outstanding violation of town ordinance or regulation. Any applicant that is not in good standing because the applicant (or a legal entity in which the applicant has a financial interest or business affiliation with) is either: (a) in existing breach of a contractual obligation with the town or (b) in existing violation of a town ordinance or regulation and which has not remedied the breach or corrected the violation, pursuant to written notice from the town, within ten business days following the date such notice was mailed or delivered to the applicant or to the legal entity in which the applicant has a financial interest or business affiliation with (or within such additional reasonable time under the circumstances as determined by the town manager), in addition to any other penalties or remedies authorized under any applicable contract, ordinance, or regulation, shall not be permitted to enter into another contract with the town for a period of two years from the date notice of the breach or violation was given unless public necessity, as determined by the town council, requires. 
(1-14.5)  Procedure. 
(a)  All directors and/or supervisors of town departments or their designees responsible for approving business dealings with the town or granting town services shall, before approving such business dealings or town services, make all reasonable efforts to determine that the applicant and the property owner are in good standing. 
(b)  If an applicant or property owner is not in good standing, the director/supervisor shall, in writing, deny the town service or business dealing until the requirements outlined in the written denial necessary for good standing have been satisfied. Failure by the appropriate director/supervisor to issue such written denial within ten business days from the town's receipt of the request for service or to enter into a business dealing with the town shall constitute a determination that the applicant and property owner are in good standing as to the request at issue. 
(c)  Applicants and/or property owners who were initially determined to not be in good standing must have written confirmation from the town director of finance (or his/her designee) indicating that the applicant and/or property owner has satisfied all outstanding obligations or has entered into a binding agreement with the town and is now in good standing before any business dealing or town service requested by the applicant will be approved by the town. 
(d)  Phased development. Where an applicant is a land developer or general contractor with an inventory of development properties within the town and is seeking a town service in order to construct, offer for sale, or sell a residential or commercial lot or building to a first purchaser, the applicant need not be current in the payment of all monies owed to the town, but only in the payment of all monies owed to the town in connection with that specific development phase wherein the lot or building is located; provided that nothing herein shall alter the requirements that such applicant is not in breach of any contractual obligation with the town or that such applicant shall not be in violation of any town ordinance or regulation. 
(1-14.6)  Appeals. Any applicant who receives a written denial of a town service or to enter into a business dealing with the town from a town official may appeal that denial in writing to the town manager within five business days of such denial. The town manager shall thereafter hold a hearing at which said applicant shall be permitted to provide proof that such denial is based on incorrect information or is not appropriate as to that applicant, and that the applicant is in good standing. 
(1-14.7)  Public bidding: Special procedure. Bids for town contracts shall only be awarded to applicants in good standing. Requests for bids published by the town shall indicate that contracts will not be awarded to any applicant not in good standing and recommend that potential applicants promptly request a determination of their good standing prior to submitting a bid. The town will notify an applicant within two business days of receiving a request for determination of good standing and in no event no later than two business days prior to opening the submitted bids if the applicant is not in good standing, and any applicant not in good standing shall cure the default by the date the council awards the bid. Any applicant not in good standing at the time the council awards a bid shall automatically be disqualified from receiving the contract. 
(1-14.8)  Emergency exception. This section shall not apply to a property owner or occupant when the property owner or occupant is requesting town services to remedy an emergency condition substantially affecting the habitability or safety of a structure or equipment on the property, such as, but not limited to, a lack of hot water, heat, water or electricity. The provisions of this section shall in no way affect the requirement that an applicant for a town service that is not a property owner or the occupant of the property must be in good standing to obtain a town service to remedy an emergency condition. 
(Ord. No. 008-09, § 1, 4-5-10) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Powers of town, § 2(b); mayor, town council, § 3; organization of council, § 4; other elective offices, § 5; appointed officers, § 6; police, § 19(a). 
Cross reference- Administration and enforcement of housing code, § 18-66 et seq.; elections, ch. 26; law enforcement, ch. 34; taxation, ch. 62; administration of water and sewer system, § 70-46 et seq.; electric system rules and regulations, § 70-151 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Policies and procedures. 
(a)  All correspondence addressed to the town, its officers, or employees and received at the town hall which is not marked "confidential" to a specific individual, whether delivered by hand, mail, fax, electronic mail, or any other means, shall be opened, date stamped, and classified for distribution to appropriate personnel for action. 
(b)  A copy of all written, printed (including e-mail) communications or correspondence, by whatever means, initiated by any elected official, purporting or appearing to represent the town in any official capacity shall be delivered to the town hall and distributed to all members of council; provided that communications which are subject to the attorney/client privilege shall be handled accordingly. 
(c)  No committee appointed by the mayor and approved by council, and no subcommittee appointed by any such committee, shall include more than three members of council. No member of council shall be deemed to be an "ex-officio" member of any committee or subcommittee to which they were not officially appointed by action of mayor and council or, as applicable, by action of any committee and its chairperson. No member of council who is not a duly appointed member of a committee or subcommittee shall have any right to attend the executive session portion of any meeting held by that committee or subcommittee. 
(d)  No member of the town council or the mayor may at any time request any person employed by the town to perform a work detail or task without going through the town manager or chief of police. 
(e)  No member of the town council or the mayor may request, order, or otherwise imply to an employee of the town that an existing ordinance not be enforced. Employees are hereby directed to report immediately any such communications to the town manager and the town council, in writing. 
(f)  Any member of the town council (including the mayor), the town manager, or the chief of police, shall submit any item to be discussed or acted upon by the town council to the town manager's office as soon as reasonably possible and, in any event, no later than noon of the Thursday prior to the council meeting date so that such item can be included on copies of the agenda distributed to the mayor and council with their briefing packages; provided further, however, that any item for town council discussion or action, legitimately arising or coming to the attention of any member of the foregoing persons subsequent to the noon Thursday deadline shall be submitted to the town manager's office as soon as reasonably possible and in no event less than six hours prior to the time of the meeting, so that such item (s) may be added to the posted agenda as required by section 10004(e)(5) of the Delaware Freedom of Information Act. 
The town manager shall include on the distributed/posted agenda all items submitted for inclusion on the agenda except as advised otherwise by the town solicitor for legal reasons. 
Once listed, no item shall be removed from the agenda without the approval of a majority vote of the town council; provided that nothing herein shall prohibit the town manager's office, at the direction of the person originally requesting the addition of such item to the agenda, from adding a parenthetical note to the posted agenda that a request has since been made to remove such Item from the agenda, as for example: 
V.  New business. 
A.  Amendment to trash ordinance [Councilman Smith has requested that this item be removed from the agenda] 
(g)  Any member of the town council desiring to formally introduce an ordinance at any town council meeting shall first submit his/her proposal to the town manager's office, verbally or in writing, to be placed in draft form and to be reviewed by the town solicitor prior to being placed on the agenda for a first reading; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit: 
(1)  Any member of the council (including the mayor) from contacting the town solicitor in advance to discuss a potential ordinance proposal as to legality, practicality, etc.; or 
(2)  When exigent circumstances require the initial drafting of an ordinance by the town solicitor at or during a council meeting at the direction of a majority of the town council. 
(Ord. of 10-15-01, §§ 1-7; Ord. No. 015-07, § 1, 12-17-07; Ord. No. 001-11, § 1, 2-7-11) 
Editor's note- An Ord. of Oct. 15, 2001, §§ 1-7, did not specifically amend the Code. Hence, its inclusion herein as section 2-1 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 2-2-2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TOWN COUNCIL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-26-2-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ORDINANCE ADOPTION, AMENDMENT AND REPEAL PROCEDURES 

Sec. 2-36. - Amendment or repeal of existing ordinances. 
    No existing ordinance shall hereafter be amended or repealed except by an ordinance specifically amending or repealing the existing ordinance. The adoption of such an ordinance repealing or amending an existing ordinance shall be dealt with as the adoption of a new ordinance, except where otherwise stated in this division. 
(Ord. of 3-6-89, § 1) 
Sec. 2-37. - Preparation of ordinances. 
    Ordinances may be prepared by the town solicitor, by the town manager or by any member of the council, but no ordinance shall be presented for final passage until approved as to form and legality by the town solicitor and by the town manager for administration involved. 
(Ord. of 3-6-89, § 2) 
Sec. 2-38. - Introduction of ordinances. 
    A proposed ordinance must be introduced and sponsored by a member of the council. 
(Ord. of 3-6-89, § 3) 
Sec. 2-39. - Adoption of ordinances. 
(a)  Except as provided under section 2-40, no ordinance shall be adopted by the council on the same day as it is introduced, and all ordinances shall have three separate readings before passage. A reading of an ordinance, for purposes of this division (i.e., first reading, second reading, third reading), shall mean the public reading of the ordinance's title and synopsis (if any), but a reading of the entire text of the ordinance, or any designated portion thereof, may be required by a majority vote of the council at any such reading. Unless referred to a special committee or to the council for a workshop meeting as a committee of the whole (as hereinafter provided) and except as provided in section 2-40, whenever the first or second reading of an ordinance is passed by the town council, that ordinance as passed shall automatically be placed on the agenda for the next succeeding regular meeting of the town council for consideration of its second or third reading, as the case may be; provided, however, that a majority of the entire council may, at any time, vote to table the ordinance indefinitely or to some later date certain, in which case, the ordinance shall not appear again on the council's agenda without the concurrence of a majority of the entire council to place the ordinance back on the agenda, or until the date-certain specified in the earlier motion to table. 
(b)  The first reading shall consist of the introduction of the ordinance by its sponsor during a duly convened meeting of the council at which a quorum is present. Following the introduction of an ordinance by its sponsor, discussion may be had concerning its merits, but no vote shall be taken except under section 2-40. At or before the first reading, a written copy of the proposed ordinance shall be distributed to each member of the council, the town solicitor and the town manager. Any ordinance introduced for a first reading shall be placed on the agenda for the second and third readings at the next two meetings unless a majority of the town council votes to table or postpone those readings to a later meeting. 
(c)  Immediately following its first reading, the proposed ordinance may, but need not be, referred by the mayor with the approval of a majority of the council to either a special committee or to a workshop meeting of the council where the council will serve as a committee of the whole. Such decision shall be made by the mayor with the approval of the majority of the council. The title and synopsis of the ordinance shall be published in the issue of a weekly newspaper of general circulation in the town next following the date of reading and posted at the town hall. Copies of the proposed ordinance shall be made available to the public upon request at the town manager's office. 
(d)  If referred to a special committee or to a committee of the whole, such committee may take such action as it deems appropriate in order to make a recommendation to the council including, but not limited to, advertising, holding public hearings or holding workshop discussions. 
(e)  If referred to a special committee or a committee of the whole, such committee shall report the proposed ordinance back to the council at a duly convened council meeting at which a quorum is present for the second reading within three months of the first reading, unless an earlier time is appointed. The second reading shall be by title and synopsis only. At the second reading, the committee, if one has been appointed, shall make whatever comments or recommendations it deems appropriate and further discussion may be had by the council on the merits of the proposed ordinance. Amendments to the proposed ordinance shall be in order, provided they fall fairly within the title and subject of the ordinance as first introduced. Should any proposed ordinance not come before the council for its second reading within three months of the first reading, it shall expire and cease to have any force or effect as if it had never been introduced at a first reading. 
(f)  The third reading shall be made, by title and synopsis only, at a duly convened meeting of the council at which a quorum is present within three months of the second reading at which time further discussion and final amendments to the proposed ordinance shall be in order, provided they fairly fall within the title and subject of the ordinance as first introduced. Should the proposed ordinance not come back before the council for its third reading within three months of the second reading, it shall expire and cease to have any force or effect as if it had never been introduced at a second reading. Immediately following the third reading, the council shall vote on the ordinance in its final form. 
(Ord. of 3-6-89, § 4) 
Sec. 2-40. - Suspension of rules. 
    Whenever it becomes desirable to adopt or amend a particular ordinance in less than three readings, the procedure set forth in section 2-39 may be suspended by the affirmative vote of at least five councilmembers, provided that the reason for suspending the rules shall be publicly stated and recorded in the minutes. In such case, the proposed ordinance may be enacted at the same meeting at which it was introduced. 
(Ord. of 3-6-89, § 5) 
Sec. 2-41. - Form of ordinance. 
(a)  Each new ordinance shall contain, as a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Title, which shall clearly express the subject of the ordinance. No ordinance shall relate to more than one subject. 
(2)  Enacting clause, stating that the ordinance has been duly adopted by a majority of the entire council duly met. 
(3)  The body of the ordinance. 
(4)  The penalty, if any. 
(5)  The effective date. 
(6)  Authentication by the mayor and secretary. 
(b)  Each amendment to an existing ordinance or the repeal of an existing ordinance shall, in addition to the items listed in subsection (a) of this section, contain the title and section of the ordinance being amended or repealed. 
(Ord. of 3-6-89, § 6) 
Sec. 2-42. - Authentication, recordation and publication. 
(a)  Upon the adoption of any ordinance, the mayor and secretary of the town council shall sign one copy of the ordinance (dated as of its adoption) to authenticate that document as a true and correct record of action taken by the council. 
(b)  The town manager shall perpetually maintain a file of all ordinances passed, repealed or amended by the council, which shall be organized according to Code section number. The original signed copy of the ordinance (referred to in subsection (a) of this section) shall be placed in this file and shall be a conclusive record of the action taken by the council. 
(c)  Except for valid emergencies, no ordinance imposing a fine, civil penalty or other sanction, or amending an ordinance imposing a fine, civil penalty or other sanction, shall be enforceable until the title, synopsis and effective date have been published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation and posted at the town hall for seven calendar days from the date of final adoption. Copies of such ordinance shall be available for inspection upon request at the town hall. The town manager shall note on the bottom margin of the original signed copy the date on which the title, synopsis and effective date was published in a newspaper of general circulation in the town and posted at the town hall. 
(Ord. of 3-6-89, § 7) 
Sec. 2-43. - Exemptions. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision in this division to the contrary, this section shall have no application to the following which are specifically exempt from the terms of this division. 
(a)  Any action by the town council involving the town zoning ordinance, including the adoption, amendment or repeal of the town zoning ordinance or zoning map. 
(b)  Any action adopting, amending or repealing the town subdivision ordinance. 
(c)  Any action to adopt, amend or repeal the town personnel policy. 
(d)  Any resolution by the town council adopted pursuant to section 66-1(b) of the Town Code regarding the placement, removal or modification of any traffic control sign, signal, lane marking and/or electronic device. 
(Ord. of 5-6-96(2), § 2; Ord. of 2-18-97(1), §§ 3-5, 2-18-97) 
Sec. 2-44. - Procedures for internal benefit of council only; strict compliance not required; no standing to challenge noncompliance except by members of council. 
(a)  The purpose of this division is to provide an orderly procedure for the internal convenience and benefit of the town council in adopting, amending or repealing ordinances. Substantial compliance with this division shall be sufficient. The failure of the town council to strictly comply with any or all of the provisions of this division shall not invalidate any ordinance adopted by the town council that is otherwise in compliance with the provisions of the town Charter, nor shall any such noncompliance give any citizen, other than a member of the town council, any right or standing to object to the council's failure to strictly comply with the terms and provisions of this division. 
(b)  Any action by the town council involving the town personnel ordinance, including the adoption, amendment or repeal of any provision of the town personnel ordinance or the modification or revision of any job description, job classification, benefit, pay grade or personnel policy adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. of 3-6-89, § 8; Ord. of 1-3-94, § 1; Ord. of 5-6-96(1), § 1; Ord. of 2-18-97(1), §§ 1, 2) 
Secs. 2-45-2-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PARTICIPATION BY REMOTE ELECTRONIC ACCESS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 013-04, §§ 1-5, adopted July 19, 2004, amended the Code with the addition of a new division 2 to article II. In order to avoid duplication of division numbers, the provisions of said ordinance have been included herein as division 3, sections 2-51-2-55, at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 2-51. - Participation by remote electronic access. 
    Any member of the town council may participate in any meeting (regular or special) of the town council (including the making or seconding of any motion and the casting of a vote on any motion) by remote electronic access (including, by way of example, a speaker telephone or video-conferencing equipment) if unavoidable circumstances prevent that individual from being physically present at such meeting, subject to the remaining provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 013-04, § 1, 7-19-04) 
Sec. 2-52. - Conditions necessary. 
    No member of the town council shall be authorized or allowed to participate in or cast a vote at a meeting of the town council by remote electronic access unless: 
(1)  There is physically present in the place where the meeting is being held a sufficient number of members of the town council to constitute a quorum thereof; 
(2)  The meeting is being presided over by a member of the town council who is physically present at the place where the meeting is being held; 
(3)  All persons present at the place of the meeting (including members of the public in attendance) can hear and speak to the person(s) participating by remote electronic access, and the person(s) participating through remote electronic access can hear and speak to all persons present at the place of the meeting, and to any other individual participating in the meeting by remote electronic access; 
(4)  Not more than two members of the town council are seeking to participate by remote electronic access; 
(5)  Notice of intent to participate by remote electronic access shall have been provided or waived in accordance with section 2-53; 
(6)  The member(s) participating in the meeting by remote access are in continuous communication with those present at the meeting throughout the entire meeting; provided however, no member's participation or vote by remote access during any portion of the meeting shall be invalidated due to loss of communication subsequent to such participation or vote if loss of communication is due to technical difficulties beyond the control of such member(s). 
(Ord. No. 013-04, § 2, 7-19-04) 
Sec. 2-53. - Notice of intent to participate by remote electronic access. 
    Any member of the town council desiring to participate at a meeting of the town council by remote electronic access shall notify the town manager's office of such intent (including the reason for being unavoidably unable to be physically present at the meeting) as soon as reasonably possible, but in no event less than eight hours prior to the time scheduled for the meeting in order to allow the town manager to make the communications facilities and arrangements necessary to enable remote electronic participation and to allow the town manager to update the posted agenda to indicate that such member of the town council will be participating by remote electronic access, and the reason therefore. Any person failing to provide such eight hours' prior notice shall not be authorized to participate in the meeting by remote electronic access (unless, by unanimous vote of those physically present at the commencement of the meeting, the town council waives such eight-hour notice). 
(Ord. No. 013-04, § 3, 7-19-04) 
Sec. 2-54. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this division, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
    Town council shall mean all members of the town council, including the mayor. 
    Unavoidable circumstances preventing a member of the town council from being physically present shall mean circumstances which a reasonable person of average intelligence and understanding would, based upon his or her life experience, view as circumstances which would reasonably justify an individual's being unable to be physically present at a meeting. By way of example and not in limitation, unavoidable circumstances would include a significant illness requiring a doctor's care and confining a person to his/her home or hospital; absence from the state due to a obligations and commitments related to an individual's employment or business; absence from the state due to a obligations and commitments related to town business or other public office; or absence from the state due to personal commitments (including extended vacations). 
(Ord. No. 013-04, § 4, 7-19-04) 
Sec. 2-55. - Town council not to act as judge; remedy for abuse. 
    The town council shall not have any duty pass upon the reason(s) given for any individual's being unavoidably unable to be physically present at the meeting, nor any right to refuse to allow such participation and voting on account of the perceived inadequacy of such reasons, provided that the other provisions of this division are complied with. In the event that a majority of the town council concludes that the purpose and intent of this division is being abused and that individuals who could be physically present at town council meetings are making improper use of this division, the town council may repeal or amend this division as it deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 013-04, § 5, 7-19-04) 
Secs. 2-56-2-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FINANCE[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Town finances, § 10. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-66. - Payment of municipal obligations in coins. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Municipal obligation shall include any and all amounts due to the town by any legal entity for any reason whatsoever including, by way of example and not in limitation, electric bills, water and sewer bills, grass cutting bills, town taxes, fines and municipal assessments. 
(b)  Town's authority to refuse payment. The town, its officers, agents and employees are hereby authorized and empowered to refuse payment of any municipal obligation in coins unless the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Any number of coins of the same denomination in sufficient quantity to constitute a standard roll of such coins shall be properly rolled in properly marked coin wrappers. Such wrappers shall indicate name, address, telephone number and date by the person tendering same. 
(2)  In no event shall the town be required to accept more than ten rolls of a specific denomination of coin, not exceeding an aggregate amount of 20 rolls of coins. 
(c)  Town's authority to accept payment. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the town, its officers, agents and employees may, where convenient or to the town's advantage, accept payment in rolled coins in excess of the quantities stated above. 
(d)  Town's authority to proceed with collection upon refusal of payment. Where payment of any amount is refused by the town under the authority granted by this section, such tender of payment shall be void and of no force or effect and the town shall be entitled to proceed as if no tender of payment had been made. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 40, § 3) 
Sec. 2-67. - Capital program and capital budget. 
(1)  Prior to the passage of the annual operating budget, the council shall adopt a capital program and a capital budget. 
(2)  The capital program shall embrace all physical public improvements and any preliminary studies and surveys relative thereto, the acquisition of property of a permanent nature, and the purchase of equipment for any public improvement when first erected or acquired that are to be financed in whole or in part from funds subject to control or appropriation by the council. It shall show the capital expenditures which are planned for each of five ensuing fiscal years. For each separate purpose, project, facility or other property there shall be shown the amount, if any, and the source of the money that has been spent, encumbered or is intended to be spent or encumbered prior to the beginning of the ensuing fiscal year and also the amount(s) and the source(s) of the money that is intended to be spent during each of the ensuing five years. 
The council may delete projects from the capital program as submitted to it, but it shall not otherwise amend the capital program until it has requested through the mayor the recommendations of the town's Long Range Planning Committee. The council shall not be bound by such recommendations and may act without them if they are not received within 30 days from the date they were requested. 
(3)  The capital budget ordinance shall show in detail the capital expenditures intended to be made or incurred in the ensuing fiscal year that are to be financed from funds subject to control or appropriation by the council, and shall be in full conformity with that part of the capital program applicable to the year which it covers. Amounts specified as intended to be spent out of new appropriations shall, upon enactment of the capital budget, constitute appropriations of such amounts. 
The council may amend the capital budget, but no amendment shall be valid which does not conform to the capital program. 
(Ord. No. 006-12, § 2, 7-16-12) 
Sec. 2-68. - Capital improvements funds. 
(a)  The town manager shall be authorized to approve expenditures in all line items (except as outlined in subsection (c) and (d) below in this section) contained in the approved budget unless further modifications are made by council during the budget year. 
(b)  The town manager shall only approve expenses in the park program expense line item after the parks and recreation committee has voted to approve the program. 
(c)  The mayor shall approve all expenses from the mayor's discretionary fund line item. 
(d)  The town manager and police chief shall be authorized to maintain the level of employees outlined in the staffing charts attached to this section. No other persons shall become employed by the town unless the position is specifically approved by council. The reductions to approved positions shall not be interpreted to remove any current people employed with the town, however the intent is to not refill any positions which are not within the approved staffing chart levels. This shall not be interpreted to prohibit the following: 
(1)  Hiring of temporary employees to fill vacancies from departing employees within the budgeted amounts. 
(2)  Hiring of part-time inmates through the department of corrections. 
(3)  Hiring of temporary part-time employees for the recreational basketball league. 
(Ord. of 12-20-93(1), §§ 1-5; Ord. of 12-2-02(1), §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 006-12, § 1, 7-16-12) 
Sec. 2-69. - Control of finances; town manager. 
(a)  The town manager shall be responsible to administer all funds of the town. The town manager shall be responsible to prepare and present the annual budget to the mayor and council after having met with the heads of the public works, electric, business and police departments. 
(b)  The police chief will be responsible to submit in writing or appear in person to propose to the budget committee any amendments to the town manager's budget proposal. 
(c)  The town manager will be responsible to then explain and predict the financial impacts of the police chief's proposed amendments to the budget committee. 
(d)  The town manager shall be responsible to monitor and have fiscal control of all expenses of the town and report findings to the town council on a monthly basis. 
(e)  Interest earned on meter deposit account (advance pay) shall be placed in the electric department as a revenue account. The amount of interest budgeted each year is to be calculated at one percent below the average return on town invested funds. 
(f)  All funds donated to the library are to be added to the library trust fund unless there are specific conditions placed on the donation by the donor. 
All funds currently in the library trust fund and future funds added to the library trust fund are to be sheltered from principal spending. Fifty percent of the interest earned on these funds is to be placed in the annual budget beginning in 1998 to partially fund capital expenses in the library. The amount of interest budgeted is to be calculated at one percent below the average return on town invested funds. 
(Ord. of 12-20-93(2), §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 4-25-95(1), §§ 1-3; Ord. of 3-16-98(1), §§ 2, 3; Ord. of 12-21-98, § 1; Ord. of 12-2-02(1), §§ 3, 4; Ord. No. 006-12, § 1, 7-16-12) 
Sec. 2-70. - Budget reserve account. 
(a)  The town hereby establishes a budget reserve account. The budget reserve account shall be reflected as a separate account on the balance sheet in the general fund. 
(b)  The budget reserve account will be $3,000,000.00 or ten percent of the general fund operating budget (excluding extraordinary or one-time items), whichever is greater. 
(c)  This account will be invested according to the town's investment policy. 
(d)  This account will be used for unexpected contingencies which are of an unusual and/or abnormal nature. For example: The account can be used for, but that use is not limited to, the town's share of large property losses due to natural or manmade disasters like a hurricane, fires, flood damage, ice storm or any other extraordinary event. 
(e)  This account may be used, if needed, for upfront expenses related to repairs, restoration and replacement of buildings, equipment and other items to restore service to the customers of the town when the reimbursements from other sources such as grants, cost-share, insurance, etc. may take time. 
    The receipts from grantors such as the state, county or federal government or other parties, if any, or any other source will be deposited into this account to restore the account. 
(f)  The money from the budget reserve account can only be expended by the town upon the approval of five members of the town council voting in favor of doing so. 
(g)  The town manager will report the balance and interest earned in this account to the budget committee and to the town council every month as a note in the monthly financial report. 
(h)  As part of the town's audit, this account shall be audited by the town's independent auditors every year. 
(Ord. of 12-2-02(1); Ord. No. 036-03, §§ 1, 2, 12-15-03; Ord. No. 007-08, § 1, 4-7-08; Ord. No. 006-12, § 1, 7-16-12; Ord. No. 006-13, § 1, 10-21-13) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 036-03, §§ 1, 2, adopted Dec. 15, 2003, repealed section 2-69 in its entirety and renumbered section 2-70 as new section 2-69. Former section 2-69 pertained to retiree benefits review, and derived from Ord. of March 16, 1998(1), § 1. 
Sec. 2-71. - Use of third-party collection agency. 
    Any amounts owed to the town including, but not limited to, real property taxes, mobile home permit fees, usage and service fees for water, sewer, and electric services, grass and weed cutting fees, sidewalk repair fees, and engineering fees that have not been paid by the due date outlined in the Town Code, Town Charter, or on the corresponding invoice are a debt owed to the town, and the town may forward the collection of the delinquent accounts (including all authorized penalties and interest) to a third-party collection agency. The cost of the third-party collection agency shall be added to the past due amounts on the delinquent account, which collection cost amount shall not exceed 15 percent of the total amount owed to the town (including all authorized penalties and interest). At least seven days prior to forwarding a delinquent account to a third-party collection agency, if the town has reason to believe the property owner or holder of the delinquent account still resides at the property in question, the town shall send written notice that failure to pay the outstanding amounts will result in the town forwarding the account to a collection agency. The town may satisfy this notice requirement by providing written notice in the original invoice sent to the property owner or account holder. 
(Ord. No. 004-15, § 5, 4-20-15) 
Secs. 2-72-2-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CLAIMS AGAINST TOWN AND EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 2-76. - Indemnification of officers for financial obligations in connection with legal proceedings. 
(a)  The town shall indemnify, from the general funds of the town's treasury, to the extent not otherwise covered by appropriate insurance, any person who is a party to or is threatened to be made a party to any threatened, pending or completed action, suit or proceedings, whether civil, criminal, administrative or investigative (other than an action by or in the right of the town itself) by reason of the fact that he is or was a councilmember, mayor or other duly elected or appointed town official, or arising out of actions taken by each or any of them in connection with the performance of their official duties, against expenses (including attorney's fees), judgments, fines and amounts paid in settlement, actually and reasonably incurred by him in connection with such action, suit or proceeding if he acted in good faith and in a manner he reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the best interests of the town, and, with respect to any criminal action or proceeding, had no reasonable cause to believe his conduct was unlawful. The termination of any action, suit or proceeding by judgment, order, settlement, conviction or upon a plea of nolo contendere or its equivalent shall not, of itself, create a presumption that the person did not act in good faith and in a manner which he reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the best interests of the town, and with respect to any criminal action or proceeding had reasonable cause to believe that his conduct was unlawful. In the event of a monetary settlement, the town council shall first approve the amount and terms of the settlement before the right to indemnification shall vest. 
(b)  Indemnification as provided in this section shall be made by the town only as authorized in the specific case upon a determination that indemnification of the councilmember, mayor and/or town officer is proper in the circumstances because he met the applicable standards of conduct set forth in subsection (a) of this section. Such determination shall be made: 
(1)  By a majority vote of a quorum of the town council consisting of councilmembers who were not parties to such action, suit or proceeding; or 
(2)  If such a quorum is not obtainable, by independent legal counsel in a written opinion. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 64) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 10 Del. C. § 4002; indemnification permitted if political subdivision's governing body so provides, 10 Del. C. § 4003. 
Sec. 2-77. - Notice to town prerequisite to maintaining action on tort claim. 
(a)  No person, joint venture, association, partnership, corporation, trust, guardian or other legal entity acting on its own behalf or on behalf of any other legal entity shall institute or file any lawsuit, legal action or claim seeking recovery of damages grounded in tort, in any court of law or equity, in this or any other state, against the town, its elected or appointed officials or any of its employees, as defined in 10 Del. C. § 4010(a), unless notice of the occurrence forming the basis of the claim or action is given to the town within one year of the date of occurrence. 
(b)  Such notice shall be in writing and shall be delivered to the town manager at the town hall. The notice shall particularly describe the occurrence and the nature of the claim, shall state the date and place of the occurrence, and the name and address of each claimant for whom the notice is being given. Such notice shall be deemed to be a condition precedent to the filing of suit and failure to provide such notice within one year of the date of the occurrence shall be an absolute defense against any such claim, action or suit. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 61, § 2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, authority to enact notice requirement, 10 Del. C. § 4013(c). 
Secs. 2-78-2-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ORGANIZATIONAL MEETING; BRIEFING AND PLANNING PROCEDURE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- An Ord. of Feb. 20, 2001(1) amended the Code with the addition of division 3, sections 2-66-2-68. In order to avoid duplication of sections, the provisions of said ordinance have been included herein as division 3, sections 2-91-2-93 at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 2-91. - Briefing concerning town's yearly plans, projects and goals. 
At  the organizational meeting held each year following the annual election, the town manager shall, in order to inform each member of the council of the town's goals, plans and projects for the year, provide to each member of the town council a copy of the following: 
(1)  Approved current year budget; 
(2)  Listing of council approved priorities from last year; 
(3)  Capital improvement plan (current year through year five); 
(4)  Employee plan (current year through year five); 
(5)  Street paving plan (current year through year three); 
(6)  Listing of approved projects, status report on each project and the council-approved committed funding source for each project; and 
(7)  Notice of requiring motions expending monies to identify funding source. 
(Ord. of 2-20-01(1)) 
Sec. 2-92. - Town council's adoption of plans and priorities. 
    At the next regularly scheduled meeting of the town council following the organizational meeting referred to above, the town council shall adopt each of the following, subject to such amendments or revisions the council deems appropriate: 
(1)  Council priorities; 
(2)  Capital improvement plan (current year through year five); 
(3)  Employee plan (current year through year five); and 
(4)  Street paving plan (current year through year three). 
(Ord. of 2-20-01(1)) 
Sec. 2-93. - Plans and priorities subject to change. 
    The plans and priorities adopted by council pursuant to section 2-92 may be amended by majority vote of the council at any time to revise, add to, or delete any item(s) identified on such plan(s) or priority list, but unless and until so revised, the plan(s) and priority list last approved shall guide the town's efforts to achieve town goals. 
(Ord. of 2-20-01(1)) 
ARTICLE IV. - PERSONNEL (RESERVED) 

Secs. 2-94-2-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CODE OF CONDUCT 
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-200. - Applicability; statement of policy. 
(a)  Applicability. This article shall be applicable to all elected and appointed officials and all employees of the town. 
(b)  Statement of policy. The proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials and employees be independent, impartial, and responsible to the people; that governmental decisions and policies are made in the proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public has confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, there is hereby established a code of conduct for all town employees and officials. The purpose of this code of conduct is to establish ethical standards of conduct for all such officials and employees by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interests of the town and by directing disclosure by such officials and employees of private financial or other interests in matters affecting the town. The town council finds and declares as matters of public policy goals and objectives for all elected and appointed officials and all employees of the town, the following: 
(1)  Public trust. In our democratic form of government, the conduct of officials and employees of the town must hold the respect and confidence of the people. They must, therefore, avoid conduct which is in violation of their public trust or which creates a justifiable impression among the public that such trust is being violated. 
(2)  Standards. To ensure propriety and to preserve public confidence, officials and employees of the town must have the benefit of specific standards to guide their conduct and disciplinary mechanisms to guarantee uniform maintenance of those standards. Some standards of this type are so vital to government that violation thereof should subject the violator to civil penalties. 
(3)  Public service. In our democratic form of government, it is both necessary and desirable that all citizens should be encouraged to assume public office and employment, and that, therefore, the activities of officers and employees of the town should not be unduly circumscribed. 
(4)  Performance of duty. 
a.  Elected town officials are obligated to uphold the fundamental legal principles of our system of government, as set forth in the United States Constitution, the state constitution, and the Town Charter, as well as all applicable provisions of federal, state and local law and court decisions. They are bound to do so, and the failure to so act shall constitute malfeasance in office. 
b.  All officials and employees of the town should be loyal to the objectives expressed by the electorate and the programs developed to attain those objectives. Appointive officials and employees should adhere to the rules of work and performance established as the standard for their positions by appropriate authority. 
c.  Officials and employees should not exceed their authority or breach the law or ask others to do so, and they should work in full cooperation with other public officials and employees unless prohibited from doing so by law or by officially recognized confidentiality of their work. 
(5)  Fairness. Town officials and employees shall strive for the highest standard of fairness in all of their activities and shall not grant any special consideration, treatment, or advantage to any citizen beyond that which is available to every other citizen. 
(6)  Use of private information. In the course of their official responsibilities, town officials and employees are often privy to categories of information which are of a private nature and are legally protected from public disclosure. Town officials and employees shall maintain the privacy of such information, and they shall not take advantage of such information for personal gain, or the personal gain of friends or family. 
(Ord. No. 021-06, § 1, 11-6-06) 
Sec. 2-201. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Close relative means a person's parents, spouse, children (natural or step or adopted), and siblings of the whole and half-blood. 
    Commission and ethics commission mean the town ethics commission as established by this article. 
    Compensation means any money, thing of value, or any other economic benefit of any kind or nature whatsoever conferred on or received by any person in return for services rendered or to be rendered by the official or employee, or by another. 
    Employee includes all persons who receive compensation as an employee of the town or a town department, and shall not include persons that are elected or appointed to serve as mayor, town councilmember or a member of any town committee, commission or board, whether paid or unpaid. 
    Financial interest. A person has financial interest in a private enterprise if: 
(1)  He has a legal or equitable ownership interest in the enterprise of more than ten percent (one percent or more in the case of a corporation the stock of which is regularly traded on an established securities market); 
(2)  He is associated with the enterprise and received from the enterprise during the last calendar year, or might reasonably be expected to receive from the enterprise during the current or the next calendar year, income in excess of $5,000.00 for services as an employee, officer, director, trustee, or independent contractor; or 
(3)  He is a creditor of a private enterprise in an amount equal to ten percent or more of the debt of that enterprise (one percent or more in the case of a corporation the securities of which are regularly traded on an established securities market). 
    Gender Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
    Matter means an application, petition, request, business dealing, contract, subcontract, or any other transaction of any sort with the town. 
    Official means any elected or appointed official of the town and all members of any committee, commission or board appointed by the mayor of the town or appointed by the town council. 
    Official responsibility means any direct administrative or operating authority at any level, either exercisable alone or with others, either personally or through subordinates, to approve, disapprove, recommend or otherwise direct action on behalf of the town. 
    Personal or private interest means an interest in a matter which tends to impair the independent judgment of an official or employee in the performance of his duties with respect to that matter. 
    Private enterprise means any activity conducted by any person, whether conducted for profit or not for profit, and includes the ownership of real or personal property. The term "private enterprise" does not include any activity of the town, of any political subdivision, or of any agency, authority, or instrumentality thereof. 
(Ord. No. 021-06, § 1, 11-6-06) 
Sec. 2-202. - Prohibitions relating to conflicts of interest. 
(a)  Restrictions on exercise of official authority. 
(1)  Prohibited participation. No town official or employee may participate on behalf of the town in the review or disposition of any matter pending before the town in which he has a personal or private interest, provided that, upon request from any person with official responsibility with respect to the matter, any such person who has such a personal or private interest may nevertheless respond to questions concerning any such matter. A personal or private interest in a matter is an interest which tends to impair a person's independence of judgment in the performance of his duties with respect to that matter. 
(2)  Impairment of judgment. A person has an interest which tends to impair his independence of judgment in the performance of his duties with respect to any matter when: 
a.  Any action or inaction with respect to the matter would result in a financial benefit or detriment to accrue to the person or a close relative to a greater extent than such benefit or detriment would accrue to others who are members of the same class or group of persons; or 
b.  The person or a close relative has a financial interest in a private enterprise which enterprise or interest would be affected by any action or inaction on a matter to a lesser or greater extent than like enterprises or other interests in the same enterprise. 
(3)  Statutory responsibility. In any case where a person has a statutory responsibility with respect to action or inaction on any matter where he has a personal or private interest and there is no provision for the delegation of such responsibility to another person, the person may exercise responsibility with respect to such matter, provided that, promptly after becoming aware of such conflict of interest, he files a written statement with the ethics commission, fully disclosing the personal or private interest and explaining why it is not possible to delegate responsibility for the matter to another person. 
(b)  Restrictions on representing another's interest before the town. 
(1)  Prohibited. No town official or employee may represent or otherwise assist any private enterprise with respect to any matter before the town. 
(2)  Exception. This subsection (b) shall not preclude any town official or employee from appearing before the town or otherwise assisting any private enterprise with respect to any matter in the exercise of his official duties. 
(c)  Restriction on contracting with the town. 
(1)  Prohibited. No town official or employee shall benefit from any contract with the town, nor solicit any contract, and shall not enter into any contract with the town (other than an employment contract). 
(2)  Ownership of enterprise. No private enterprise in which a town official or employee has a legal or equitable ownership of more than ten percent (more than one percent in the case of a corporation the stock of which is regularly traded on an established securities market) shall enter into any contract with the town (other than an employment contract) unless such contract was made or let after public notice and competitive bidding. 
(d)  Post employment restrictions. No person who has served as a town official or employee shall represent or otherwise assist any private enterprise on any matter involving the town, for a period of two years after termination of his elected or appointed status or employment with the town, if he gave an opinion, conducted an investigation or otherwise was directly and materially responsible for such matter in the course of his official duties as a town employee or official, nor shall any former town official or employee disclose confidential information gained by reason of his public position, nor shall he otherwise use such information for personal gain or benefit. 
(e)  Unauthorized disclosure of confidential information. No person shall disclose any information required to be maintained confidential by the ethics commission under section 2-203(d), 2-204(b) or 2-207. 
(f)  Abuse of office. 
(1)  Political contributions. No elected town official shall agree to sponsor legislation, or to influence in any manner the formulation or passage of legislation, in exchange for political contributions or promises thereof. 
(2)  Substantial interest. No elected town official shall vote for, or promote in any manner whatsoever, legislation affecting any subject matter in which he has a substantial interest. Any such interest shall be disclosed by said elected official prior to a vote on any such legislation, and said elected official shall vote "abstain" when called upon to vote. 
(3)  Use of town property. No town official or employee shall request or permit the use of town-owned vehicles, equipment, materials, or property for personal convenience or profit, except when such services are available to the public generally or are provided for the use of such official or employee in the conduct of official business as a matter of town policy. 
(4)  Personal gain. No town official or employee shall utilize the influence of his office or position for personal pecuniary gain, or to avoid the legal consequences of his personal conduct. 
(g)  Civil penalties. Any person who knowingly or willfully violates any provision of this section shall be punishable for each such violation by a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000.00. 
(h)  Contracts voidable by court action. In addition to any other penalty provided by law, any contract entered into by the town in violation of this chapter shall be voidable by the town council; provided that in determining whether any court action should be taken to void such a contract pursuant to this subsection, the town council shall consider the interests of innocent third parties who may be damaged thereby. Any court action to void any transaction must be initiated within 30 days after the town council has, or should have, knowledge of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 021-06, § 1, 11-6-06) 
Sec. 2-203. - Established. 
(a)  Appearance of violation. Each town official and employee shall endeavor to pursue a course of conduct which will not raise suspicion among the public that he is engaging in acts which are in violation of his public trust and which will not reflect unfavorably upon the town and its government. 
(b)  Private interest; gifts. No town official or employee shall have any interest in any private enterprise, nor shall be incur any obligation of any nature which is in substantial conflict with the proper performance of his duties in the public interest. No town official or employee shall accept other employment, any compensation, gift, payment of expenses or any other thing of monetary value under circumstances in which such acceptance may result in any of the following: 
(1)  Impairment of independence of judgment in the exercise of official duties; 
(2)  An undertaking to give preferential treatment to any person; 
(3)  The making of a governmental decision outside official channels; or 
(4)  Any adverse effect on the confidence of the public in the integrity of the government of the town. 
(c)  Interest in private enterprise. No town official or employee shall acquire a financial interest in any private enterprise which he has reason to believe may be directly involved in decisions to be made by him in an official capacity on behalf of the town. 
(d)  Disclosure statement. Any town official or employee who has a financial interest in any private enterprise which is subject to the regulatory jurisdiction of, or does business with, any town department (and any town official who has a financial interest in any private enterprise which is subject to the regulatory jurisdiction of, or does business with, the town department on which he serves as an appointee) shall file with the ethics commission a written statement fully disclosing the same. Such disclosure shall be confidential and the ethics commission shall not release such disclosed information, except as may be necessary for the enforcement of this article. The filing of such disclosure statement shall be a condition of commencing and continuing employment or appointed status with the town. 
(e)  Private gain. No town official or employee shall use his public office to secure unwarranted privileges, private advancement or gain. 
(f)  Confidential information; prohibited activity. No town official or employee shall engage in any activity beyond the scope of his public position which might reasonably be expected to require or induce him to disclose confidential information acquired by him by reason of his public position. 
(g)  Disclosure of information. No town official or employee shall, beyond the scope of his public position, disclose confidential information gained by reason of his public position, nor shall he otherwise use such information for personal gain or benefit. 
(h)  Sexual favors. No town official or employee, in the course of his public responsibilities, shall use the granting of sexual favors as a condition, either explicit or implicit, for an individual's favorable treatment by that person or a town department. 
(Ord. No. 021-06, § 1, 11-6-06) 
Sec. 2-204. - Waivers of restrictions and advisory opinions. 
(a)  Authority of ethics commission. Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 2-202 and 2-203, upon the written request of any town department or of any individual who is or was a town employee or town official, the ethics commission may grant a waiver to the specific prohibitions contained therein if the ethics commission determines that the literal application of such prohibition in a particular case is not necessary to achieve the public purposes of this chapter or would result in an undue hardship on any employee or official. Any such waiver may be granted only by written decision of the ethics commission. Any person who acts in good faith reliance upon any such waiver decision shall not be subject to discipline or other sanction hereunder with respect to the matters covered by the waiver decision, provided there was a full disclosure to the ethics commission of all material facts necessary for the waiver decision. 
(b)  Waiver information confidential; exceptions. Any application for a waiver, any proceeding and any decision with respect thereto shall be maintained confidential by the ethics commission, provided that: 
(1)  Applicant's request. Public disclosure shall be made by the ethics commission upon the written request of the applicant; 
(2)  Violations. The ethics commission may make such public disclosure as it determines is required in connection with the prosecution of any violation of this chapter; 
(3)  Evidence of crime. The ethics commission shall report to appropriate federal, state and/or town authorities substantial evidence of any criminal violation which may come to its attention; and 
(4)  Public record. In the event that a waiver is granted, the waiver decision and the record of all proceedings relating thereto shall be open to public inspection. 
(c)  Advisory opinion authorized. Upon the written request of any town official or employee, the ethics commission may issue an advisory opinion as to the applicability of this chapter to any particular fact or situation. Any person who acts in good faith reliance upon any such advisory opinion shall not be subject to discipline or other sanction hereunder with respect to the matters covered by the advisory opinion, provided there was a full disclosure to the ethics commission of all material facts necessary for the advisory opinion. 
(d)  Advisory opinion confidential; exceptions. Any application for an advisory opinion, any proceeding and any decision with respect thereto shall be maintained confidential by the ethics commission, provided that: 
(1)  Applicant's request. Public disclosure shall be made by the ethics commission upon the written request of the applicant; 
(2)  Violations. The ethics commission may make such public disclosure as it determines is required in connection with the prosecution of any violation of this article; and 
(3)  Evidence of crime. The ethics commission shall report to appropriate federal, state and/or town authorities substantial evidence of any criminal violation which may come to its attention. 
(Ord. No. 021-06, § 1, 11-6-06) 
DIVISION 2. - ETHICS COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-205. - Established; composition; removal; terms of office; vacancies; chairperson; quorum; compensation; legal counsel. 
(a)  Established; composition; removal. The town ethics commission is hereby established to administer and implement this chapter. The ethics commission shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the town council. No member of the commission shall hold any elected or appointed office under the government of the United States or the state, county, or town, or be a candidate for any such office. Members of the ethics commission may be removed by the mayor, with the concurrence of the town council, for substantial neglect of duty, gross misconduct in office or a violation of this chapter. 
(b)  Terms of office; vacancies. A member of the ethics commission shall be appointed for a term of office of five years. The members shall be appointed for staggered terms of office and shall continue to serve until their successors have been appointed. When a vacancy occurs in the membership of the ethics commission, it shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired portion of the term in the same manner as the original appointment. 
(c)  Chairperson; quorum. The ethics commission shall elect a chairperson from among its membership. Three members of the ethics commission shall constitute a quorum and, if a quorum is present, a vacancy on the ethics commission shall not impair the right of the remaining members to exercise all the powers of the ethics commission. Disciplinary hearings may be conducted and sanctions may be imposed only by the affirmative action of at least three members; otherwise, the ethics commission may delegate authority to the chairperson to act for the ethics commission between meetings. 
(d)  Compensation. Members of the ethics commission shall receive no compensation. 
(e)  Legal counsel. The town solicitor shall provide legal counsel to the ethics commission and shall be the legal representative of the ethics commission in connection with its duties hereunder, on a case-by-case basis, or determine that outside counsel is needed and obtain such outside counsel for a particular matter. 
(Ord. No. 021-06, § 1, 11-6-06) 
Sec. 2-206. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The powers and duties of the ethics commission shall be: 
(1)  Rules of conduct. To recommend to the mayor and council, from time to time, such rules of conduct for public employees and officials as it shall deem appropriate. 
(2)  Advisory opinions. To issue written advisory opinions, upon the request of any town employee or official, as to the applicability of this article to any particular factual situation. 
(3)  Referrals to solicitor. To refer to the town solicitor for investigation any alleged violation of this article and, after notice and hearing, to recommend such disciplinary action as it may deem appropriate to such appropriate official or department as the ethics commission shall determine, or to take such other disciplinary action as authorized by section 2-207(d) or other provisions of the Town Charter or this Code. The ethics commission may dismiss, without reference to the town solicitor, any complaint which the ethics commission determines is frivolous or fails to state a violation. 
(4)  Report of crimes. To report to the appropriate federal, state or town authorities any substantial evidence of a violation of any criminal law which may come to its attention in connection with any proceeding, whether advisory or disciplinary. 
(5)  Records. To maintain a file of its proceedings, waiver decisions and advisory opinions with a view toward achieving consistency of opinions and recommendations subject to the confidentiality requirements of sections 2-205(d) and 2-207(h). 
(6)  Procedures. To make, adopt, and publish rules of procedure in accordance with section 2-207 which may, from time to time, be amended by action of the commission. 
(7)  Witnesses, evidence. To subpoena witnesses, compel their attendance and testimony, administer oaths and affirmations, take evidence and require, by subpoena, the production of books, papers, records or other evidence needed for the performance of the ethics commission's duties or exercise of its powers. 
(8)  Assistance to town personnel. To provide assistance to any town employee, official or department in administering the provisions of this article. 
(9)  Provide information. To prepare any necessary reports and studies to advance the purpose of this article, to provide any necessary materials explaining the duties of individuals covered by this article, and to supply instructions and public information materials to facilitate compliance with, and enforcement of, this article. 
(10)  Request town departments for assistance. To request appropriate town departments to provide such professional assistance as it may require in the discharge of its duties. 
(Ord. No. 021-06, § 1, 11-6-06) 
Sec. 2-207. - Complaints; hearings; dispositions. 
(a)  Investigation of violations. Upon the sworn complaint of any person or on its own initiative, the ethics commission may refer to the town solicitor for investigation, any alleged violation of the conflict of interest provisions and of the code of conduct provisions in sections 2-202 and 2-203, respectively. The town solicitor shall be the prosecuting attorney in all disciplinary proceedings before the ethics commission. In any such investigation or proceeding, a defendant shall be given an opportunity to be heard after notice, to be advised and assisted by legal counsel, to produce witnesses and offer evidence, and to cross examine witnesses. A transcript of any such proceeding shall be made and retained, subject to the confidentiality requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Proceeding relating to member. A member of the ethics commission shall be ineligible to participate, as a member of the ethics commission, in any ethics commission proceeding relating to his conduct. A member of the ethics commission who has been found by the ethics commission to have violated this chapter shall be ineligible to serve again as a member of the ethics commission. 
(c)  Self-disqualification. A member of the ethics commission may disqualify himself from participating in any investigation of the conduct of any person upon submission, in writing and under oath, of an affidavit or disqualification stating that he cannot render an impartial and unbiased decision in the case in which he seeks to disqualify himself. 
(d)  Effect of violations of the code conduct . Violation of any provision of the code of conduct should raise questions of conscience for the council member or other official or employee concerned as to whether voluntary resignation or other action is indicated to promote the best interest of the town. With respect to any violation with which a person has been charged and which the ethics commission has determined as proved, the violation may constitute a cause to take any one or more of the following actions: 
(1)  Reprimand. Issue a written reprimand or censure of that person's conduct. 
(2)  Discipline. With respect to a town employee, remove, suspend, demote or take other appropriate disciplinary action with respect to that person, without regard to any limits imposed by this chapter, but within the limits of the constitution, the laws of the state, the Charter of the town, and ordinances and existing collective bargaining agreements. 
(3)  Recommend removal. With respect to an appointed official, recommend that appropriate action be taken to remove the official from the appointed position. 
(4)  Recommend civil penalty. With respect to an elected town official, recommend a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000.00. 
(e)  Rights of person charged. In any proceeding before the ethics commission, upon the request of any person charged with a violation of this chapter, such person shall be permitted to inspect, copy or photograph books, papers, documents, photographs or other tangible objects which will be used as evidence against that person in a disciplinary hearing and which are material to the preparation of his defense. 
(f)  Exculpatory information. In any proceeding before the ethics commission, if the town solicitor or ethics commission at any time receives any exculpatory information concerning an alleged violation against any person, it shall forthwith make such information available to such person. 
(g)  Subpoenas. Any person charged with a violation of this chapter may apply to the ethics commission for the issuance of subpoenas for the appearance of witnesses and for the production of documents on his behalf. The application shall be granted upon a concise showing by such person that the proposed testimony or evidence is relevant (or is reasonably calculated to lead to the discovery of relevant evidence) and is not otherwise available. The application shall be denied if not made at a reasonable time or if the testimony or evidence would be merely cumulative. 
(h)  Confidentiality of proceedings. 
(1)  Town employee. All proceedings before the ethics commission relating to a violation of this chapter by a town employee shall be maintained confidential by the ethics commission, unless: 
a.  Public disclosure is requested, in writing, by the person charged; or 
b.  The ethics commission determines after a hearing that a violation has occurred. 
(2)  Town official. All proceedings before the ethics commission relating to a violation of this chapter by a town official, appointed or elected, shall be maintained confidential by the ethics commission, unless: 
a.  Public disclosure is requested, in writing, by the person charged; or 
b.  The ethics commission determines after a hearing that a violation has occurred. 
(3)  Appeals; public inspection. Notwithstanding the confidentiality requirements of subsections (h)(1) and (2) of this section, the ethics commission shall make available for public inspection the record of all proceedings relating to any decision of the ethics commission which is appealed to the superior court and the ethics commission shall report to appropriate federal, state and/or town authorities any substantial evidence of a violation of any criminal law which comes to its attention in connection with any proceeding under this chapter. 
(4)  Confidentiality procedures. The chairperson of the ethics commission shall, with the approval of the ethics commission, establish such procedures as, in the chairperson's judgment, may be necessary to prevent the disclosure of any record of any proceedings or other information received by the ethics commission, except as permitted by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 021-06, § 1, 11-6-06) 
Sec. 2-208. - Judicial review. 
    In the event that the ethics commission finds that any person has violated any provision of this chapter, said person shall have a right of appeal to the superior court of any such finding, and of any sanctions imposed with respect thereto, by filing a notice of appeal with the superior court within 30 days of the final action by the ethics commission in a particular case. The appeal shall be on the record without a trial de novo. If the court determines that the record is insufficient for its review, it shall remand the case to the ethics commission for further proceedings on the record. The court's review, in the absence of actual fraud, shall be limited to a determination of whether the ethics commission's decision was supported by substantial evidence on the record. The burden of proof in any such appeal shall be on the appellant. 
(Ord. No. 021-06, § 1, 11-6-06) 
Secs. 2-209-2-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 008-06, adopted Feb. 21, 2006, amended the Code with the addition of a new article V. In order to avoid the duplication of article numbers, the provisions of said ordinance have been included herein as article VI, sections 2-221-2-227, at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 2-221. - Policy. 
    It is vital to a democratic society that public business be performed in an open and public manner. In accordance with the state Freedom of Information Act, the public has the right to "reasonable access" to public records; however, the Act provides that the town may make reasonable rules and regulations concerning access to "public records." 
(Ord. No. 008-06, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 2-222. - Procedure. 
    Determination of public record. All requests for documentation shall be forwarded to the FOIA Coordinator or his/her designee to determine if the requested documents are a "public record" and fall under the purview of the Freedom of Information Act. "Public record" shall be as defined in 29 Del. C. § 10002, as the same may be amended from time to time and in accordance with any other corresponding provision of law, and may take many forms including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Printed, typed, or written material. 
(2)  Drawings, plots, plats, and maps. 
(3)  Magnetic tapes of recorded oral dialogue. 
(4)  Computer-stored information. 
(5)  Microfilm. 
(6)  Transcripts. 
(7)  Published documents. 
(Ord. No. 008-06, 2-21-06; Ord. No. 012-17, § 1, 1-16-18) 
Sec. 2-223. - Examination of public records. 
(a)  Protection of original documents is of paramount importance. Custodians shall take every reasonable precaution to ensure documents are not removed or altered. 
(b)  Examination of original records shall be supervised unless the department manager has provided previous written permission. If supervision is not possible, then copies of documents shall be provided at requester's expense. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  As defined above, public records are open to examination by any citizen of the state during regular business hours of the town office, upon the submission of a Freedom of Information Act request as outlined in 29 Del. C. Ch. 100, as the same may be amended from time to time and in accordance with any other corresponding provision of law. 
(e)  Reasonable access to said records shall not be denied. If a public record is in active use or in storage at the time it is requested for examination, the citizen shall be so informed and an offer shall be extended to schedule a time as expediently as possible when said records may be examined. Appropriate accommodations shall be provided during said examination. 
(Ord. No. 008-06, 2-21-06; Ord. No. 012-17, § 1, 1-16-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 012-17, § 1, adopted January 16, 2018, repealed § 2-223 and renumbered § 2-224 as § 2-223. Former § 2-223 pertained to guidelines for public access to records/reproduction fees and derived from Ord. No. 008-06, adopted February 21, 2006. 
Sec. 2-224. - Fees for copying public records. 
(a)  Printed, typed or written material. The cost per page for paper copies of public records up to 11" × 17" in size shall be $.25 each for up to and including 100 copies and $.10 each for all copies in excess of 100 copies or actual cost, whichever is more. The minimum fee of $1.00 shall be charged per request. Two-sided copies shall be counted as two copies. 
(b)  Drawings, plots, plats and maps. To the extent that town equipment permits the reproduction of said document the fees for each single copy shall be as follows: 
Plots/plats/maps no larger than 11" × 17": $3.00. 
The town does not have the capability to copy documents larger than 11" × 17". Arrangements can be made for such copies with the town engineer with applicant paying the expense. 
(c)  Magnetic tapes of recorded oral disclosure. If requested, individuals may listen to recorded oral dialogue. Proper supervision must be ensured in order to protect the material from damage or loss. No tapes will be copied for or by staff or other persons without the written authorization of the town manager. If transcripts are requested, then the procedures listed in subsection (e) shall be followed, or actual cost, whichever is more. 
(d)  Computer tapes of stored information. The fee to produce computer generated paper copies of computer-stored information shall be based on the amount of machine operating time necessary to produce the copy and shall be calculated at the rate of $60.00 per hour. The minimum charge shall be $15.00 or actual cost, whichever is more. 
If computer programming is required, the fee shall be calculated at the rate of $60.00 per hour and the minimum charge shall be $60.00. The fee for computer programming is separate from and in addition to the charge for machine operating time. 
If computer-stored information is requested to be transferred to floppy diskettes, the customer must supply them in either 31/2", 51/4" or 8" magnetic tape sizes. The fee shall be calculated at $60.00 per hour. The minimum charge shall be $15.00 or actual cost, whichever is more. 
(e)  Transcripts. If magnetic tapes are available, a typed verbatim transcript of meetings and/or hearings will be made upon written request. The cost of one copy of a transcript shall be at the rate of $1.00 per typed page (double spaced) plus the hourly rate of pay of the employee or court reporter preparing the transcript multiplied by the time necessary to complete the transcript. Additional copies may be purchased at the rates charged for printed, typed or written material (see subsection (a) above) or actual cost, whichever is more. 
(f)  Published documents. From time to time a flat document fee is established for the purchase of certain publications of the town. Examples are the zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations, building code and supplement, etc. The cost for copies of portions of such documents shall be as stated in subsection (a) above. The cost of purchase of the complete publication shall be in accordance with the fee established at the time of publication or actual cost, whichever is more. 
(g)  Preparation fees. In addition to fees as listed in subsections (a) through (f), there shall be a preparation fee charged. This fee shall be based on the hourly wage plus benefits of the employee who prepares the information, which fee shall be billed in increments of one-tenth of an hour. Prior to fulfilling a FOIA request, the Town shall provide the requestor with a good faith estimate of the preparation fees that will be incurred to fulfill a FOIA request, which fee, in addition to the fees listed in subsections (a) through (f), shall be paid to the town prior to the FOIA request being fulfilled. If the actual preparation fees are less than the good faith estimate paid by the requestor, the town shall reimburse the requestor for the excess amount paid. If the actual preparation fees are greater than the good faith estimate paid by the requestor, the requestor shall be required to pay the additional costs associated with fulfilling the request. 
(h)  Legal research and review fees. No fee shall be charged by the town for legal research and review associated with responding to a FOIA request. 
(i)  Exceptions. No cost shall be charged for material which has been exempted by town directive. 
Whenever the fee to be charged for reproducing copies of public records has been established by a court order or a town ordinance or a written opinion of the Delaware Office of the Attorney General, such order or ordinance or opinion shall take precedence over the fees established by this policy. 
Where a reciprocal agreement has been reached between the town and non-town end-user to share information, said agreement shall govern the cost of reproduction. There shall be no charge for providing copies of public records to declared candidates for town public office. 
(Ord. No. 008-06, 2-21-06; Ord. No. 012-17, § 1, 1-16-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 012-17, § 1, adopted January 16, 2018, renumbered § 2-226 as § 2-224. 
Sec. 2-225. - Freedom of Information Act request form. 
    Requests for public documents shall be made in accordance with the requirements set forth in 29 Del. C. Ch. 100, as the same may be amended from time to time and in accordance with any other corresponding provision of law. 
(Ord. No. 008-06, 2-21-06; Ord. No. 012-17, § 1, 1-16-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 012-17, § 1, adopted January 16, 2018, repealed § 2-225 and renumbered § 2-226 as § 2-224 and renumbered § 2-227 as § 2-225. Former § 2-225 pertained to form of public records and derived from Ord. No. 008-06, adopted February 21, 2006. 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to prevent drunkenness, § 2(b)(6); authority to provide for public peace and safety, § 2(b)(7). 
Cross reference- General penalty for Code violations, § 1-11; alcoholic beverages prohibited on park premises, § 46-28; traffic and vehicles, ch. 66. 

Sec. 6-1. - Possession, consumption by minors. 
(a)  Whoever, being then under the age of 21 years, shall have upon or about his person or shall have in his possession any alcoholic, malt or spirituous beverage, within the limits of the town or within the limits of the streets or public places vested in the town, shall be guilty of a criminal violation and shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(b)  Whoever, being then under the age of 21 years, shall consume any alcoholic, malt or spirituous beverage upon the beaches, or any other public place within the limits of the town or within the limits of the public lands vested in the town, shall be guilty of a criminal violation and shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply either to the possession or consumption of alcoholic or spirituous beverages when consumed as an integral part of the sacramental rites performed in the course of religious services conducted in a church building or other house of worship, or where consumption is for medicinal purposes pursuant to the direction or prescription of a physician or surgeon duly licensed to practice within this state. 
(d)  Where any person is determined to have violated this section by any court of competent jurisdiction, the state's division of motor vehicles shall be appropriately notified so that person's license shall be revoked in accordance with 4 Del. C. § 904(f) as it may from time to time hereafter be amended, or any future corresponding provision of law. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 43, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 8-5-02, § 7) 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; law enforcement, ch. 34; parks and recreation, ch. 46; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 50; solid waste, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; traffic and vehicles, ch. 66; zoning, app. A; subdivision regulations, app. B. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS AND OTHER EXHIBITIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Circus exhibitor's right to carry on business with state license, 30 Del. C. § 2113. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 10-26-10-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 10-36. - Required; application. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or cause to be erected any temporary structure composed wholly or partly of canvas or similar material to be used as a place of amusement or for any religious, educational or recreational purposes or for any other public assemblages whatsoever within the limits of the town without first having made application to the town manager and received a permit to operate from the mayor and council of the town. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 45, § 1) 
Sec. 10-37. - Factors considered prior to issuance. 
    The town manager shall, prior to the granting or rejection of the permit required by this division by the mayor and council, determine if the applicant has made provision for: 
(1)  Seating capacity. 
(2)  Proper number of exits. 
(3)  Sufficient first aid and fire apparatus. 
(4)  Sufficient safety devices. 
(5)  Sufficient sanitary facilities. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 45, § 2) 
Sec. 10-38. - Bond; indemnification of town. 
    The applicant for a permit under this division shall deposit with the town manager a bond in the sum of $1,000.00 conditioned upon saving harmless the town from any and all liabilities or causes of action which might arise by virtue of the granting of a permit to the applicant or by the activity of the applicant. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 45, § 3) 
Sec. 10-39. - Fee. 
    The applicant for the permit required by this division shall pay a fee in the amount of $50.00 per day. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 45, § 4) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- An Ord. of 3-5-01(1), § 1, repealed chapter 14, sections 14-1, 14-2, and 14-26-14-36, in its entirety and replaced it with a new chapter 14, sections 14-1, 14-2, and 14-26-14-35. Former chapter 14 pertained to similar material and derived from Gen. Ords., Art IV, Tit. 37, §§ 1, 3, Tit. 47, §§ 1-9; and an Ord. of 11-2-98, §§ 1-3. 
Charter reference- Authority to establish pounds, restrain animals running at large and regulate keeping of dogs, § 2(b)(11). 
Cross reference- Nuisances, § 42-26 et seq.; restrictions as to animals on Lake Como bathing beach or swimming areas, § 46-61; solid waste, ch. 54. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Designation of dogcatchers. 
    The chief of police may authorize such persons as he designates to act as dogcatchers. 
(Ord. of 3-5-01(1), § 1) 
Sec. 14-2. - Killing domestic animals within town prohibited; exceptions; disposal. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to kill any domestic animal within the limits of the town, except in cases of necessity, and in such cases not without the consent of the town manager or the chief of police and under the direction of an officer designated by them for the purpose. 
(b)  The streets and public alleys of the town shall not be used for the deposit of dead animals of any sort, nor shall such dead animals be left on streets or public alleys of the town or on private property within the town or in vehicles, trucks or conveyances standing on the streets or any premises within the limits of the town. 
(Ord. of 3-5-01(1), § 1) 
Secs. 14-3-14-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS 

Sec. 14-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    At large means off the premises of the owner and not under the control of a human being, either by leash, cord, chain, rope or other means of physical restraint. 
    Dog means either male or female. 
    Noisy dog means any dog that repeatedly or continuously barks, whines or howls so as to make a disturbance. 
    Owner means any person, firm, association or corporation owning, keeping, harboring or entrusted to keeping a dog. 
    Property. Real and personal property shall include, but not be limited to, shrubbery, grass, flowers and other plants. 
    Tether means to restrain a dog by tying the dog to any object or structure, including but not limited to a house, tree, fence, post, garage, or shed, by any tethering device (as defined herein) or other similar means. This definition does not include the restraint of a dog by an attended leash. 
    Tethering device means any tether chain, rope, cord, leash, cable, running line, or similar device used to restrain a dog. 
    Vicious dog means any dog that attacks, snaps at, attempts to bite or bites a person or animal upon the streets, sidewalks or in any public place or private place; provided that any dog on private property enclosed by a fence or restrained by a chain or other similar device shall be excluded from the definition of "vicious dog" for the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-5-01(1), § 1; Ord. No. 004-13, § 1, 7-15-13) 
Sec. 14-27. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any owner who shall violate any section of this article shall be guilty of a criminal violation and shall, upon conviction before any court of competent jurisdiction, forfeit and pay a fine as follows: 
(1)  For violation of sections 14-28, 14-29, 14-32, 14-33, and 14-36: 
a.  First offense: $50.00 
b.  Second offense: $100.00 
c.  Third and subsequent offenses: $300.00 
(2)  For violation of sections 14-31 and 14-34: 
a.  First offense: $100.00 
b.  Second offense: $150.00 
c.  Third and subsequent offenses: $300.00 
(3)  For violation of section 14-35 subsection (a): 
a.  First offense: $100.00 
b.  Second offense: $150.00 
c.  Third offense: If the dog is not removed from the town limits within 24 hours, each day thereafter will be considered a separate offense with a fine of $400.00 per day. 
(4)  For violation of section 14-35 subsection (b): 
a.  First offense: $50.00 
b.  Second offense: $100.00 
c.  Third and subsequent offenses: $400.00 
(b)  Any fines imposed under this section shall be in addition to any amounts due under section 14-32. 
(Ord. of 3-5-01(1), § 1; Ord. of 8-5-02, § 8; Ord. No. 017-05, §§ 1-4, 10-3-05; Ord. No. 004-13, § 3, 7-15-13) 
Sec. 14-28. - Keeping of dogs; maintenance of area. 
    The owner of any dog shall at all times maintain the area wherein the dog is kept in a clean and sanitary condition, free of unreasonable accumulations of waste and refuse. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the town to permit excreta from any animal kept by such person to accumulate to the extent that it becomes visibly offensive or the odor therefrom can be detected by any person on any property other than the property on which such animal is kept, or that it provides a breeding ground for flies or mosquitoes. If any person shall violate this section, he shall be give written notice thereof, which shall direct that such excreta be eliminated within such time as may be specified in said notice, which shall not exceed 24 hours. 
(Ord. of 3-5-01(1), § 1) 
Sec. 14-29. - Running at large prohibited. 
(a)  The owner of any dog within the town shall keep the same securely upon his own premises or under the control of the owner or some other person by means of leash, cord, chain, rope, fence or some other means of physical restraint. No dog shall be permitted to run at large within the town at any time. 
(b)  The owner of any female dog in heat shall keep such dog at all times while in heat, confined within an enclosure from which it cannot escape. 
(Ord. of 3-5-01(1), § 1) 
Sec. 14-30. - Impoundment-Authorized; records. 
    It shall be the duty of every dogcatcher to apprehend any dog found running at large contrary to the provisions of section 14-29 and to impound such dog at the county SPCA or other such suitable place. The dogcatcher who impounds such a dog shall make a record of the breed, color and sex of such dog and its license tag, if any. A compilation of the records of all such dogs caught and impounded shall be maintained at the county SPCA. Any police officer who impounds a dog shall turn the animal over to the county SPCA as soon as practical. 
(Ord. of 3-5-01(1), § 1) 
Sec. 14-31. - Keeping of vicious dogs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner to keep any vicious dog within the town. Any dogcatcher or any police officer, after making a reasonable effort to impound a vicious or rabid animal, may kill any such vicious or rabid animal in as humane a manner as possible. 
(Ord. of 3-5-01(1), § 1) 
Sec. 14-32. - Keeping of noisy dogs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner to keep any dog which, by frequent, habitual or long-continued barking, whining or howling disturbs any person or neighborhood and such action is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and detrimental to the public health and welfare. 
(b)  any owner who keeps such a dog and who fails to abate the nuisance after being notified by the police shall be prosecuted as provided in section 14-27. 
(Ord. of 3-5-01(1), § 1) 
Sec. 14-33. - Dog waste. 
(a)  Soiling or damaging private property. No person having possession, custody or control of any dog shall permit such animal to damage, defile or defecate upon any private property within the town not owned or leased by such person. 
(b)  Soiling or damaging public property. No person having possession, custody or control of any dog shall permit such animal to damage, defile or defecate upon any public property within the town, including but limited to, streets, alleys, curbs, sidewalks, parks. 
(c)  If the excrement is removed immediately and disposed of in a sanitary manner by the owner or person in charge of the animal, it will not be considered a violation of section 14-33. 
(d)  Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a guide dog accompanying any blind person or to a dog used to assist any other physically challenged person. 
(Ord. of 3-5-01(1), § 1) 
Sec. 14-34. - Attack by animal. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any animal owned by him or under this control, to attack molest or threaten any person or domestic animal on private or public property. 
(Ord. of 3-5-01(1), § 1) 
Sec. 14-35. - Interference with town employees. 
(a)  The owner of any dog within the limits of the town shall keep, prevent or restrain any dog from attacking, snapping at, attempting to bite or biting any town employee in the performance of their duties. 
(b)  In addition to the above, the owner of any dog within the limits of the town shall ensure that town employees shall have access to utility meters, free from interference or threat from dogs. 
(Ord. of 3-5-01(1), § 1) 
Sec. 14-36. - Tethering of dogs. 
    It shall be unlawful for a dog to be tethered outdoors, except when all of the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The dog is not tethered outside for a period of longer than six consecutive hours without the owner or individual who tethered the dog, or who is otherwise responsible for the care and maintenance of the dog, having direct physical contact with the dog. 
(b)  The tethering device complies with the following requirements: 
(1)  The tethering device is not placed directly around the dog's neck; 
(2)  The tethering device is connected to the dog using a buckle-type collar or a body harness made of nylon or leather at least one inch in width; 
(3)  The length is at least (a) five times the length of the dog's body, as measured from the tip of the nose to the base of the tail or (b) ten feet long, whichever is greater; 
(4)  Both ends of the tethering device terminate with a swivel; 
(5)  The tethering device does not weigh more than 1/8 of the dog's weight; and 
(6)  The tethering device is not prone to becoming tangled. 
(c)  The dog is tethered in such a manner as to prevent injury, strangulation, or entanglement with the dog or other objects. 
(d)  The dog is not outside during periods of extreme weather, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Those times when the National Weather Service has issued an excessive heat warning for the Town of Smyrna; 
(2)  Those times when the temperature is at or below 32 degrees Fahrenheit or zero degrees Celsius; 
(3)  Thunderstorms; 
(4)  Tornadoes; 
(5)  Tropical storms; and 
(6)  Hurricanes. 
(e)  The tethering device shall allow the dog adequate access to food and water containers, shelter, and dry ground. 
(f)  The dog is not sick or injured or a puppy less than six months of age. 
(g)  Any pulley, running line, or trolley systems used to tether the dog is at least 15 feet in length and is less than seven feet above the ground. 
(h)  If there are multiple dogs, the dogs are tethered such that they cannot come into contact with each other. 
(Ord. No. 004-13, § 2, 7-15-13) 
Secs. 14-37-14-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 026-03, § 1, adopted Sept. 15, 2003, repealed article III, sections 14-40-14-45, in its entirety. Former article III pertained to possession of wild and/or exotic mammals or reptiles and derived from Ord. No. 021-03, § 1, adopted June 16, 2003. 

Secs. 14-40-14-45. - Reserved. 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 016-05, § 1, adopted Aug. 15, 2005, deleted in its entirety chapter 18 adopted by the town council on December 20, 2004 by Ordinance No. 024-04, and inserted in its place the then-existing 2003 chapter 18. All amendments to chapter 18 that occurred in 2004 calendar year are incorporated into the 2003 chapter 18, including Ordinances 010-04 and 011-04. 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate construction, § 2(b)(20). 
Cross reference- Amusements, ch. 10; civil emergencies, ch. 22; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 38; parks and recreation, ch. 46; utilities, ch. 70; zoning regulations, app. A; subdivision and land development ordinance, app. B. 
State Law reference- Building permits and construction codes in Kent County, 9 Del. C. § 4401 et seq.; exemption from county construction codes for municipalities adopting and enforcing building code and permit procedures, 9 Del. C. § 4413; reports to Kent County board of assessment of permits issued by municipalities, 9 Del. C. § 4403. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-1. - Purpose. 
    This chapter shall be liberally construed to promote and safeguard the health, safety, and welfare of the public by establishing the minimum requirements and standards for the built environment in the town. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 3, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 18-2. - Conflict. 
    Where, in any specific case, different sections of this chapter specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. where there is a conflict between any code adopted by the town and any other code or regulation in and for the state, the most restrictive shall apply. Where differences occur between this chapter, the International Codes, and the referenced standards, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail over the provisions of the International Codes, and the provisions of the International Codes shall prevail over any referenced standards. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 3, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 18-3. - Appendices. 
    Provisions in the appendices to any code adopted under this chapter shall not apply unless specifically adopted by the adopting ordinance(s) for each code adopted. An appendix for each code adopted under this chapter shall be maintained by the department, and each may be amended from time to time as deemed necessary by the department. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 3, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 007-10, § 1, 3-1-10) 
Sec. 18-4. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means a person, business, corporation or company performing construction which is authorized to act on behalf of a person or a business entity. 
    Board of adjustment/appeals means the board of adjustment/appeals that hears appeals from decisions of the code official. 
    Building code official or building official means the code official as defined herein. 
    Building contractor means any person or company, whether operating from a place within the town or not, engaged in the business of construction, or providing construction or outdoor property maintenance related services for the altering, improving, maintaining, repairing, dismantling or demolishing of buildings, roads, bridges, sewers, water and gas mains and every other type of structure or property within the definition of real estate and/or regulated by the town code. A general contractor and subcontractor working under the direction of the contractor in charge are also building contractors. Building contractors include, but are not limited to, the construction classification codes listed in the NAICS (North American Industrial Classification System). The NAICS list can be found in the appendices to this code. Property owners performing services included in this definition on property they own shall not be considered building contractors under this definition. 
    Business entity means any business form that may be organized to operate a business including, but not limited to, corporation, partnership, limited partnership, association, or sole proprietorship. Business entity shall also mean an individual operating a business. 
    Certificate of occupancy means a statement signed by the department of planning and inspections setting forth that a building, structure, or use legally complies with this chapter and appendix A "zoning code" and appendix B "subdivision code", if applicable, of the Town Code, and that the building, structure, or use may be used for the purposes stated therein. 
    Code, construction code or Town Code means any building, housing, electrical, plumbing or other similar code adopted by the town. 
    Code enforcement officer means any sworn code enforcement constable within the town planning and inspections department. 
    Code official means the planning and inspections department employee designated by the town manager who has the authority to administer and enforce this chapter, or his or her duly authorized representative. 
    Construction and demolition waste means lumber, roofing material, sheathing, rubble, broken concrete, plaster and brick, conduit, pipe, wire, insulation and similar material which results from a construction process which shall include packaging materials and equipment used in the delivery or shipment of goods to or from the construction site. 
    Department means the town department of planning and inspections. 
    Design flood elevation (DFE) means the elevation of the highest flood (generally the BFE including freeboard) that a retrofitting method is designed to protect against. Also referred to as flood protection elevation. 
    Design professional means an architect or engineer duly registered by the applicable state professional association, and who, by reason of his or her special knowledge, experience, and education is qualified to practice in that particular area of expertise. A design professional shall only practice or engage in those areas in which he or she has adequate knowledge of the facts and competence in the subject matter. The code official shall have the authority to request that the design professional provide credentials indicating his or her knowledge, experience, and education. 
    Developed parcel means any improved parcel which has residential, office, commercial, manufacturing or industrial improvements located thereon. 
    Licensed contractor means a building, mechanical, plumbing, or electrical contractor, including a general contractor or subcontractor, duly registered with the town pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
    Manager means the town manager. 
    New home means any dwelling unit not previously occupied, including newly built townhouses and newly built condominiums, including dwelling units constructed solely for lease. 
    New home builder means a building contractor engaged in general construction of new residential dwellings to be sold to the public, including condominiums and dwelling units constructed solely for lease. 
    Nuisance means one that is annoying, unpleasant, or obnoxious. 
    Parcel means a lot, piece or parcel of land separately identified by a tax assessment parcel number issued by either Kent or New Castle County. 
    Post frame building means a structural building frame consisting of a wood truss or rafters connected to vertical timber columns or sidewall posts, which function as the principal gravity and load resisting elements of the building. A building used for motor vehicles is considered a garage and must meet the requirements in section R309 as well as Section 614 of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition (incorporated into the Town Code in Chapter 18, Buildings and Building Regulations, Article XIII, Residential Code). 
    Person means an individual or business entity such as a firm, business, corporation, partnership, limited partnership, association, or any other group acting as a unit including, but not limited to, a building contractor, developer, or owner. 
    Stop work order means a notice issued by the code official directing a person to immediately stop work on a building, structure or any other improvement. 
    Third party inspector means a business entity that provides town-required inspections but whose employees are not employed by town. 
    Town means Town of Smyrna, Delaware. 
    Town solicitor means the town attorney and all assistant town solicitors appointed by the town attorney. 
    Violation notice means a notice issued by the code official identifying noncompliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 3, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 001-10, § 1, 3-1-10; Ord. No. 007-10, § 1, 3-1-10; Ord. No. 004-17, § 1, 5-15-17) 
Sec. 18-5. - Used materials and equipment. 
    The use of used materials which meet the requirements of this chapter and the codes adopted hereunder for new materials is permitted upon prior written approval from the code official. Used equipment and devices shall not be reused unless approved, in writing, by the code official. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 3, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 18-6. - Alternative materials, design and methods of construction and equipment. 
    The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any design or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this chapter, provided that any such alternative has been approved by the code official. An alternative material, design or method of construction shall be approved by the code official where the code official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this chapter and any code adopted hereunder, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this chapter in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. Supporting data, where necessary to assist in the approval of materials or assemblies not specifically provided for in this chapter, shall consist of valid research reports from design professionals or other sources which are requested and approved by the code official. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 3, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 18-7. - Tests. 
    Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of this chapter, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the code official shall have the authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no expense to the town. Test methods shall be as specified in this chapter, by any code adopted hereunder or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the code official shall approve the testing procedures. Tests shall be performed by an approved agency and/or design professional as reasonably determined by the code official. Reports of such tests shall be retained by the code official for the period required for retention of public records. 
Secs. 18-8-18-14. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS AND FEES 

Sec. 18-15. - Permit required. 
(a)  Any licensed contractor, or an authorized representative registered with the department of planning and inspections, or the owner of the building, structure or parcel who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy or use of a building, structure, or parcel(s), or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by this chapter, shall first make application to the code official and obtain the required permit (and/or obtain any other permit required by any federal, state, county and/or other local agencies). 
(b)  Exceptions: 
Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit requirements of this chapter shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this chapter or any other laws or ordinances of the town. Permits shall not be required for the following: 
a.  One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 24 square feet (2.23 m 2 ). 
b.  Retaining walls which are not over four feet (1,219 mm) in exposed height, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding class I, II or III-A liquids. 
c.  Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work. 
d.  Replacement of roof covering that does not involve the repair or replacement of more than 25 percent of the sheathing. 
e.  Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery. 
f.  Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a one- or two-family dwelling, which are less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons (19,000 L) and are installed entirely above ground. 
g.  Swings and other playground equipment accessory to one- and two-family dwellings. 
h.  Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not project more than 54 inches (1,372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require additional support. 
i.  Movable cases, counters and partitions not over five feet nine inches (1,753 mm) in height. 
j.  Emergency repairs. Where equipment replacements and repairs must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted within the next business day to the code official. 
k.  Repairs. Application or notice to the code official is not required for ordinary repairs to structures, replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or load bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, mechanical, or other work affecting public health or general safety. 
l.  Mechanical: 
1.  Portable heating appliance. 
2.  Portable ventilation equipment. 
3.  Portable cooling unit. 
4.  Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this code. 
5.  Replacement of any part that does not alter its approval or make it unsafe. 
6.  Portable evaporative cooler. 
7.  Self-contained refrigeration system containing 10 pounds (5 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of 1 horsepower (746 W) or less. 
m.  Plumbing: 
1.  The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe, provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code. 
2.  The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures. 
n.  Public service agencies. A permit shall not be required for the installation, alteration or repair of generation, transmission, distribution or metering or other related equipment that is under the ownership and control of public service agencies by established right. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 4, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 006-06, §§ 1, 2, 3-6-06; Ord. No. 007-10, § 1, 3-1-10) 
Sec. 18-16. - Application for permit. 
    To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application on a form furnished by the department of planning and inspections for that purpose. The code official shall be authorized to modify the application requirements to accommodate electronic submissions. Such application shall: 
(1)  Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made; 
(2)  Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal description that will readily identify and definitively locate the proposed buildings or work; 
(3)  Indicate the use for which the proposed work is intended; 
(4)  Be accompanied by construction documents, site plans, and other information as required herein; 
(5)  State the valuation of the proposed work; 
(6)  Be signed or authorized by the applicant, or the applicant's authorized agent; 
(7)  Submit proof of liability insurance required for building contractors (if applicable); 
(8)  Submit a copy of the license issued by the town for building contractors (if applicable); and 
(9)  Provide such other data and information as required by the code official. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 4, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 18-17. - Action on application. 
    The code official shall examine or cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing. If the application or the construction documents do not conform to the requirements of any applicable town, county, state or federal laws or regulations, the code official shall reject such application. If the code official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter and laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the code official shall issue a permit as soon as reasonably practicable. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 4, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 18-18. - Other required approvals. 
    In addition to complying with this chapter and any other code requirement of the town, the applicant is responsible for securing any license, permit, approval or certification required by any applicable county, state or federal laws, rules or regulations, including, but not limited to, the following agencies (if applicable): state department of transportation (DelDOT), state fire marshal's office, the state board of health and the state board of electrical examiners. 
(1)  DelDOT. Where a site is accessed from a state-maintained roadway, any proposed construction or change in use of such access must be accompanied by an entrance/exit construction permit or waiver from DelDOT. 
(2)  State fire marshal's office. The state fire marshal's office shall issue approvals for all non-residential construction and all multi-family residential construction. 
(3)  State board of health. Written approval is required from the state board of health for any facility where equipment is utilized to prepare food for public consumption and for public swimming pools. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 4, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 18-19. - Pending zoning change. 
    No permit shall be issued under this chapter for construction, alteration, removal, demolition or other building construction upon land subject to an ordinance to change its zoning classification that has been introduced to mayor and council until mayor and council have voted on the ordinance or until the expiration of 180 days from the date the ordinance was introduced, whichever occurs first. This subsection, however, shall not prohibit the issuance of a permit in connection with a use or proposed use permitted in both the existing zoning classification and proposed zoning classification as set forth in such ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 4, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 18-20. - Time limitation of application for permit. 
    An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 90 days after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued. The code official is authorized to grant an additional 90 days for further consideration of the application. The extension shall be requested in writing by the applicant and granted upon justifiable cause being demonstrated. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 4, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 007-10, § 1, 3-1-10) 
Sec. 18-21. - Validity of permit. 
    The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or of any other ordinance or laws of the town. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinances or laws of the town shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit based on construction documents and other data shall not prevent the code official from requiring the correction of errors in the construction documents and other data. The code official is also authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a structure where any construction work is done in violation of the Town Code, approved plans, or written directive of the code official. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 4, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 18-22. - Time to begin work. 
    If the work described in the building permit has not begun within 90 days from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire, it shall be cancelled by the code official, and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected, together with notice that further work as described in the cancelled permit shall not proceed unless and until a new building permit has been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 4, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 18-23. - Time to complete construction. 
    All construction covered by the building permit shall be completed, pass inspection, and obtain the certificate of occupancy within the time frames as follows: 
(1)  Three months for a permit for prefabricated sheds and swimming pools. 
(2)  Two months for a permit for demolition and/or moving. 
(3)  One year for permits for all other construction. 
All permits issued shall become invalid if the authorized work is not completed by the permit expiration date. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 4, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 18-24. - Extensions for permits. 
    Expired permits may be renewed subject to the written approval of the code official. Approval by the code official shall occur only if the applicant can show that a good faith effort has been made to complete the work and that the work has not been suspended without reasonable cause. The first renewal period, upon written approval of the code official, shall not exceed the period of time as the initial application. The cost for the first renewal shall be equal to the cost of the initial application, including the certificate of occupancy. All subsequent renewals, upon approval of the code official, shall be for a period not to exceed 30 days. The cost for all subsequent renewals shall be equal to the cost of the initial application, including the certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 4, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 18-25. - Multiple expired permits. 
    If any licensed contractor is determined to have in excess of ten expired permits at a given time, the code official may withhold additional permits until all expired permits have been satisfactorily addressed and any required inspections performed. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 4, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 18-26. - Display of permit. 
    The building permit, or a copy thereof, shall be kept on the work site and conspicuously displayed at a location visible from the street until the completion of the project. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 4, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 18-27. - Payment of fees. 
(1)  A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law have been paid in full. No amendment to a permit shall be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid. 
(2)  Related fees. The payment of fees for the construction, alteration, removal, demolition or any other work done in connection with or concurrently with the work authorized by a building permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 4, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 007-10, § 1, 3-1-10) 
Sec. 18-28. - Schedule of permit fees. 
    Before receiving a permit for any construction, including, but not limited to, a permit for any building (structure), fence, swimming pool, heating system, electric system and/or air conditioning system, the owner or his agent shall pay the following fee: 
(1)  For a construction valuation up to but not exceeding $1,000.00, the permit fee shall be $40.00. 
(2)  In addition to the initial $40.00 fee, a permit fee of $11.00 shall be paid for each additional $1,000.00 construction valuation or fraction thereof up to $1,000,000.00. 
(3)  In addition to the fees set forth in subsections (1) and (2), a permit fee of $5.50 shall be paid for each additional $1,000.00 of construction valuation or fraction thereof over $1,000,000.00. 
(4)  Fees for plumbing permits shall be $20.00 for the first five fixtures, $2.00 per each fixture thereafter. 
(5)  Fees for signs shall be $2.00 per square foot with a $25.00 minimum for new signs and $25.00 for refacing of existing signs. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 4, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 007-10, § 1, 3-1-10) 
Sec. 18-28.1. - Cap on permit fees for qualifying projects. 
    Qualifying projects in commercially-zoned areas or in the historic preservation overlay district. 
(1)  Cap on building permit fees. Subject to (3), (4) and (5) hereafter, for a "qualifying project", the maximum building permit fee shall be $40.00 for the first $1,000.00 of value and $11.00 per each additional $1,000.00 of value, not to exceed $1,129.00 regardless of the total cost of the project. 
(2)  "Qualifying project" defined. A "qualifying project" is the rehabilitation, renovation, reconstruction, or restoration of a building or structure located in a commercially-zoned area of the town (i.e. local commercial, central commercial, and highway commercial) or in the historic preservation overlay district, which as of December 19, 2003: 
a.  Is currently vacant; 
b.  Is determined by the code official to have been vacant for at least the immediately previous 24 months; and 
c.  Is reasonably anticipated to contribute to the revitalization of that area and/or community in general, as reasonably determined by the town manager. 
A "qualifying project" shall also include the replacement of a former building or structure on its site, which, in addition to the aforementioned criteria of paragraph "2 (i-iii)", the replacement is the substantially same size, scale, footprint, appearance and configuration as the previously-existing building or structure. 
(3)  Projects not qualifying. The cap on building permit fees provided for under this section shall not apply to the value of any improvements which extend a building or structure beyond its existing "footprint" or which results in a net increase in the total floor area of an existing building by the addition of floors, porches, or decks; nor to the replacement of any building or structure which is not substantially the same size, scale, footprint, appearance, and configuration as the previously existing building or structure. The value of any such improvements and/or replacements shall be subject to the standard building permit fees. 
(4)  Limitation on cap. No qualifying project shall be entitled to the cap on building permit fees under this section more than once in any consecutive ten-year period. 
(5)  Qualified projects within the historic preservation overlay district. No qualified project located within the town's historic preservation overlay district shall be entitled to the cap on building permit fees provided for under this section unless the improvements made to rehabilitate, renovate, reconstruct, restore, and/or replace the building or structure are undertaken and completed in strict compliance with all design and construction requirements recommended by the town's historic preservation overlay district review board. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 4, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 007-10, § 1, 3-1-10) 
Note- Formerly, § 18-29. 
Sec. 18-29. - Final and temporary certificate of occupancies. 
(a)  Final certificate of occupancy. The fee for the final certificate of occupancy shall be $40.00. An additional fee as provided under this division shall be charged for each follow-up inspection required because of uncompleted or unsatisfactorily completed items found by the code official on a previous inspection. 
(b)  Temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued before the completion of final grading, topsoil seeding, public sidewalks, sidewalks and/or pathways leading to the structure, and paved driveways, upon a showing of extenuating circumstances, as determined in the reasonable discretion of the town manager, provided that: 
a.  The lot has been graded to allow proper drainage and to provide a protective slope; 
b.  A stabilized gravel or stone entrance to the lot has been provided to park and gain access to the structure; 
c.  The roadway and drainage swales or curb are free of sediment; 
d.  All required sediment and erosion controls have been installed to prevent runoff from the property to neighboring properties or roadways; and 
e.  The lot has been temporarily straw mulched which must be tacked and/or crimped. 
(2)  The temporary certificate of occupancy shall list all work to be completed for a final certificate of occupancy to be granted. 
(3)  The fee for a temporary certificate of occupancy shall be $100.00, which is to paid prior to the issuance of the certificate. 
(4)  Prior to the issuance of the temporary certificate of occupancy, the party to whom the building permit was issued shall provide a bond approved by the town solicitor, to guarantee the performance of the uncompleted work listed in the certificate, and shall provide a cash deposit equal to 200 percent of estimated costs to complete such work which will be held in escrow by the town. 
(5)  The temporary certificate of occupancy shall be for a period of six months. 
(6)  Failure to complete all the work listed in the temporary certificate of occupancy 30 days prior to the expiration of the temporary certificate shall result in a forfeiture of the amount held in escrow by the town. The town shall issue a check to the record owner of the property in the amount shown on the invoice(s) listing the work which was completed. The town shall charge an administrative fee up to 25 percent, but not to exceed the sum held in escrow after paying the invoice provided by the record owner. Any escrow remaining after payment to the record owner and town shall be returned to the party who paid the escrow with an explanation of any sums deducted from same. 
(7)  Upon the completion of all the work listed in the temporary certificate of occupancy, a final certificate of occupancy, indicating completion of the work for which the permit was issued, shall be issued as provided under this section. 
(c)  Other fees, charges and expenses. Three business days prior to an application for a certificate of occupancy, final or temporary, any and all fees, charges, and/or expenses owed to the town arising out of or connected to the construction of the structure for which the certificate is being issued shall be paid in full, including, but not limited to, water, sewer, electric connection and/or impact fees; any sums owed for the provision of utility services (water, sewer, or electric); and any sums owed to design professionals for services provided to the town. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 4, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 007-10, § 1, 3-1-10) 
Note- Formerly, § 18-32. 
Sec. 18-30. - Reinspections. 
    When an inspection is scheduled with the town, it is the responsibility of the building contractor or property owner to make sure the structure and property is ready by the time the code official arrives on site. A minimum of one hour's notice is required to cancel or reschedule an inspection. All inspections require 24-hour advance notice. If a code official arrives on-site and the structure or property is not ready and the inspection was not cancelled at least one hour in advance, the inspection must be rescheduled. Reinspections shall be subject to the following fees: 
First reinspection ..... $0.00 
Second reinspection ..... $25.00 
Third reinspection ..... $50.00 
Any subsequent reinspection ..... $100.00 
The building official shall be given the authority to waive reinspection fees for individual cases if circumstances beyond the control of the property owner or building contractor prevented them from contacting the town an hour prior to the inspection to reschedule. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 4, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 007-10, § 1, 3-1-10) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 007-10, § 1, adopted March 1, 2010, repealed § 18-30, which pertained to related fees and derived from Ord. No. 016-05, § 4, 8-15-05. Subsequently, Ord. 007-10 renumbered § 18-33 as § 18-30 as herein set out. 
Sec. 18-31. - Permit valuations. 
    The applicant for a permit shall provide an estimated permit value at time of application. The estimate shall be consistent with the standard valuation procedures and policies contained in the appendix (including the fee schedule) to this chapter. Permit valuations shall include total value of work, including materials and labor, for which the permit is being issued. If, in the opinion of the code official, the valuation is underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the code official. Final building permit valuation shall be set by the code official and any difference due to the value of work being underestimated shall be paid prior to the certificate of occupancy being issued. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 4, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 007-10, § 1, 3-1-10) 
Note- Formerly, § 18-34. 
Sec. 18-32. - Work commencing before permit issuance. 
(a)  Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, gas, electrical, mechanical, or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to administrative penalties and fees established by the code official in addition to the required permit fees. 
(b)  Doubling fees. Permit fees shall double in the event that a permit is applied for after construction has commenced without the permission of the building inspector. The building inspector may waive the doubling of fees in cases where the building permit applicant is not a professional contractor, and the work is not being done by a professional contractor. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 4, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 007-10, § 1, 3-1-10) 
Note- Formerly, § 18-35. 
Sec. 18-33. - Construction documents. 
(a)  Construction documents, special inspection and structural observation programs, investigation and evaluation reports, and other data shall be submitted in two sets or more with each application for a permit. Construction documents for new construction, alterations, repairs, expansion, additions or modifications of buildings or structures, which involve the practice of architecture or engineering, as defined by the professional registration laws of the State of Delaware shall be prepared by a registered design professional consistent with the professional registration laws of the State of Delaware. Construction documents shall include the name, address and license or registration number of the registered design professional and shall be signed, sealed and dated by the registered design professional in accordance with the professional registration or licensing laws, statutes, regulations or administration provisions of the State of Delaware. Where special conditions exist, the code official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional at the applicant's expense. 
(b)  Exception: The code official may accept the submission of construction documents that are not prepared by a registered design professional for non-structural alterations and buildings which are any of the following: 
(1)  Single and two-family dwellings, any additions, alterations and renovations thereto, shed and garages incidental to such dwellings. 
(2)  Commercial accessory structures, two units maximum per property (square footage not to exceed 300 square feet each), shall be used exclusively for low hazard storage purposes. Structures shall be leveled and secured with tie downs or equivalent of manufactured home fastening devices; one anchor installed at each corner. Structures 20 feet or more in length shall have two additional anchors installed; one on each side mid-span. All lumber and wood siding is to be pressure treated from grade to eight inches above finished grade. 
(3)  Farm structures used exclusively for farm use. 
(4)  Home occupations that have been approved by the planning and zoning department for their stated use. 
(5)  The building official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that review of construction documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with this code. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 4, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 007-10, § 1, 3-1-10; Ord. No. 004-17, § 2, 5-15-17) 
Note- Formerly, § 18-36. 
Sec. 18-34. - Required inspections. 
    All projects for which a permit is issued by the town department of planning and inspections shall be subject to inspection by the building official and such construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of this Code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this Code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the building official nor the jurisdiction shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection. 
(a)  Preliminary inspection. Before issuing a permit, the code official is authorized to examine or cause to be examined buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been filed. 
(b)  Required inspections. The following inspections shall be conducted (as applicable) by the code official: 
(1)  Footing inspection. Footing inspections shall be made after excavations for footings are complete and any required reinforcing steel is in place. 
(2)  Foundation. Foundation inspections shall be made prior to backfill. Backfill shall not be placed against the wall until the wall has sufficient strength to prevent damage by the backfill, and has been inspected. 
(3)  Concrete slab and under-floor inspection. Concrete slab and under-floor inspections shall be made after in-slab or under-floor reinforcing steel and building service equipment, conduit, piping accessories and other ancillary equipment items are in place, any electric and plumbing installations have inspected and approved but before any concrete is placed or floor sheathing installed, including the subfloor. 
(4)  Water and/or sewer laterals. Water and/or sewer laterals shall be inspected after connection and before covering. 
(5)  Sidewalk forms. Sidewalk forms shall be inspected with the forms and stone base in place prior to the placement of concrete. 
(6)  Framing. Framing inspections shall be made after the roof deck or sheathing, all framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place and pipes, chimneys and vents to be concealed are complete and the rough electrical, plumbing, heating wires, pipes and ducts are inspected and approved. 
(7)  Close-in/insulation. 
(8)  Step or deck footings. Step or deck footing inspections shall be made after excavations for footings are complete and any required reinforcing steel is in place. 
(9)  Grading and drainage. Grading and drainage inspections shall be done and approved by all agencies having jurisdiction when the final grade and stabilization has been established and prior to scheduling of a final or certificate of occupancy inspection. 
(10)  Final or certificate of occupancy inspection. The final inspection shall be made after all work required by the building permit is completed, all required inspections performed by other agencies have been completed and approved and prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, if a certificate of occupancy is required. 
(11)  In addition to the inspections specified above, the code official is authorized to make or require other inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this code and other laws that are enforced by the department of building safety. 
(12)  Inspection agencies. The building official is authorized to accept reports of approved inspection agencies, provided such agencies satisfy the requirements as to qualifications and reliability. 
(Ord. No. 023-06, § 1, 12-4-06; Ord. No. 007-10, § 1, 3-1-10) 
Note- Formerly, § 18-37.5. 
Sec. 18-34.1. - Debris and rubbish. 
(a)  All solid waste, construction debris and/or rubbish caused, created, exposed or encountered on any premises due to a permit issued under this chapter shall be removed from the premises within ten calendar days of the creation thereof (unless otherwise stored pursuant to the provisions of this chapter). Such removal shall comply with all applicable federal, state, county and town laws and regulations. 
(b)  Any dirt, mud, waste, rubbish and/or debris which may be tracked, washed, deposited or which may otherwise collect or accumulate on any public street, right-of-way or pedestrian pathway shall be removed daily. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 4, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 007-10, § 1, 3-1-10) 
Note- Formerly, § 18-37. 
Sec. 18-35. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by an action taken by the code official may appeal from such action by filing written notice of appeal with the appointed building/housing code board of appeals in accordance with the provisions contained in the Town of Smyrna Housing Code within ten days after the giving or posting of notice of such action. An appeal under this section shall stay the effect of the notice of violation or condemnation and shall prevent the code official from proceeding with the remedies provided under this article pending decision by a board of appeals. 
(b)  Limitations on authority. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted there under have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The board shall have no authority to waive requirements of this code. 
(Ord. No. 007-10, § 1, 3-1-10) 
Sec. 18-36. - Violations. 
(a)  Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated by this code, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code. 
(b)  Notice of violation. The building official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition or occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of this Code, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation and shall be in accordance with the notice provisions found in the Smyrna Housing Code. 
(c)  Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall upon conviction, be guilty of a criminal misdemeanor and subject to punishment as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 007-10, § 1, 3-1-10) 
Sec. 18-37. - Stop work order. 
(a)  Authority. Whenever the building official finds any work regulated by this code being performed in a manner either contrary to the provisions of this code or dangerous or unsafe, the building official is authorized to issue a stop work order. 
(b)  Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order, and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume. 
(c)  Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall upon conviction, be guilty of a criminal misdemeanor and subject to punishment as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 007-10, § 1, 3-1-10) 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS AND FEES FOR DEMOLITION OR RELOCATION OF A STRUCTURE 

Sec. 18-38. - Permit required. 
    A demolition or relocation permit shall be obtained from the department of planning and inspections prior to the start of the demolition or relocation of a structure or building. Application for a demolition or relocation permit shall be signed by both the applicant for the permit and the owner(s) of the property(s) for which such permit is sought. Both the owner and the applicant shall be held and bound by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 5, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 18-39. - Documentation requirements. 
    Before issuance of demolition or relocation permit, the following documents shall be submitted to the planning and inspections department if determined to be necessary by the town manager: 
(1)  Site shall be reviewed by the historic review board to determine whether the structure has any historical significance and whether the structure or property is located in any type of historical district. The board shall summarize, in writing, its findings to the planning and inspection department and town manager prior to the issuance of the permit; 
(2)  Full photo-documentation of the structure including the interior, exterior and all facades. All photo-documentation shall be labeled and dated; and 
(3)  Full written documentation of the entire property which includes a complete property description, the types of materials the structure is constructed of, methods of construction, number and type of rooms and any accessory structures. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 5, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 18-40. - Demolition and relocation fees. 
(a)  Demolition or relocation of primary structures. The fee for a permit for demolition or the relocation of a building or structure from one lot to another or to a new location on the same lot shall be $500.00 plus any reasonable expenses incurred by the town. A bond accompanied and secured by approved surety, as reasonably determined by the town manager, in the amount of 150 percent of the town's estimated costs shall be filed with the town prior to the issuance of the permit. 
(b)  Demolition or relocation of accessory structures. The fee for a permit for demolition or the relocation of an accessory structures without utilities from one lot to another or to a new location on the same lot shall be $40.00 plus 50 cents per square foot over 160 square feet plus any reasonable expenses incurred by the town. A bond accompanied and secured by approved surety, as reasonably determined by the town manager, in the amount of 150 percent of the town's estimated costs shall be filed with the town prior to the issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 5, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 18-41 - Notice to others. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued under this division until written notice has been sent by U.S. regular mail and certified mail (return receipt requested) by the permit applicant to the owners of adjoining lots and to the owners of any property for which the temporary disconnection of utilities is necessitated by the proposed work. Copies of such written notice(s) shall be provided to the town with a written assurance from the applicant as to delivery of such notice(s) to the addressees prior to the issuance of a permit. 
(b)  Utility connections. Before a structure is demolished or removed, the owner or agent shall notify all utilities, in writing, having service connections within the structure, including, but not limited to, water, electric, gas, sewer and other connections. A permit to demolish or remove a structure shall not be issued until a release is obtained from the utilities, stating that their respective service connections and appurtenant equipment, such as meters and regulators, have been removed or sealed and plugged in a safe manner. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 5, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 007-10, § 1, 3-1-10) 
Sec. 18-42. - Lot restoration. 
(a)  Whenever a structure is relocated or demolished, the premises from which, to which, and/or upon which such structure has been relocated or demolished shall be restored, cleared, filled, excavated, graded, or maintained (including the restoration of established grades and the erection of necessary retaining walls, fences and grass seeding) to remove or correct all nuisances and unsafe or hazardous conditions caused, created, exposed, or remaining on the premises after the structure(s) has/have been relocated or demolished. 
(b)  Whenever as a result of the relocation or demolition of any structure on or from any lot in the town, any foundation is left, exposed or encountered such foundation shall be completely removed. After complete removal of the foundation, the lot shall be filled, compacted, graded and seeded to existing grade. 
(c)  All basements, cellars, well pits and other excavations left open, exposed or encountered as a result of or in connection with the relocation or demolition of a structure on any lot in the town shall be filled, compacted, graded and seeded to existing grade. 
(d)  All underground storage tanks, including septic tanks, which are encountered during a relocation or demolition shall be removed in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations. After removal, the lot shall be filled, compacted, graded and seeded to existing grade. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 5, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 18-43. - Debris and rubbish. 
(a)  All solid waste, construction debris and/or rubbish caused, created, exposed or encountered on any premises from which, to which, and/or upon which such structure(s) has been relocated or demolished shall be removed from the premises within ten calendar days of the completion of the relocation or demolition of the structure(s). Any such waste, construction debris and/or rubbish subsequently caused, created, exposed or encountered on any premises to which, from which, or upon which a structure(s) has been moved or removed shall be removed from such premises not less than once every five calendar days. Such removal shall comply with all applicable federal, state, county and town laws and regulations. 
(b)  Any dirt, mud, waste, rubbish and/or debris which may be tracked, washed, deposited or which may otherwise collect or accumulate on any public street, right-of-way or pedestrian pathway shall be removed daily. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 5, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 18-44. - Compliance with other applicable provisions. 
    Whenever a structure is relocated or demolished in the town, both the owner and the person or legal entity employed or authorized by the owner to perform such work (e.g. general contractor, house mover, demolition company) shall be responsible to comply with all applicable provisions of the Town Code, and state and federal laws in a safe, reasonable and workmanlike manner. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 5, 8-15-05) 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 18-45. - Adoption. 
    That certain document, at least one copy of which is on file in the office of the department of planning and inspections, being marked and designated the International Building Code, 2012 Edition, including Appendix E-Supplementary Accessibility Requirements but excluding all other appendices, as published by the International Code Council, be and hereby is adopted as the building code of the town for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures, by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use as herein provided. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International Building Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part of hereof as if fully set out in this article with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in this article. 
(Ord. of 7-3-95(1), § 1; Ord. of 7-20-98(1), § 1; Ord. No. 016-05, § 6, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 002-10, § 1, 3-1-10; Ord. No. 004-17, § 3, 5-15-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 016-05, § 6, adopted Aug. 15, 2005, renumbered former section 18-26 as new section 18-45. 
Sec. 18-46. - Additions, insertions, deletions and changes. 
    The town hereby adopts specific amendments to the International Building Code, 2012 Edition, as follows: 
Chapter 1, ADMINISTRATION, is amended by deleting the chapter in its entirety. Refer to Article I of this chapter. 
Chapter 9, FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS, is amended as follows: 
a.  Section 903.2.1.3, Group A-3, from item number one (1), delete "12,000 square feet (1115 m 2 )" and insert in lieu thereof "5,000 square feet (464.5 m 2 )". 
Chapter 13, ENERGY EFFICIENCY is deleted in its entirety, and the Delaware Residential Building Energy Code, as adopted by the State of Delaware in Title 7 of the Delaware Administrative Code, section 2101 "Regulations for State Energy Conservation Code," including any future amendments thereto and any other existing or future corresponding provisions of law, shall be enforced by the Town. 
Chapter 16, STRUCTURAL DESIGN 
a.  Section B1608.2, Ground Snow Loads, delete the subsection in its entirety and insert in lieu thereof the following: 
1608.2 Ground snow load. The ground snow load to be used in determining the design snow loads for roofs as determined by Figure 1608.2 is 25 pounds per square foot. 
b.  1612.3 Establishment of flood hazard areas . To establish flood hazard areas, the applicable governing authority shall adopt a flood hazard map and supporting data. The flood hazard map shall include, at a minimum, areas of special flood hazard as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in an engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for Kent County, Delaware and Incorporated Areas" date most recently enacted, as amended or revised with the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM), along with any related supporting data pertaining to any revisions. The adopted flood hazard map and supporting data are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this section. 
Chapter 27, ELECTRICAL , is hereby deleted in its entirety, and all those regulations, including electrical codes, adopted by the State of Delaware in Title 1 of the Delaware Administrative Code, section 700 ("Delaware State Fire Prevention Regulations"), including any future amendments thereto and any other existing or future corresponding provisions of law, shall be enforced by the Town. 
Chapter 28, MECHANICAL SYSTEMS , is hereby deleted in its entirety, and the International Mechanical Code and International Fuel Gas Code, as adopted by the State of Delaware in 24 Del. C. § 1806, including any future amendments thereto and any other existing or future corresponding provisions of law, shall be enforced by the Town. 
Chapter 29, PLUMBING SYSTEMS , is hereby deleted in its entirety, and the 2015 State of Delaware Plumbing Code, as adopted by the State of Delaware in Title 16 of the Delaware Administrative Code, section 4455 ("Delaware Regulations Governing a Detailed Plumbing Code"), including any future amendments thereto and any other existing or future corresponding provisions of law, shall be enforced by the Town. 
Chapter 31, SPECIAL CONSTRUCTION, Subsection 3107 Signs 
a.  Section B3107.1, General, delete the subsection in its entirety and insert in lieu thereof the following: 
Section B3107.1, General. Signs shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with this code and with Appendix A "Zoning" of the Town of Smyrna Code. 
Chapter 33 SAFEGUARDS DURING CONSTRUCTION 
a.  Section B3301, General, add the following new subsection: 
Section B3301.3, Storage of construction and demolition waste. Construction and demolition waste may be stored upon the land where actual construction or demolition is in progress; provided, however, that such waste shall not be stored for a period exceeding thirty (30) days. 
b.  Section B3301, General, add the following new subsection: 
Section B3301.4, Handling and storage of construction and demolition waste, trash, and litter. During all construction activities, the lot(s) shall be kept neat of trash and building materials. All construction sites shall be required to obtain and maintain on the site a container of suitable size and design to hold and confine trash, scraps, and other construction and demolition waste created or accumulated on the site, which might be blown from the site. All such construction refuse shall be maintained in a closed container, or a container of sufficient depth to prevent construction and demolition waste from blowing out of the container, at all times, until transferred to a landfill. Containers may be placed in setback areas, provided that the placement of the container does not obstruct the view of motorists and thereby create traffic hazards. It shall be a violation to permit accumulated debris, litter, or trash attributable to the construction site and the construction activity to blow or scatter onto adjoining properties, including the public street or to accumulate on the site outside of the container, or in transit to a landfill or dump. The owner or contractor shall service the container as frequently as needed to prevent trash from over-flowing. 
c.  Section B3303.6, Utility connections, delete the subsection in its entirety and insert in lieu thereof the following: 
Section B3303.6, Utility connections. Before a structure is demolished or removed, the owner or agent shall notify all utilities, in writing, having service connections within the structure, including, but not limited to, water, electric, gas, sewer and other connections. A permit to demolish or remove a structure shall not be issued until a release is obtained from the utilities, stating that their respective service connections and appurtenant equipment, such as meters and regulators, have been removed or sealed and plugged in a safe manner. 
(Ord. of 3-15-93(1), §§ I, II; Ord. of 7-3-95(1), § 2; Ord. of 7-15-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-20-98(1), § 4; Ord. of 10-5-98; Ord. of 5-15-00, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 10-2-00(1), § 1; Ord. of 10-16-00(1), § 1; Ord. of 11-20-00, §§ 1-3; Ord. of 12-4-00, § 1; Ord. of 12-18-00(1), § 1; Ord. of 12-18-00(2), § 1; Ord. of 2-20-01(2), §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 11-5-01(1), §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 11-5-01(2), §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 3-5-01(2), §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 8-5-02(1), §§ 36, 37; Ord. No. 030-03, §§ 1, 2, 11-3-03; Ord. No. 016-05, § 7, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 002-10, § 2, 3-1-10; Ord. No. 004-17, § 3, 5-15-17) 
Sec. 18-47. - Scope. 
(a)  The provisions of this article, including the International Building Code, shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal, and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(b)  Exception. Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories high with separate means of egress and their accessory structures shall comply with the International Residential Code. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 8, 8-15-05) 
Secs. 18-48-18-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOUSING CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-51. - Title and scope. 
    This article shall be known as the "Town of Smyrna Housing Code," which establishes minimum property maintenance standards for structures and premises covered by this article and is referred to as the "housing code" or "code" and shall apply to all dwelling structures located in the town except as may be exempted by this article. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. VII, Tit. 11, § 101.1) 
Sec. 18-52. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Whenever the words "multifamily dwelling," "residence building," "dwelling unit," "roominghouse," "rooming unit" or "premises" are used in this article, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." 
    Approved, as applied to a material, device or method of construction, means approved by the code official under the provisions of this article or approved by other authority designated by law to give approval in the matter in question. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 31 Del. C. § 4106(b)(1). 
    Basement means that portion of a building which is partly below and partly above grade, and having at least one-half its height above grade (see Cellar ). 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 31 Del. C. § 4106(b)(2). 
    Boardinghouse, lodginghouse and tourist house mean a building arranged or used for lodging, with or without meals, for compensation, by more than five and not more than 20 individuals. 
    Cellar means that portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade, and having at least one-half its height below grade (see "basement"). 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 31 Del. C. § 4106(b)(3). 
    Central heating means the heating system permanently installed and adjusted so as to provide the distribution of heat to all habitable rooms, bathrooms and kitchens. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 31 Del. C. § 4106(b)(4). 
    Code official means the official who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this article, or any duly authorized representative. For the town, the code official shall be the chief code enforcement officer or any duly authorized representative. 
    Condemn means to adjudge unfit for residential use or human occupancy. 
    Condemnation means the act of administratively, judicially or quasijudicially condemning according to the standards and procedures set forth in this article. 
    Dormitory means a space in a building where group sleeping accommodations are provided in one room, or in a series of closely associated rooms for persons not members of the same family group. 
    Dwelling. 
One-family dwelling means a building containing one dwelling unit with not more than five lodgers or boarders. 
Two-family dwelling means a building containing two dwelling units with not more than five lodgers or boarders per family. 
Multifamily apartment house means a building or portion thereof containing more than two dwelling units and not classified as a one- or two-family dwelling. 
    Dwelling unit means a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation which are contained within the dwelling unit. 
    Enforcement officer means the town official designated in this article or otherwise charged with the responsibility of administering this article or the official's authorized representative. 
    Exterior property areas means the open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the control of occupants, owners or operators of such premises. 
    Extermination means the control or elimination of insects, rats or other pests by eliminating their harborage places by making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food, by poison spraying, fumigating, trapping or by any other approved pest elimination methods. 
    Family means an individual or married couple and the children thereof with not more than two other persons related directly to the individual or married couple by blood or marriage; or a group of not more than five unrelated persons, living together as a single house-keeping unit in a dwelling unit. 
    Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
    Habitable space means space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or utility space and similar areas are not considered habitable space. 
    Hotel means any building containing six or more guest rooms intended or designed to be used, or which are used, rented or hired out to be occupied, or which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests. 
    Infestation means the presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or premises of insects, rats, vermin or other pests. 
    Let for occupancy or let means to permit possession or occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building or structure by a person who shall be legal owner or not be the legal owner of record thereof, pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement or contract for the sale of land. 
    Maintenance means conformance of a building and its facilities to the code under which the building was constructed. 
    Motel means a hotel as defined in this article. 
    Multifamily (multiple) dwelling means a multifamily apartment house. 
    Occupant means any person living and sleeping in a dwelling unit or having actual possession of the dwelling or rooming unit. 
    Openable area means that part of a window or door which opens directly to the outdoors and is available for ventilation. 
    Operator means any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which are let or offered for occupancy. 
    Owner means any person having a legal or equitable interest in the premises or any agent thereof. 
    Plumbing means the labor, materials and fixtures used in the installation, maintenance, extension and alteration of all piping, fixtures, appliances and appurtenances. 
    Plumbing fixture means a receptacle or device which is either permanently or temporarily connected to the water distribution system of the premises and demands a supply of water therefrom; or discharges used water, liquid-borne waste materials or sewage, either directly or indirectly, to the drainage system of the premises; or which requires both a water supply connection and a discharge to the drainage system of the premises. 
    Premises means a lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings or structures thereon. 
    Public nuisance means the following: 
(1)  The physical condition or use of any premises regarded as a public nuisance at common law. 
(2)  Any physical condition, use or occupance of any premises or its appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children, including but not limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations and unsafe fences or structures. 
(3)  Any premises designated as having unsanitary sewerage or plumbing facilities. 
(4)  Any premises designated as unsafe for human habitation or use. 
(5)  Any premises which are manifestly unsafe or unsecure so as to endanger life, limb or property. 
(6)  Any premises from which the plumbing, heating and/or facilities required by this article have been removed, or from which utilities such as water, sewer, gas and electricity have been disconnected, destroyed, removed or rendered ineffective, or the required precautions against trespassers have not been provided. 
(7)  Any premises which are unsanitary, or which are littered with rubbish or garbage, or which have an uncontrolled growth of weeds. 
(8)  Any structure or building that is in an advanced state of dilapidation, deterioration or decay; faulty construction; overcrowded; open, vacant or abandoned; damaged by fire to the extent as not to provide adequate shelter; in danger of collapse or structural failure and is dangerous to anyone on or near the premises. 
    Renovation means work on a building and its facilities to make it conform to present day minimum standards or sanitation, fire and life safety. 
    Residence building means a building in which sleeping accommodations, toilet, bathing and cooking facilities as a unit are provided. 
    Rooming unit means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not used for cooking or eating purposes. 
    Roominghouse means any residence building, or any part thereof, containing one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to more than five persons who are not members of the family. (See the definition of "boardinghouse, lodginghouse and tourist house.") 
    Rubbish means combustible and noncombustible waste materials except garbage, and the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials. 
    Structure means that which is built or constructed, including, without limitation because of enumeration, buildings for any occupancy or use whatsoever, fences, signs, billboards, fire escapes, chute escapes, railings, water tanks, towers, open-grade steps, sidewalks or stairways, tents or any thing erected and framed to component parts which is fastened, anchored, or rests on a permanent foundation or on the ground. 
    Supplied means installed, furnished or provided by the owner or operator. 
    Ventilation means the process of supply and removing air by natural or mechanical means to or from any space. 
(1)  Mechanical ventilation means ventilation by power-driven devices. 
(2)  Natural ventilation means ventilation by opening to outer air through windows, skylights, doors, louvers, or stacks without wind-driven or mechanical devices. 
    Workmanlike means, whenever the words "workmanlike state of maintenance and repair" are used in this article, that such maintenance and repair shall be made in a reasonably skillful manner. 
    Yard means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building extending along the entire length of a street, or rear or interior lot line. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. VII, Tit. 11, § 101.3; Ord. of 11-6-95(1), § 1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-53. - Purpose. 
    This article is intended to protect the public health, safety and welfare in all existing residential structures, and on all existing residential premises, as hereinafter provided, by: 
(1)  Establishing minimum maintenance standards for all residential structures and premises for basic equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, heat and sanitation; for safety from fire; for space; and for safe and sanitary maintenance of all structures and premises in existence. 
(2)  Fixing the responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants of all structures. 
(3)  Providing for administration, enforcement and penalties. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. VII, Tit. 11, § 101.2) 
Sec. 18-54. - Liberal interpretation. 
    The provisions of this article shall be liberally interpreted so as to minimize displacement of persons whose dwelling units may deviate from this article's specifications but do not pose an imminent threat to the health, safety and general welfare of the occupants and other persons. Additionally, this article is to be liberally interpreted so as to minimize hardships to persons that inhabit or own dwelling units which deviate from this article's specifications, but do not pose an imminent threat to the health, safety and general welfare of the occupants and other persons. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. VII, Tit. 11, § 301.1) 
Sec. 18-55. - Applicability. 
(a)  Subject to the exemptions provided in this article, the provisions of this article shall apply to all existing and future residential structures used for human habitation and to all existing and future residential premises. The provisions of this article are designed to eliminate or prevent substandard conditions with respect to structure; protect against fire hazard; provide adequate space for light and air; provide for proper heating and ventilating; and eliminate unsanitary conditions and overcrowding. Certain designated provisions of this article shall not apply to structures which were in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, provided that the owner, operator or occupant thereof obtains written certification from the town (as provided in this article) as to the preexisting nature of such nonconforming condition and a ruling that such condition cannot reasonably be brought into compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Every portion of a building or premises used or intended to be used for residential purposes shall comply with the provisions of this article, except hotels and motels serving transient guests only, migratory labor housing, rest homes, convalescent homes, nursing homes, recreational campers and civil defense shelters. For the purpose of this article, regulations of the state department of health and social services for migratory labor camps will apply to migrant housing. 
(c)  This article does not replace or modify requirements otherwise established for the construction, repair, alteration or use of buildings and facilities related thereto. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall be deemed to abolish or impair existing rights or remedies of the town or its officers relating to the removal or demolition of any buildings which are deemed to be unsafe or unsanitary. 
(e)  Unless clearly preempted by a scheme or regulation authorized by the state, the provisions of this article shall govern where a provision of any other ordinance, regulation or statute (existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived or hereafter enacted) establishes a lower standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the public. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. VII, Tit. 11, § 101.4(1)) 
Editor's note- The town housing code, as originally adopted, contained § 101.4(2), which provided for exemptions and read as follows: 
 Any owner, operator or occupant of a structure, or portion thereof, existing as of the effective date of this Code who desires to obtain an exemption from certain designated provisions of this Code shall make written application for such exemption to the Code Enforcement Officer on forms supplied by the Town, within six months from the effective date hereof. Absent of showing a good cause, failure to make such application within said six months shall constitute an admission that the public welfare requires retroactive application of this Code, a waiver of any right to exemption, and a bar to any future claim for exemption or to any defense on the grounds of retroactive application. 
 All applications for exemption shall be under oath and shall contain all information reasonably necessary or convenient to a determination of the pertinent issues. 
 The applicant shall have the burden of proving, by a clear preponderance of the evidence, that: 
 (1) the condition for which the exemption is sought was already in existence on the effective date of this Code, and 
 (2) that the burden of correcting the violation is clearly unreasonable when balanced against the public benefits which would result from such correction. 
 In considering any such application, the Code Enforcement Official may: 
  a. grant such exemption in its entirety 
  b. deny such exemption in its entirety 
  c. grant such exemption in part and deny such exemption in part, attaching such conditions thereto as are reasonably designed to accomplish the purpose and intent of this Housing Code. 
 The Code Enforcement Official shall render a written decision on such application within 90 days of its filing; provided that the Code Enforcement Officer may, for cause, extend the time for rendering such written decision for an additional 90 days by providing the applicant with written notice of such extension before the expiration of the initial 90 day period. Failure of the Code Enforcement Official to render a written decision on any application under this section within the original 90 day period or within any 90 day extension shall constitute the granting of such exemption in its entirety. 
 Notice of the Code Enforcement Officer's decision (including failure to render a written decision within said 90 or 180 days) shall be sent to the owner, operator, and occupant of such structure, to any mortgagee or lienholder of public record, to owners of properties abutting the subject premises and to the Town Council. 
 Any person affected by any decision of the Code Enforcement Officer under this section shall have the right to appeal such decision to the Town Board of Appeals as provided in Section 101.16. In addition, the Town Council may, on its own motion, by a majority vote, request the review of any such decision by the Board of Appeals. 
Secs. 18-56-18-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 18-66. - Enforcement authority. 
    It shall be the duty and responsibility of the town to enforce the provisions of this article throughout the town with the exception of any shelter constructed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of the state's office of civil defense for use solely during any civil emergency. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. VII, Tit. 11, § 101.5) 
Sec. 18-67. - Coordination of enforcement. 
    Inspection of premises and the issuing of orders in connection therewith under the provisions of this article shall be the exclusive responsibility of the code official. Wherever in the opinion of the code official it is necessary or desirable to have inspections of any condition by any state agency, the code official shall attempt to coordinate this in such a manner that the owners or occupants of dwellings shall not be subjected to visits by numerous inspectors nor to multiple or conflicting orders. Whenever coordination of enforcement is required, the code official shall make all reasonable efforts to ensure that no order for correction of any violation under this section is issued without the concurrence of any other department or agency having jurisdiction thereover. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. VII, Tit. 11, § 101.6) 
Sec. 18-68. - Administrative liability. 
    In addition to any other immunity from civil suit provided by the constitutions of the United States or of the state, by federal or state statute, or by any judicial decision of any federal or state court, the provisions of 10 Del. C. chapter 40, subparagraph II, County and Municipal Tort Claims (or any future corresponding provisions of law), shall apply to the town and to all officers, agents and employees (as the term "employees" is defined in 10 Del. C. § 40110) with regard to any claims made against any or all of them arising out of or connected with the implementation and enforcement of this article. To the extent not covered by any applicable contract of insurance carried by, or protecting the interest of, the town, its officers, agents and employees, the town solicitor shall defend any civil suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of the town as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of duties under this article, until the final determination of such proceedings. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. VII, Tit. 11, § 101.7) 
Sec. 18-69. - Conflict of interest. 
    No officer or employee who has an official duty in connection with the administration and enforcement of this article shall be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, materials or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building or in making the plans or specifications therefor, unless that person is the owner of such building. No such officer or employee shall engage in any activity which is inconsistent with the public interest and the officer's official duties. Any member of a board of appeals who has a similar conflicting interest in the subject matter on appeal shall not participate in the voting; however, solely because that member's vote is counted will not make the decision void or voidable if the board of appeals, with or without the knowledge of the material facts as to that member's interest, decided in good faith by a sufficient vote not counting the vote of the interested board of appeals member. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. VII, Tit. 11, § 101.8) 
Sec. 18-70. - Records. 
    The code official shall keep or cause to be kept records concerning the enforcement of this article's provisions, which records shall be open to public inspection. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. VII, Tit. 11, § 101.9) 
Sec. 18-71. - Code official's powers and duties. 
(a)  Generally. The code official shall enforce all the provisions of this article relative to the maintenance of structures and premises, except as may otherwise be specifically provided by other regulations. 
(b)  Notices and order. The code official shall issue all necessary notices and orders to abate illegal or unsafe conditions to ensure compliance with requirements of this article for the safety, health and general welfare of the public. 
(c)  Inspections to be made at reasonable times. In order to safeguard the safety, health and welfare of the public, the code official is authorized to enter any structure or premises between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. weekdays for the purpose of making inspections and performing duties under this article. 
(d)  Right of entry. If any owner, occupant or other person in charge of a structure subject to the provisions of this article refuses, impedes, inhibits, interferes with, restricts or obstructs entry and free access to any part of the structure or premises where inspection authorized by this article is sought, the code official may seek, in a court of competent jurisdiction, an order that such owner, occupant or other person in charge cease and desist with such interference. 
(e)  Access by owner or operator. Every occupant of a structure or premises shall either give the owner or operator thereof, or agent or employee, access to any part of such structure or its premises at reasonable times (normally 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. weekdays) for the purpose of making such inspections, maintenance, repairs or alteration as are necessary to comply with the provisions of this article, or, upon refusing to give such access, becomes personally responsible for making such inspection, maintenance, repairs or alterations. 
(f)  Credentials. The code official or the code official's authorized representative shall display proper evidence of their respective office for the purpose of demonstrating authority to inspect any and all buildings and premises in the performance of duties under this article. 
(g)  Rule-making authority. The mayor and council shall have power as may be necessary in the interest of public safety, health and general welfare to adopt and promulgate rules and regulations upon recommendation of the code official to interpret and implement the provisions of this article, to secure the intent thereof and to designate requirements applicable because of local, climatic or other conditions. 
(h)  Quarterly report. At least quarterly, the code official shall submit to the mayor and council a written statement of activities in a form and content as shall be prescribed by the mayor and council. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. VII, Tit. 11, § 101.10; Ord. No. 004-17, § 4, 5-15-17) 
Sec. 18-72. - Condemnation. 
(a)  Generally. When a structure is found by the code official to be unsafe, or when a structure or part thereof is found unfit for human occupancy or use, it may be condemned pursuant to the provisions of this article and may be placarded and vacated. Such condemned structure shall not be reoccupied without approval of the code official. 
(b)  Unsafe structure. An unsafe structure is one in which all or part thereof is found to be dangerous to life, health, property or the safety of the public or the structure's occupants because it is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation that it is likely to partially or completely collapse. 
(c)  Unsafe equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the structure which is in such disrepair or condition that it is found to be a hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or structure. Unsafe equipment may contribute to the finding that the structure is unsafe or unfit for human occupancy or use. 
(d)  Structure unfit for human occupancy. A structure is unfit for human occupancy or use whenever the code official finds that it is unsafe or, according to the standards set forth in this article because it lacks maintenance and is in extreme disrepair, it is unsanitary, vermin- or rat-infested, contains filth and contamination or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment required by this article. 
(e)  Closing of vacant structures. If the structure or part thereof is vacant and unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use and is not in danger of structural collapse, the code official may post a placard of condemnation on the premises and may order the structure closed up so it will not be an attractive nuisance to youngsters. Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time specified in the order, the code official shall cause it to be closed through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement by private persons, and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate in accordance with section 18-83. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. VII, Tit. 11, § 101.11) 
Sec. 18-73. - Notices and orders. 
(a)  Notice to owner or person responsible. Whenever the code official determines that there has been a violation of this article or has reasonable grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, or whenever the code official has condemned any structure or equipment under the provisions of section 18-72, notice shall be given to the owner or the person responsible therefor in the manner prescribed below. 
(b)  Form. Such notice shall: 
(1)  Be in writing. 
(2)  Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification. 
(3)  Include a statement of the reason or reasons why it is being issued. 
(4)  Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time for repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or structure into compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(5)  Include an explanation of the owner's right to seek modification or withdrawal of the notice by petition to a board of appeals having jurisdiction. 
(6)  State penalties for noncompliance. 
(c)  Service on owner. Such service shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner if a copy thereof is delivered to the owner personally, or by leaving the notice at the usual place of abode, in the presence of someone in the family of suitable age and discretion who shall be informed of the contents thereof; or by certified or registered mail addressed to the owner at the last known address with return receipt requested; or if the certified or registered letter is returned with receipt showing that it has not been delivered, by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on or about the structure affected by such notice, and at least one publication of such notice in a local newspaper of general circulation. 
(d)  Service on occupant. When a condemnation order is served on an occupant other than the owner or person responsible for such compliance, a reasonable time to vacate the property after noncompliance shall be stated. Owners or persons responsible for compliance must vacate at the time set for correction of defects if there is a failure of compliance. 
(e)  Penalties. Failure to comply with orders and notices shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 18-76. 
(f)  Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such property to another until the provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation issued by the code official and shall furnish to the code official a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or notice of violation. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. VII, Tit. 11, § 101.12) 
Sec. 18-74. - Placarding. 
(a)  Placarding of structure. After the condemnation notice required under the provisions of this article has resulted in an order by virtue of failure to comply within the time given, the code official may post on the premises or structure or parts thereof, or on defective equipment, a placard bearing the words: "CONDEMNED AS UNFIT FOR HUMAN OCCUPANCY OR USE," and a statement of the penalties provided for any occupancy or use or for removing the placard. The owner or the person responsible for the correction of violations shall remove themselves from the property on failure to comply with the correction order in the time specified, but other occupants shall be given a reasonable time thereafter to vacate. 
(b)  Prohibited use. Any person who shall occupy a placarded premises or structure or part thereof, or shall use placarded equipment, and any owner or any person responsible for the premises who shall let anyone occupy a placarded premises shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 18-76. 
(c)  Removal of placard. The code official shall remove the condemnation placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated. Any person who defaces or removes a condemnation placard without the approval of the code official shall be subject to the penalties provided by this article. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. VII, Tit. 11, § 101.13) 
Sec. 18-75. - Emergency orders. 
(a)  Generally. Whenever a code official finds that an emergency exists on any premises or any structure or part thereof, or on any defective equipment which requires immediate action to protect the public's health and safety or that of the occupants thereof, the code official may, with proper notice and service in accordance with the provisions of section 18-73, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring the vacating of the premises or such action taken as the code official deems necessary to meet such emergency. Notwithstanding other provisions of this article, such order shall be effective immediately, and the premises or equipment involved shall be placarded immediately upon service of the order. 
(b)  Hearing. Any person to whom such order is directed shall comply therewith. He may thereafter, upon petition directed to a board of appeals having jurisdiction, be afforded a hearing as prescribed in this article. Depending upon the findings of the board of appeals at such hearing as to whether the provisions of this article and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with, the board of appeals shall continue such order or modify or revoke it. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. VII, Tit. 11, § 101.14) 
Sec. 18-76. - Violations. 
(a)  Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, remove, demolish, use or occupy any structure or equipment regulated by this article, or knowingly cause same to be done contrary to or in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Penalty for violation. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or who fails to comply with any notice or order issued by a code official pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-11. Except where an appeal is taken, each day of a separate and continuing violation shall be deemed a separate offense. The justice of the peace court shall have such jurisdiction over violations of this article as is provided by statute. 
(c)  Prosecution. In case any violation order is not promptly complied with, the code official shall institute an appropriate action or proceed at law to seek the penalty provided in subsection (b) of this section. Also, the code official may ask such legal representative to proceed at law or in equity against the person responsible for the violation for the purpose of ordering that person to: 
(1)  Restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain from any further execution of work. 
(2)  Restrain or correct the erection, installation or alteration of such structure. 
(3)  Require the removal of work in violation. 
(4)  Prevent the occupancy or use of the structure, or part thereof erected, constructed, installed or altered in violation of, or not in compliance with, the provisions of this article, or in violation of a plan or specification under which an approval, permit or certification was issued. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. VII, Tit. 11, § 101.15) 
Sec. 18-77. - Board of appeals. 
(a)  Created; composition. A housing code board of appeals is hereby created in the town. This board of appeals shall consist of five members who shall be residents of the community and who shall be appointed by the town council for staggered terms. The first and second appointees shall serve for a term of two years, the third and fourth appointees shall serve for a term of three years and the fifth appointee, who will serve as chairperson, shall serve for a term of four years. Any appointment, pursuant to the provisions thereof, to replace a member whose position becomes vacant prior to the expiration of that person's term shall be filled only for the remainder of that term. 
(b)  Rules and regulations. The board of appeals may adopt and publish rules and regulations as may be necessary to govern its administrative procedures and proceedings. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. VII, Tit. 11, § 101.16(1), (2)) 
Sec. 18-78. - Appeals procedure. 
    Any person aggrieved by an action taken by the code official may appeal from such action by filing written notice of appeal with the appointed housing code board of appeals within ten days after the giving or posting of notice of such action. An appeal under this section shall stay the effect of the notice of violation or condemnation and shall prevent the code official from proceeding with the remedies provided under this article pending decision by a board of appeals. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. VII, Tit. 11, § 101.16(3)) 
Sec. 18-79. - Vote on appeals. 
    The housing code board of appeals shall hear all appeals relative to the enforcement of this article within its jurisdiction within a reasonable period of time after the filing of an appeal, and by a concurring vote of the majority of its members may reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify the action appealed from, and shall make such other order or determination as it deems just. Failure to secure such concurring votes shall be deemed a confirmation of the decision of the code official. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. VII, Tit. 11, § 101.16(4)) 
Sec. 18-80. - Financial interest in appeals. 
    A member of the housing code board of appeals shall not participate in any hearings or vote on any appeal in which that member has a direct or indirect financial interest. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. VII, Tit. 11, § 101.16(5)) 
Sec. 18-81. - Records of appeals. 
    The housing code board of appeals shall keep a written or recorded record of each meeting showing clearly the basis for each decision made by the board. A recording secretary shall be approved for the board of appeals hearings. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. VII, Tit. 11, § 101.16(6)) 
Sec. 18-82. - Demolition. 
(a)  General. The code official may order the owner of premises upon which is located any structure or part thereof which, in the code official's judgment, is so old, dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use so that it would be unreasonable to repair the same, to raze and remove such structure or part thereof; or, if it can be made safe by repair, to repair and make safe and sanitary or to raze and remove at the owner's option. 
(b)  Order. The order shall specify a time in which the owner shall comply therewith and shall specify repairs, if any. It shall be served on the owner of record or an agent, where an agent is in charge of the building, and upon the holder of any lien in the manner provided for service of a summons by a court of record. If the owner or a holder of a lien of record cannot be found, the order may be served by posting it on the main entrance of the building and by publishing it once each week for three successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation. 
(c)  Restraining actions. Any person affected by any such order may, within 30 days after service of the order, apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an order restraining the code official from razing and removing such structure or parts thereof. 
(d)  Failure to comply. Whenever the owner of a property fails to comply with a demolition order within the time prescribed, the code official shall cause the structure or part thereof to be razed and removed, either through an available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons and the cost of such razing and removal shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate as provided in section 18-83. 
(e)  Salvage materials. When any structure has been ordered razed and removed, the code official or other designated officer shall ensure that all demolition bids include consideration for any valuable salvage material; but that ownership and removal of all salvage material and debris from the demolition site shall be the responsibility of the bidder. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. VII, Tit. 11, § 101.17) 
Sec. 18-83. - Creation of tax lien. 
    Where the responsible party refuses or fails to comply with the lawful order of the code official after due notice thereof, either actual or constructural, any monies expended by the town for razing, demolition, removal, repairs or closing up of buildings and/or abatement of other unsafe conditions constituting a threat to the public health and safety shall be charged to the responsible party and shall be made a lien upon the property of the responsible person according to the appropriate provisions of 25 Del. C. chapter 29, 25 Del. C. chapter 46, the provisions of the town Charter or any future corresponding provisions of law. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. VII, Tit. 11, § 101.18) 
Secs. 18-84-18-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MINIMUM CONDITIONS OF PREMISES AND STRUCTURES 

Sec. 18-106. - Generally. 
    The provisions of this division shall describe the minimum conditions of residential premises and buildings to be used for human occupancy. Every residential building or structure occupied by humans, except as exempted pursuant to an application within six months from the effective date of the ordinance from which this article was derived, and its premises shall comply with the conditions and standards prescribed in this division when deviation from such conditions and standards poses an imminent threat to the health, safety and general welfare of the occupants and other persons. The code official shall cause periodic inspections to be made of residential buildings or premises to secure compliance with the requirements in this division. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. VII, Tit. 11, § 201.1) 
Sec. 18-107. - Premises conditions. 
(a)  Responsibility. Subject to provisions in a written lease or agreement shifting responsibility to the occupant, the owner of buildings and premises shall maintain such buildings and premises in compliance with the requirements in this division. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy or use premises which do not comply with the following requirements of this section. 
(b)  Vacant structures and land. All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided in this division so as to not cause blight or adversely affect the public health or safety. 
(c)  Sanitation. All premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage. 
(d)  Containers. Garbage, vegetable wastes or other putrescible material shall be stored in leakproof containers, provided with close-fitting covers, for the storage of such materials until removed from the premises for disposal. 
(e)  Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any structure located thereon. 
(f)  Insect and rat control. All premises shall remain free of insect infestation, rats, vermin or other pests in all exterior areas of the premises. An owner shall be responsible for extermination, except that the occupant shall be responsible for such extermination in the exterior areas of the premises of a single-family dwelling. Extermination in the shared or public parts of the premises of other than a single-family dwelling shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(g)  Public areas. All sidewalks, steps, driveways, parking spaces and similar paved areas for public use shall be kept in a proper state of repair. If any sidewalk or driveway or portion thereof by virtue of its state of repair shall constitute a danger to public health and safety, the sidewalk or driveway or portion thereof shall be replaced. 
(h)  Noxious weeds. All premises shall be kept free from weeds or plant growth which are noxious or detrimental to the public health and welfare. 
(i)  Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound and in compliance with sections 18-108 and 18-109. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. VII, Tit. 11, § 201.2; Ord. No. 004-17, § 5, 5-15-17) 
Sec. 18-108. - Exterior structure. 
(a)  Generally. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the health and safety of the occupants and so as to protect the occupants from the environment. 
(b)  Structural members. All supporting structural members of all structures shall be maintained structurally sound, free of deterioration and capable of safely bearing the dead and live loads imposed upon them. 
(c)  Exterior surfaces (foundations, walls and roof). Every foundation, exterior wall, roof and all other exterior surfaces shall be maintained in a workmanlike state of maintenance and repair, and shall be kept in such condition so as to exclude rats. 
(d)  Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained so as to carry the safe design and operating dead and live loads, plumb and free from open cracks and breaks, so as not to be detrimental to public safety and welfare. 
(e)  Exterior walls. Every exterior wall shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers, and any other condition which might admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls or to the occupied spaces of the building. All exterior surface materials, including wood, composition or metal siding, shall be maintained weatherproof so as to prevent deterioration. 
(f)  Roofs. The roof shall be structurally sound, tight and not have defects which might admit rain, and roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent rain water from causing dampness in the walls or interior portion of the building. 
(g)  Decorative features. All cornices, trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition. 
(h)  Signs, marquees and awnings. All canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, stairways, fire escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts and similar overhang extensions shall be maintained in good repair and shall be properly anchored so as to be kept in a safe and sound condition. 
(i)  Chimneys. All chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe, sound and in good repair. 
(j)  Stairs and porches. Every stair, porch, balcony and all appurtenances attached thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the loads to which they may be subjected and shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair. 
(k)  Window and door frames. Every window, door and frame shall be constructed and maintained in such relation to the adjacent wall construction so as to exclude rain as completely as possible and to substantially exclude wind from entering the building. 
(l)  Weathertight. Every window and exterior door shall be fitted reasonably in its frame and be weathertight. Weather stripping shall be used as necessary to exclude wind or rain from entering the dwelling or structure and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. 
(m)  Openable windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be capable of being easily opened and shall be held in position by window hardware. 
(n)  Door hardware. Every exterior door, door hinge and door latch shall be maintained in good condition. 
(o)  Basement hatchways and windows. Every basement or cellar hatchway or window shall be so constructed and maintained so as to prevent the entrance of rain and surface drainage water into the structure. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. VII, Tit. 11, § 201.3; Ord. No. 016-05, § 9, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 18-109. - Interior structure. 
(a)  Generally. The interior of a structure and its equipment shall be maintained structurally sound and in a sanitary condition so as not to pose a threat to the health and safety of the occupants, and to protect the occupants from the environment. 
(b)  Structural members. The supporting structural members of every building shall be maintained structurally sound, not showing any evidence of deterioration which would render them incapable of carrying the imposed loads. 
(c)  Interior surfaces. Floors, walls, including windows and doors, ceilings and other interior surfaces shall be maintained in good, reasonably sanitary condition. 
(d)  Lead-based paint. Lead-based paint with a lead content of more than 0.5 percent shall not be applied to any interior or exterior surface of a dwelling, dwelling unit or child care facility, including fences and outbuildings on any premises. 
(e)  Free from dampness. Cellars, basements and crawl spaces shall be maintained reasonably free from dampness to prevent conditions conducive to decay or deterioration of the structure. 
(f)  Sanitation. The interior of every structure shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(g)  Storage. Garbage or refuse shall not be allowed to accumulate or be stored in public halls or stairways. 
(h)  Insect and rat harborage. All structures shall be kept free from insect and rat infestation and, where insects or rats are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by acceptable processes which will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation. 
(i)  Exit doors. Every door available as an exit shall be capable of being opened easily from the inside. 
(j)  Stairs, porches and railings. Stairs, porches, railings and other exit facilities shall be adequate for safety. 
(k)  Exit facilities. All interior stairs and railings and other exit facilities of every structure shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair. Every inside stair shall be so constructed and maintained as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the anticipated loads. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. VII, Tit. 11, § 201.4) 
Sec. 18-110. - Light, ventilation and space requirements. 
(a)  Generally. All spaces or rooms shall be provided sufficient light so as not to endanger health and safety. All spaces or rooms shall be provided sufficient natural or mechanical ventilation so as not to endanger health and safety. Where mechanical ventilation is provided in lieu of the natural ventilation, such mechanical ventilating system shall be maintained in operation during the occupancy of any structure or portion thereof. 
(b)  Light in habitable rooms. Every habitable room, except kitchens and toilet rooms, shall have at least one window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total window area, measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be eight percent of the floor area of such room, except in kitchens when artificial light may be provided. Whenever walls or other portions of a structure face a window of any room and such obstructions are located less than three feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such a window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area for the room. Every habitable room, except kitchens and toilet rooms, shall have at least one window which can be easily opened or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room. 
(c)  Common halls and stairways. Every common hall and stairway in every building, other than one-family dwellings, shall be adequately lighted at all times with an illumination of at least a 60-watt light bulb. Such illumination shall be provided throughout the normally traveled stairs and passageways. 
(d)  Toilet rooms. Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms as required by subsection (b) of this section, except that a window shall not be required in bathrooms or water closet compartments equipped with an approved mechanical ventilation system. 
(e)  Cooking. Primary cooking shall not be permitted in any sleeping room or dormitory unit. 
(f)  Privacy. When permitted by the town's building and zoning codes, hotel units, lodging units and dormitory units shall be designed to provide privacy and shall be separate from other adjoining spaces. 
(g)  Below-grade rooms. Rooms partially or completely below grade shall not be used as habitable space unless: 
(1)  Floors and walls are watertight and so insulated as to prevent entry of moisture. 
(2)  Required minimum window area of every habitable room is entirely above the grade of the ground adjoining such window area. 
(3)  Means of egress and emergency escape are provided. 
(h)  Separation of units. Dwelling units shall be separate and apart from each other. With the exception of cribrooms or rooms accommodating handicapped individuals, sleeping rooms shall not be used as the only means of access to other sleeping rooms. 
(i)  Common access. A habitable room, bathroom or water closet compartment which is accessory to a dwelling unit shall not open directly into or be used in conjunction with a food store, barbershop or beauty shop, doctor's or dentist's examination or treatment room, or similar room used for public purposes. 
(j)  Dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall contain a minimum gross floor area of not less than 200 square feet for the first occupant, and 120 square feet for each additional occupant. The floor area shall be calculated on the basis of the total area of all habitable rooms. 
(k)  Area for sleeping purposes. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor area. 
(l)  Overcrowding. If any room used for residential purposes is overcrowded as defined in 31 Del. C. § 4106(27), the code official may order the number of persons sleeping or living in the room to be reduced. 
(m)  Minimum ceiling heights. Habitable rooms shall have a clear ceiling height over the minimum area required by this article at not less than seven feet, except that in attics, basements or top half-stories the ceiling height shall be not less than seven feet over less than one-third of the minimum area required by this division when used for sleeping, study or similar activity. In calculating the floor area of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area of the room having a clear ceiling height of five feet or more may be included. 
(n)  Minimum ceiling heights in mobile homes. Habitable space in a mobile home shall have a minimum ceiling height of seven feet over 50 percent of the floor area, and the floor area where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be considered in calculating floor area. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. VII, Tit. 11, § 201.5; Ord. of 11-6-95(1), § 2; Ord. No. 016-05, §§ 10, 11, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 004-17, § 6, 5-15-17) 
Sec. 18-111. - Plumbing facilities and fixtures requirements. 
(a)  Generally. Every dwelling unit shall include its own plumbing facilities which are in proper operating condition, can be used in privacy, and are adequate for personal cleanliness and the disposal of human waste. All plumbing facilities shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition by the occupant so as not to breed insects and rats or produce dangerous or offensive gases or odors. 
(b)  Water closet and lavatory. Every dwelling unit shall contain a lavatory and water closet supplied with cold running water. The water closet shall not be located in a habitable room. The lavatory may be placed in the same room as the water closet, or if located in another room, the lavatory shall be located in close proximity to the door leading directly into the room in which the water closet is located. The lavatory shall be supplied with hot and cold running water. 
(c)  Bathtub or shower. Every dwelling unit shall contain a room which affords privacy to a person in such room and which is equipped with a bathtub or shower supplied with hot and cold running water. 
(d)  Sink. Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink apart from the lavatory required under subsection (b) of this section and shall be supplied with hot and cold running water. 
(e)  Roominghouse. At least one water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower properly connected to an approved water and sewer system and in good working condition shall be supplied for each four rooms within a roominghouse, wherever such facilities are shared. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot and cold water at all times. 
(f)  Hotels. Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not provided, one water closet, one lavatory and one bathtub accessible from a public hallway shall be provided on each floor. Each lavatory, bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot and cold water at all times. 
(g)  Privacy. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall be designed and arranged to provide privacy. 
(h)  Same story. Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel units, lodging units or dormitory units, unless located within such respective units, or directly connected thereto, shall be provided on the same story with such units and be accessible only from a common hall or passageway. 
(i)  Floors. Bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided with floors of moisture-resistant materials. 
(j)  Connections. Water supply lines, plumbing fixtures, vents and drains shall be properly installed, connected and maintained in working order and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects and capable of performing the function for which they are designed. 
(k)  Water conservation. Plumbing fixtures which are replaced shall be of water-saving construction and use. 
(l)  Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained free from contamination and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located above the overflow rim of the fixture. 
(m)  Supply. The water supply systems shall be installed and maintained to provide at all times a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable them to function satisfactorily. 
(n)  Water heating facilities. Water heating facilities shall be properly installed, properly maintained and properly connected with hot water lines to the fixtures required to be supplied with the hot water. Water heating facilities shall be capable of heating water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub, shower and laundry facility or other similar units at a temperature of not less than 110 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(o)  Connections. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water closet or other facility shall be properly connected to either a public sewer system or to an approved private sewage disposal system. 
(p)  Maintenance. Every plumbing stack, waste and sewer line shall be so installed and maintained as to function properly and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects to prevent structural deterioration or health hazards. All repairs and installations shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the applicable codes. 
(q)  Storm drainage. An approved system of stormwater disposal shall be provided and maintained for the safe and efficient drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts and other open areas on the premises. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. VII, Tit. 11, § 201.6) 
Sec. 18-112. - Heating. 
(a)  Generally. Every dwelling unit and guestroom shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(b)  Heating equipment. All heating equipment, components and accessories in every heating and water heating device shall be maintained free from leaks and obstructions, and kept functioning properly so as to be free from fire, health and accident hazards. 
(c)  Installation. All mechanical equipment shall be properly installed and safely maintained in good working condition and be capable of performing the function for which it was designed and intended. 
(d)  Flue. All fuel-burning equipment designed to be connected to a chimney, flue or vent shall be connected in an approved manner. 
(e)  Clearance. All required clearances from combustible materials shall be maintained. 
(f)  Safety controls. All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall be maintained in effective operation. 
(g)  Combustion air. A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel and for ventilation of the space shall be provided the fuel-burning equipment. 
(h)  Fireplaces. Fireplaces and other construction and devices intended for use similar to a fireplace, including woodburning and coalburning stoves, shall be stable and structurally safe and connected to approved chimneys. 
(i)  Climate control. When facilities for interior climate control (heating, cooling and/or humidity) are integral functions of structures used as dwelling units, such facilities shall be maintained and operated in a continuous manner in accordance with the designed capacity. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. VII, Tit. 11, § 201.7; Ord. No. 004-17, § 7, 5-15-17) 
Sec. 18-113. - Electrical facilities. 
(a)  Outlets required. Where there is electric service available to a structure, every habitable room of a dwelling unit and every guestroom shall contain at least two separate and remote outlets, one of which may be a ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture. In a kitchen, three separate and remote wall-type electric light fixtures shall be provided. Every public hall, water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room or furnace room shall contain at least one electric light fixture. In addition to the electric light fixture in every bathroom and laundry room, there shall be provided at least one electric outlet. 
(b)  Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be installed and maintained in a safe manner in accordance with all applicable codes. All electrical equipment shall be of an approved type, i.e., swimming pools shall have ground-fault receptacles and related wiring. 
(c)  Defective system. Where it is found, in the opinion of the code official, that the electrical system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure, by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the code official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. VII, Tit. 11, § 201.8; Ord. No. 016-05, §§ 12, 13, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 18-114. - Fire safety requirements. 
(a)  Generally. A safe, continuous and unobstructed means of egress shall be provided from the interior of a structure to the exterior at a street, or to a yard, court or passageway leading to a public open area at grade. 
(b)  Direct exit. Every dwelling unit or guestroom shall have access directly to the outside or to a public corridor. 
(c)  Doors. All doors in the required means of egress shall be readily openable from the inner side. 
(d)  Fire escapes. All required fire escapes shall be maintained in working condition and structurally sound. 
(e)  Exit signs. All exit signs shall be maintained, illuminated and visible. 
(f)  Accumulations. Waste, refuse or other materials shall not be allowed to accumulate in stairways, passageways, doors, windows, fire escapes or other means of egress. 
(g)  Flammable matter. Highly flammable or explosive matter, such as paints, volatile oils and cleaning fluids or combustible refuse, such as waste paper, boxes and rags, shall not be accumulated or stored on residential premises except in reasonable quantities consistent with normal usage. 
(h)  Residential unit. A dwelling unit or rooming unit shall not be located within a structure containing an establishment handling, dispensing or storing flammable liquids with a flashpoint of 110 degrees Fahrenheit or lower. 
(i)  Fire alarms and smoke alarms. Fire alarms and detecting systems shall be maintained and be suitable for their purposes. All residential occupancies shall be provided with a minimum of one approved single-station or multiple-station smoke alarm on each story, including basements and cellars, but not including crawlspaces or uninhabitable attics, on the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of bedrooms, and in each sleeping area, guestroom or suite of a hotel, motel, lodginghouse, boardinghouse or dwelling unit. The alarms shall be installed in accordance with the building code and when activated shall provide an alarm suitable to warn the occupants within the individual room or unit. 
(j)  Fire suppression system. Fire suppression systems shall be maintained in good condition, free from mechanical injury. Sprinkler heads shall be maintained clean, free of corrosion and paint, and shall not be bent or damaged. 
(k)  Fire extinguishers. All portable fire extinguishers shall be visible and accessible, and maintained in an efficient and safe operating condition. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. VII, Tit. 11, § 201.9; Ord. No. 004-17, § 8, 5-15-17) 
Sec. 18-115. - Extermination. 
(a)  Owner. The owner of any structure shall be responsible for extermination of insects, rats, vermin or other pests within the structure prior to leasing, renting or selling the structure. 
(b)  Tenant-occupant. The tenant-occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the continued ratproof condition of the structure and, if the tenant-occupant fails to maintain the ratproof condition, the cost of extermination shall be the responsibility of the tenant-occupant. 
(c)  Single occupancy. The occupant of a structure containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rats or other pests in the structure or on the premises. 
(d)  Multiple occupancy. Every owner, agent or operator of two or more dwelling units or multiple occupancies, or roominghouses, shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rats or other pests in the public or shared areas of the structure and premises. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. VII, Tit. 11, § 201.10) 
Sec. 18-116. - Kitchen facilities. 
(a)  Cooking facilities. In every dwelling unit that contains cooking and baking facilities for the purpose of preparation of food, such facilities shall be properly installed by the owner and operated and kept in a clean and sanitary working condition by the occupant. 
(b)  Refrigeration. In every dwelling unit that contains a refrigeration unit for the temporary preservation of perishable foods, such unit shall be capable of maintaining an average temperature below 45 degrees Fahrenheit and shall be properly installed by the owner and operated and kept in a clean and sanitary working condition by the occupant. 
(c)  Cooking and heating equipment. All cooking and heating equipment, components and accessories in every heating, cooking and water heating device shall be maintained free from leaks and obstructions, and kept functioning properly so as to be free from fire, health and accident hazards. 
(d)  Rubbish storage facilities. Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with approved containers and covers for storage of rubbish, and the owner, operator or agent in control of such dwelling shall be responsible for the removal of rubbish. 
(e)  Food preparation. All spaces used or intended to be used for food preparation shall contain suitable space and equipment to store, prepare and serve foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be adequate facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for temporary storage when necessary. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. VII, Tit. 11, § 201.11) 
Secs. 18-117-18-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 005-08, § 1, adopted April 7, 2008, repealed the former Art. IV, §§ 18-136-18-146, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to dangerous buildings and derived from Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 24, § 1-11; Ord. of 11-15-93, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 6-4-01(2), § 1; Ord. No. 010-04, §§ 1-24, 6-21-04; Ord. No. 021-05, §§ 1, 2, 1-17-06. 

Sec. 18-136. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the housing or enclosure of persons, animals, or chattels. As used in this article, the term "building" shall, where appropriate, include the term "structure." 
    Dangerous building means all buildings or structures which have any or all of the following defects: 
(1)  Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base. 
(2)  Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show 33 percent or more of damage or deterioration of the supporting member or members, or 50 percent of damage or deterioration of the non-supporting enclosing or outside walls or covering. 
(3)  Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe, for the purpose used. 
(4)  Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to have become dangerous to life, safety, morale, or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the people of the town. 
(5)  Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living that they are unfit for human habitation, or are likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health, morale, safety or general welfare of those living therein. 
(6)  Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the health, morale, safety or general welfare of human beings who live or may live therein. 
(7)  Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other means of communication. 
(8)  Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure members of the public or property. 
(9)  Those which because of their condition are unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous to the health, morale, safety or general welfare of the people of the town. 
(10)  Those under construction, if the authorized work is substantially suspended or abandoned for a period of three months or more and the abandoned site creates risk or danger to the health, safety, and welfare of the occupants, neighboring properties, or the residents of the town. 
    Final order means: (a) any order issued by the town code enforcement official that is either not appealed to housing code board of appeals in accordance with section 18-143 of this article, (b) any order issued by the housing code board of appeals following an appeal of a town code enforcement official's order pursuant to section 18-143 of this article; (c) a consent decree, and/or (d) any emergency order issued by the code official. 
    "PHALI" -Acronym for all "persons holding a legal interest" in a building or structure as of record in the public land records of Kent or New Castle County, including, but not limited to, the owners, mortgagees, lien holders, and lessees under a recorded lease. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. "Structure" shall include, among other things, buildings, manufactured homes, walls, fences, and billboards. 
    Tenant in possession means a tenant having legal possession under a written lease which lease obligates the tenant (rather than the owner of record) to repair and/or maintain the building. 
(Ord. No. 005-08, § 1, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 18-137. - Declared nuisances. 
    All dangerous buildings are hereby declared to be public nuisances, and shall be vacated, repaired, or demolished, as provided in this article. The town manager may, in addition to or in lieu of all other remedies contained herein, seek equitable relief from the Court of Chancery to enjoin such nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 005-08, § 1, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 18-138. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Removal of posted legal notice. Any person removing the legal notice posted on the building pursuant to section 18-139(7) of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $500.00. 
(b)  Failure to vacate by occupant. Any person occupying a dangerous building who fails to comply with any final order to vacate shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $500.00. 
(c)  Failure to repair by tenant in possession. Any tenant in possession of any dangerous building who fails to repair the building in accordance with any final order to repair issued as provided in this article shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of not less than $300.00 and not more than $1,000.00. 
(d)  Failure to repair or demolish by owner of record. Any owner of record of any dangerous building who shall fail to comply with any final order to repair or any final order to demolish the building as provided for in this article shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 005-08, § 1, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 18-139. - Code official's duties. 
    The code official shall: 
(1)  Inspect or cause to be inspected periodically, all public buildings, schools, halls, churches, theaters, hotels, tenements, commercial, manufacturing, or loft buildings for the purpose of determining whether any conditions exist which render such places a dangerous building. 
(2)  Inspect any building about which complaints are filed by any person to the effect that a building, wall or structure is or may be in violation of this article. 
(3)  Inspect any building reported by the fire or police department of the town as being in probable violation of this article. 
(4)  Inspect such other buildings as shall from time to time come to his attention as possibly dangerous buildings. 
(5)  Notify all occupants and PHALI in any dangerous building in accordance with the provisions of section 18-142. 
(6)  Appear at all hearings conducted before the housing code board of appeals and testify as to the condition of dangerous buildings. 
(7)  At the time notice is provided pursuant to section 18-142 of this article, place a notice on all dangerous buildings reading as follows: 
"This building has been found to be a Dangerous Building by the Code Official and ordered [vacated/repaired/demolished]. It is unlawful to remove this notice without prior written approval from the Town Code Official. Any person convicted of so removing this notice shall pay a fine of not less than $100.00" 
(8)  Prosecute: 
a.  All occupants for failure to comply with a final order to vacate. 
b.  All persons removing the notice posted pursuant to section 18-139(7). 
c.  All tenants in possession of any dangerous building who fail to repair the building in accordance with any final order issued pursuant to this article. 
d.  Any owner of record of any dangerous building who shall fail to comply with any final order to repair or demolish the building as provided for in this article. 
(9)  When necessary or appropriate, retain a structural engineer, architect, or other qualified expert consultant to inspect and issue a report with regards to any building or structure determined to be "dangerous" by him, the cost of such expert to be: Paid by the owner of record; charged against the lands on which the building exists as a municipal lien; added to the tax duplicate as an assessment; or recovered in a suit at law against the owner; provided however, that such costs shall be paid by the town where the consultant determines that the building does not constitute a dangerous building hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 005-08, § 1, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 18-140. - Standards for repair, vacation or demolition. 
    The following standards shall govern decisions by any town code official and/or the housing code board of appeals in ordering any vacation, repairs, or demolition of a building determined to be "dangerous" in violation of this article: 
(1)  Vacate building. If the building is in such condition, or if authorized repair work is such, as to endanger the health, safety, or general welfare of the building's occupants, it shall be ordered vacated. 
(2)  Repair if reasonable. If, under all of the circumstances, it would be reasonable to repair the building so that it will no longer exist in violation of this article, it shall be ordered repaired. Factors that may be taken into consideration in determining whether it is "reasonable" to make repairs may include, but shall not be limited to: the extent and estimated cost of the repairs necessary in comparison to the fair market value of the building if such repairs were to be made; the practicality of making such repairs due to construction, engineering, safety, or similar constraints; the uniqueness of the building from an architectural or historic vantage point; and the financial ability of the PHALI to initiate such repairs and complete them in a workmanlike and timely manner. 
(3)  Fire hazard: Repair or demolish. In all cases where it is determined that a dangerous building is a fire hazard existing or erected in violation of the terms of this article or of any town ordinance or state statute or regulation, it shall be ordered repaired or demolished, as appropriate, pursuant to the terms of this article. 
(4)  Demolish. A building shall be ordered demolished in all cases where: (1) it is determined, in accordance with subsection (b) of this section 18-140, that it would not be reasonable to repair the building so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this section; or (2) the building is determined to be damaged, decayed, or deteriorated to such an extent as to require replacement of 51 percent or more of: 
a.  Its major structural components (e.g. foundation, supporting structural members, floors, exterior walls, roof, porches and steps); 
b.  The total square footage of all enclosed floor area; or 
c.  The reasonably estimated current cost (including all labor, materials, engineering, building permits, insurance, and the like) of reconstructing the entire building. 
(Ord. No. 005-08, § 1, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 18-141. - Enforcement order by code official. 
    Whenever the code official determines that a building is a dangerous building under this article, he/she shall issue one or more of the following orders as appropriate: 
(a)  Order to vacate. If the building is occupied and: (1) has been ordered demolished or (2) has been ordered repaired but the condition of such building, or the repairs thereto, are such as to endanger the health, safety, or general welfare of the occupants thereof, the code official shall issue an order to vacate commanding the occupants to vacate within seven calendar days, or such lesser time as reasonable in view of the dangers presented. Such order shall include notice of the occupant's right to appeal the code official's order pursuant to section 18-143. 
(b)  Order to repair. If it is determined that the building may reasonably be repaired pursuant to section 18-140(b), the code enforcement official shall issue an order to repair, commanding: (1) the tenants in possession and/or (2) the owner(s) of record, to repair the building so that it shall no longer be a dangerous building under this article. Such order shall: 
(1)  Specify the particulars which make the building a dangerous building under this article, 
(2)  Require that repair work be commenced within 30 days (or such lesser time as reasonable in view of the dangers presented) and completed within 90 days of the date work was commenced, 
(3)  Require that any person(s) or entity undertaking repairs pursuant to the order to first: (a) safely secure the building and lot to protect the public and abutting owners for potential injury to persons or property and (b) obtain all required building permits. 
(4)  Include notice of the occupant's right to appeal the code official's order pursuant to section 18-143. 
(c)  Order to demolish. If it is determined that it is not reasonable to repair the building under section 18-140(b) or that the building should otherwise be demolished under section 18-140(c) or (d), the code enforcement official shall issue an order to demolish, commanding the owner(s) of record to demolish such building, including disposal of all demolition debris from the site and proper grading and seeding thereof following such demolition. Such order shall: 
(1)  Specify the particulars which make the building a dangerous building under this article, 
(2)  Require that demolition work be commenced within 30 days (or such lesser time as reasonable in view of the dangers presented) and completed within 60 days of the date work was commenced, 
(3)  Require that any person(s) or entity undertaking demolition pursuant to the order to first: (a) safely secure the building and lot to protect the public and abutting owners for potential injury to persons or property and (b) obtain all required demolition permits. 
(4)  Include notice of the occupant's right to appeal the code official's order pursuant to section 18-143. 
(Ord. No. 005-08, § 1, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 18-142. - Notice of code official's order; effective date of order. 
(a)  Any order to vacate, repair, or demolish shall be provided to the occupant(s) (if any), the owner(s) of record, and all other PHALI as follows: 
(1)  Order to vacate. An order to vacate shall be given to the occupants of any dangerous building by: (a) posting a copy of such order on the front door of such building and (b) personal delivery to an adult person residing within the building or (c) certified and regular mail sent to the "occupant" at the mailing address of the dangerous building. 
(2)  Order to repair. An order to repair shall be given to the tenants in possession (if the town is aware of such lease obligation), to the owner(s) of record, and to all other PHALI by: (a) personal delivery or (b) certified and regular mail sent to the last known mailing address of person(s) or entity(s) as shown on the town's tax assessment records. Additionally: (a) such order shall be posted in some conspicuous place on the front of the building, posted at the town hall, and (c) published in a newspaper of general circulation in the town. 
(3)  Order to demolish. An order to demolish shall be given to the tenants in possession (if the town is aware of such lease obligation), to the owner(s) of record, and to all other PHALI by: (a) personal delivery or (b) certified and regular mail sent to the last known mailing address of person(s) or entity(s) as shown on the town's tax assessment records. Additionally: (a) such order shall be posted in some conspicuous place on the front of the building, (b) posted at the town hall, and (b) published in a newspaper of general circulation in the town. 
(b)  Any order issued under section 18-141 shall be effective upon the expiration of five days from the date that notice was given. Where such notices are provided on different dates, the last such date shall control. Notice by mail shall be effective upon depositing same in the U.S. mails, postage pre-paid, to the proper address. 
(Ord. No. 005-08, § 1, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 18-143. - Right to appeal order of code official. 
    Any occupant, owner of record, or other PHALI in a building determined to be a dangerous building under this article may, within ten days, file a written appeal of the order of the code official to the housing code board of appeals in accordance with section 18-78 of article III ("housing code") of this Code. Notice of such appeal hearing, setting out the date, time, place, and subject property shall be: (a) posted on the front door of the building and at the town hall; (b) provided to the owner of record, tenant in possession, and all other PHALI by regular and certified mail, and (c) to the occupant by personal delivery, or by regular and certified mail. Sections 18-77 through 18-81 of article III ("housing code") of this Code shall apply to any such appeal as if restated herein. At such hearing, the housing code board of appeals shall: 
(1)  Hear such testimony and evidence as the code official and any occupant, tenant in possession, or other PHALI shall offer relative to the condition of the building. The strict legal rules of evidence shall not apply, and hearsay evidence shall not be prohibited, but the board shall be free to accept such evidence as a reasonable person would accept as reliable and trustworthy in making important decisions in his own life, affording all evidence such weight as the board deems appropriate. All parties appearing before the board shall have the right to be represented by legal counsel and to cross-examine witnesses. Such hearing shall be transcribed or tape-recorded and a record kept of all exhibits introduced for the board's consideration. 
(2)  Make written findings of fact from the testimony and evidence presented at the hearing. 
(3)  Issue a final order based upon its written findings of fact. If the finding of the board is that the building is a dangerous building, the board shall issue an appropriate final order commanding that the building be vacated, repaired, or demolished as appropriate: 
a.  Order to vacate. If the building is occupied and: (1) has been ordered demolished or (2) has been ordered repaired but the condition of such building, or the repairs thereto, are such as to endanger the health, safety, or general welfare of the occupants thereof, the housing board of appeals shall issue an order to vacate, specifying the particulars which make the building a dangerous building under this article, and commanding the occupants to vacate within seven calendar days, or such lesser time as reasonable in view of the dangers presented. 
b.  Order to repair. If it is determined that the building may reasonably be repaired, the housing code board of appeals shall issue a final order to repair, commanding the tenants in possession and/or the owner(s) of record, to repair the building so that it shall no longer be a dangerous building under this article. Such order shall: 
(i)  Specify the particulars which make the building a dangerous building under this article, 
(ii)  Require that repair work be commenced within 30 days (or such lesser time as reasonable in view of the dangers presented) and completed within 90 days of the date work was commenced, 
(iii)  Require that any person(s) or entity undertaking repairs pursuant to the order to first: (a) safely secure the building and lot to protect the public and abutting owners for potential injury to persons or property and (b) obtain all required building permits. 
(c)  Order to demolish. If it is determined the building should be demolished, the housing code board of appeals shall issue a final order to demolish, commanding the owner(s) of record to demolish such building, including disposal of all demolition debris from the site and proper grading and seeding thereof following such demolition. Such order shall: 
(1)  Specify the particulars which make the building a dangerous building under this article, 
(2)  Require that demolition work be commenced within 30 days (or such lesser time as reasonable in view of the dangers presented) and completed within 60 days of the date work was commenced, 
(3)  Require that any person(s) or entity undertaking demolition pursuant to the order to first: (a) safely secure the building and lot to protect the public and abutting owners for potential injury to persons or property and (b) obtain all required building permits. 
(Ord. No. 005-08, § 1, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 18-144. - Consent decree. 
    Within ten days of the effective date of the code official's order that a building has been found by him to be a dangerous building pursuant to this article, or at any time during the pendency of an appeal of such order to the housing code board of appeals, the owner of the property may enter into a consent decree with the town acknowledging that the owner is in concurrence with the findings of the code official and consenting to remedial action by the town, the cost of which, if not promptly paid by the owner of record, is to be: (a) charged against the land upon which the building stands or formerly stood as a municipal lien, and/or added to the tax duplicate as an assessment. In the event of such consent decree, the town code official shall notify all other PHALI according the public land records, and also any occupants of the building, of such consent order. 
(Ord. No. 005-08, § 1, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 18-145. - Right to post secured bond and repair, notwithstanding order to demolish. 
    Notwithstanding the issuance of any final order (other than a consent order or an emergency order), any owner of record or other PHALI may proceed to repair such building as follows: 
(a)  Prior to the expiration of the time limit established by the code official or housing code board of appeals (as appropriate) to commence demolition work, the owner of record or other PHALI shall provide the town manager with: 
(i)  A detailed written estimate from a Delaware-licensed architect, engineer, or established construction contractor specifying the work necessary to bring the building into compliance, a projected time frame to complete work (which shall not exceed nine months) and the estimated cost thereof. Such costs shall include all costs associated with the project including construction, demolition, permits, insurance, landfill charges, and landscaping/restoration. The cost of obtaining the estimate shall be paid by the person seeking to repair the building. Such estimate shall be subject to review for reasonableness by the town's consulting engineer and approval by the town manager. 
(ii)  A completion performance bond in an amount equal to 125 percent of the estimated cost of bringing the building into compliance, in form acceptable to the town, together with approved surety in form acceptable to the town manager. Surety may consist of an irrevocable letter of credit from a bank located in the State of Delaware, a commercial surety bond from an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Delaware, a first lien mortgage on real estate in the State of Delaware with an appraised value equal to or exceeding twice the amount of the bond, or cash deposited with the town. 
(b)  Work to repair the building shall commence within 15 days of the date that the town manager approves the cost estimate, completion of work time frame, completion performance bond, and approved surety. The owner of record, any PHALI, or their construction contractor, shall obtain all necessary construction permits prior to commencing work. Work shall continue on a regular and diligent basis except for weekends, holidays, bad weather days and the like. Except for the forgoing, if work ceases for five consecutive work days or for five workdays out of any ten consecutive work days, in the absence of a showing of just cause by the contractor, owner of record, or other PHALI, the town manager shall be entitled to declare the performance completion bond in default and proceed to draw upon the surety as hereinafter provided. 
(c)  All work shall be completed within such period of time as approved by the town manager under subsection (a)(i) above; provided however, that for just cause shown, the town manager may (in writing) extend the time to complete work beyond the original deadline not exceeding three months. 
(d)  In the event that work is not commenced, continued, or completed in accordance with the provisions of this section, the town manager may declare a default under the performance completion bond and make such draw or draws upon the approved surety as necessary to either: (i) finish the repair work necessary to bring the building into compliance or (ii) in the event that completion of the repair work does not, in the reasonable discretion of the town manager, appear to be practical, to have the building demolished, the demolition materials properly disposed of, and the lot graded and seeded. 
(Ord. No. 005-08, § 1, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 18-146. - Right of PHALI, other than the owner of record, to perform repairs or demolition to avoid imposition of lien. 
    Any PHALI other than the owner of record shall have the right, at their own assumed risk, to undertake repairs or demolition of any building in accordance with any final order or consent decree in the place and stead of the tenant in possession and/or owner of record in order to avoid the town performing the work and imposing a lien upon the property which lien, by law, would have preference and priority over all other liens, including those prior in time. 
(Ord. No. 005-08, § 1, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 18-147. - Failure to comply with final order or consent decree. 
(a)  Town's authority to take remedial action, including vacating, repair, or demolition. Where: 
(1)  Any dangerous building has not been brought into compliance within the time specified in an order of the code official issued pursuant section 18-141 and no timely appeal is filed in accordance with section 18-143; or 
(2)  Any dangerous building has not been brought into compliance within the time specified in a final order of the housing code board of appeals pursuant to section 18-143(3), or 
(c)  Any dangerous building has not been brought into compliance within the time specified in any consent decree entered into pursuant to section 18-144: 
The town code official may, in addition to the enforcement provisions of section 18-138, immediately undertake such remedial action as the code enforcement official, in his reasonable discretion, deems necessary or appropriate, to bring the building into compliance, including but not limited to: (a) taking possession of the building and, if necessary, having any remaining occupants evicted as trespassers with the assistance of the town police department to insure their health and safety; (b) securing the building and lot to protect the public and abutting owners from potential injury to persons or property, (c) undertaking, with town staff and/or through private contractors, such repairs as necessary to bring the building into compliance; or (d) undertaking, with town staff and/or through private contractors, demolition of the building, the proper removal of all demolition materials, and the grading and seeding of the lot. 
(b)  Presumption that building not reasonable to repair where repairs not completed within time permitted. Where any building has not been repaired within the time permitted under an order to repair issued by the code official pursuant to section 18-141(b) and no timely appeal has been filed under section 18-143, or where any building has not been repaired within the time permitted under a final order to repair issued by the housing code board of appeals pursuant to section 18-143(3)(b), the town code official may reasonably presume that it is not reasonable to repair the building and proceed to have such building demolished. 
(Ord. No. 005-08, § 1, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 18-148. - Costs of appeal and/or remedial action to be a lien upon the property. 
    In the event that the code official takes remedial action due to the failure of the occupant, tenant in possession, or owner of record to comply with any final order or consent decree: (a) all of the town's administrative, legal, and expert witness costs incurred to inspect the building and/or in connection with any hearing held pursuant to section 18-143, and (b) all remedial costs incurred to repair or demolish the building: 
(1)  Shall be a lien upon the property to the extent and as authorized by 25 Del.C. Chapter 29; 
(2)  Shall be added to the town's assessment list as authorized by Section 9.5 of the Town Charter; 
(3)  May be recovered from the owner of record in an action at law in any court of competent jurisdiction 
(Ord. No. 005-08, § 1, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 18-149. - Duties of fire marshal, fire department, police force, other town employees. 
    The fire marshal, all members of the fire department, all officers of the police force, and all other employees of the town shall report in writing to the code official all buildings or structures within the town which shall come to their knowledge or attention as being dangerous buildings within the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 005-08, § 1, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 18-150. - Duties of town solicitor. 
    The town solicitor shall: 
(1)  Appear at all hearings before the housing code board of appeals in regard to dangerous buildings. 
(2)  Bring suit to collect all municipal liens, assessments or costs incurred in repairing or causing to be vacated or demolished dangerous buildings. 
(3)  Take such other legal action as is necessary to carry out the terms and provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 005-08, § 1, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 18-151. - Emergency cases. 
    In cases where it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger to the life or safety of any person unless a dangerous building is immediately vacated, repaired, or demolished, the code official may, without complying with any of the other legal procedures set forth herein, order the immediate vacation, repair, or demolition of such dangerous building or any portion thereof, and may proceed as expeditiously as possible to have all necessary work done (including: boarding up of openings in the building; fencing off or barricading access to the lot; closing abutting streets, sidewalks, alleys, and public ways; or such other appropriate action) as deemed necessary to render the building and premises temporarily safe. In such event, the code official shall make reasonable efforts, under the circumstances, to provide the occupants, tenants in possession, and owners, prompt notice of such actions (by fax, e-mail, telephone, personal delivery, or overnight courier, as reasonable under the circumstances), but prior notice shall not be required if the circumstances do not reasonably allow for same. The costs of such emergency actions, as well as the cost of providing notice thereof, shall be collected in the same manner as provided in section 18-148. 
(Ord. No. 005-08, § 1, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 18-152. - Administrative liability. 
    No officer, agent or employee of the town shall render himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this article, and all such persons against whom such claims are brought shall be defended by the town. In the event that a final judgment is rendered against any such person(s), the town shall indemnify and hold them harmless in accordance with the provisions of article III, division 2, of the town's municipal code ("claims against town and employees"). 
(Ord. No. 005-08, § 1, 4-7-08) 
Secs. 18-153-18-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTRICAL WORK 

Sec. 18-166. - Adoption. 
    The National Electrical Code regulations of the National Board of Fire Underwriters, as administered by the state board of electrical examiners, for electrical wiring and apparatus are adopted for all electrical work installed within the jurisdiction of the town. 
(Ord. of 1-19-93(1), § 1; Ord. No. 016-05, § 14, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 18-167. - Work to be inspected prior to connection. 
    Subject to section 18-168, the town council, its officers, agents and employees are hereby directed to refuse connection or reconnection of electrical service at any building or location whatsoever having electrical work installed until such work has been inspected and finally approved by a recognized electrical inspection agency of the state. 
(Ord. of 1-19-93(1), § 1) 
Sec. 18-168. - Temporary reconnection. 
(a)  A licensed electrical contractor and the property owner may request a temporary electrical reconnection while awaiting inspection and approval of the electrical inspection authority, if and only if such electrician and property owner provide certification to the town that an emergency situation exists that requires immediate electrical reconnection of that property owner's electric service. Such certification of emergency shall be in writing upon a form as established by the town council from time to time, and incorporated herein by specific reference, which form, duly executed, shall be submitted to the town prior to reconnection. 
(b)  If a cut-in card issued by the authorized inspection agency is not received within ten days from the date of temporary reconnection, the town shall disconnect such property owner's electric service. 
(Ord. of 1-19-93(1), §§ 2, 3) 
Sec. 18-169. - Scope. 
    The provisions of the National Electric Code shall apply to the installation, alterations, repairs and replacement of all electrical systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and will be administered by the state board of electrical examiners. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 15, 8-15-05) 
Secs. 18-170-18-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FENCES 

Sec. 18-191. - Applicability; conflicting ordinances. 
(a)  This article shall apply to and regulate manmade fences in all zoning districts in the town. 
(b)  Hedges, shrubs, fir trees, bushes and other dense plantings shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Whenever this article conflicts with the buffer screening provisions of the town zoning ordinance, the buffer screening provisions shall control. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 26, § 1; Ord. of 4-6-98(2), § 1; Ord. No. 002-19, § 1, 2-19-19) 
Sec. 18-192. - Existing fences. 
    Any fence lawfully existing as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived may be repaired, altered, reconstructed or replaced without a building permit according to the following standards: 
(1)  "Repairs" for purposes of this section shall mean the fixing or replacing of a small section of an existing fence because of damage or deterioration to that small section of fence being repaired. Repairs may be made to any lawfully existing fence provided that such repairs do not increase the height of the existing fence, do not change the location of such fence on the ground, are of the same design as the existing fence, and are made using the same or substantially same type of materials. 
(2)  Any lawfully existing fence may be replaced, reconstructed or altered provided that such replaced, reconstructed or altered fence either: 
a.  Meets all the requirements of this article; or 
b.  Does not increase the degree of noncompliance with the requirements of this article as regards the materials, design or location on the ground and does not exceed the height limitations established by this article. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 26, § 2; Ord. No. 002-19, § 2, 2-19-19) 
Sec. 18-193. - Specifications for new fences. 
    Any fence erected after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, other than as provided in section 18-191, shall require a building permit and shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Maximum height. The height of a fence shall be measured from existing grade abutting such fence to the highest point thereof. Fence heights in the front yard of a property, defined for purposes of this article as that area between the side property lines from the front property line extending inward to the front walls of the principal structure (excluding any front decks, steps, or porches), shall not exceed four feet. Fence heights on all other areas on a property shall not exceed six feet. 
(2)  Materials. Fences shall be constructed of materials (such as chain link) or design (such as picket) which permit substantial air, water and light to pass through; provided, however, that fences installed behind the depth of the front yard of the property (as defined in this article) on any lot having a width (as defined in the zoning ordinance) in excess of 70 feet, and abutting any lot having a width in excess of 70 feet, may be constructed of solid materials. Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, if the administrative official grants a waiver pursuant to subsection (6) ("Town Easements"), fences located in the area for which the waiver was granted that would otherwise be allowed to be constructed of solid materials under this subsection shall not be constructed of solid materials unless a waiver to construct the fence with solid materials is also granted by the administrative official. 
(3)  Construction standards. Fence posts shall be installed to such depth below grade and/or anchored (e.g., concrete) as to prevent high winds from causing them to lean or blow over. Fence materials shall be securely fastened to fence posts. 
(4)  Meter reading, trash access. No fence shall obstruct ready access for purposes of reading water or electric meters or for trash collection, and any fence not containing an opening for such purposes shall provide an unlocked gate to permit access for such purposes. 
(5)  Public utilities, fire hydrants. Fences erected shall not be installed in any manner which obstructs, obscures or otherwise interferes with the use or operation of fire hydrants, transformers, utility poles or other utilities. 
(6)  Town easements. The temporary or permanent erection or placement of any type of structure or material, including fencing, sheds, trees or shrubbery, etc., is prohibited within any utility easement and/or access easement. The administrative official may waive this requirement for fences in utility easements not in active use and/or drainage easements not containing stormwater drainage fixtures, such as catch basins or piping, situated on the property; however, the owner shall remove the fence at the owner's expense if access to the easement is ever required. If the owner does not remove the fence, the town may remove the fence at the owner's expense. If utilities are subsequently placed within the easement, the owner must relocate the fence at the owner's expense. 
(7)  Visibility at intersections. No fence shall be constructed near streets or alleys in such manner as to obstruct the view of traffic approaching the intersection of any such streets or alleys. At a minimum, no fence shall be installed in the triangular area determined by measuring 25 feet in both directions from the intersection of the two curblines then connecting both points by drawing a diagonal line. 
(8)  Approval by building inspector. 
a.  The building inspector is hereby granted reasonable discretion to interpret and construe the standards of this article in their application to any particular situation, subject always to the right of the applicant to appeal the interpretation of the building inspector to the town board of adjustment. 
b.  All new fences installed after the date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be subject to approval by the town building inspector. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 26, § 3; Ord. No. 012-03, § 1, 5-5-03; Ord. No. 002-19, § 3, 2-19-19) 
Sec. 18-194. - Electric and barbed wire fences prohibited. 
(a)  Any fence designed, installed, or intended to produce electric shock upon contact by or when in close proximity to any living thing is hereby prohibited; provided however, nothing contained herein shall be deemed to prohibit the use of a pet containment system (commonly referred to as a "radio fence" system) consisting of a collar-mounted battery-operated beeping/shocking radio receiver which, when activated by radio signals emanating from an underground wire or a wireless transmitter, emits an audible warning signal and/or electrical shock to the animal wearing such collar. 
(b)  Any fence consisting in whole or in part of barbed wire is hereby prohibited. 
(c)  Any parcel of land containing ten or more acres shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. of 12-16-02(1), § 2) 
Sec. 18-195. - Article not to reduce or alter zoning ordinance fence requirements. 
    Neither this article nor any part hereof shall be construed so as to reduce or alter the requirements of the town zoning ordinance insofar as it may be applicable to fences. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 26, § 4; Ord. of 12-16-02(1), § 1) 
Sec. 18-196. - Adjustment. 
    Any property owner may apply to the town council for an adjustment from the provisions of this article. Notice of the date, time, place, property address and nature of the adjustment request shall be posted on the property and mailed or delivered to abutting property owners. 
    Abutting property owners or the building inspector shall have 15 days from the date of the notice to request a hearing before the town council. Requests for hearings must in writing and received at the town hall no more than 15 days after the date on the notice. 
    If a request for hearing is not received by the town prior to the expiration of the 15-day time limit, the building inspector shall approve the request for adjustment. 
(Ord. of 4-6-98(2), § 2; Ord. of 12-16-02(1), § 1) 
Editor's note- An Ord. of April 6, 1998, § 2 repealed section 18-195 in its entirety and enacted a new section 18-195 in its place. Former section 18-195 pertained to variances and derived from Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 26, § 5) 
Sec. 18-197. - Enforcement. 
    Any violation of this article may be enforced by one or more of the following procedures: 
(1)  Fine. Where any fence is erected in violation of this article, the town shall give the property owner 30 days' written notice to correct the violation. If such violation remains uncorrected at the end of such 30 days, the property owner or person in possession having created such violation shall, upon conviction before any court of competent jurisdiction, pay a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $300.00 plus costs. 
(2)  Injunction. Where any fence is erected in violation of this article, the town or any aggrieved abutting property owner may seek injunctive relief before any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(3)  Removal by town. Where any fence is erected in violation of this article, the town shall give the property owner and/or person in possession written notice to correct the violation or request a hearing before the town council within 30 days from the date of such notice. If the violation is not corrected nor any hearing requested before the town council within the aforesaid 30 days, the town may proceed to remove the fence or correct the violation and assess the cost thereof against the property owner and/or person in possession. If a hearing is timely requested before the town council, the property owner and/or person in possession shall comply with the town council's determination following such hearing. Failure to do so shall entitle the town to remove the fence or correct the violation and assess the cost thereof against the property owner and/or person in possession. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 26, § 6; Ord. of 12-16-02(1), § 1) 
Secs. 18-198-18-215. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS 

Sec. 18-216. - Generally. 
    The rules and regulations set out in this article shall control and govern the use of house numbers within the corporate limits of the town. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 34, § 1) 
Sec. 18-217. - Each building to be designated by number; sequencing of numbers. 
    Each property in the town shall be designated by a number, and in numbering one number shall be allowed for each 25 feet of front and each fractional part over two-thirds thereof. In numbering, if any building has more than one entrance, one number shall be allowed for each of such entrances. For properties having a frontage of 50 feet at least two numbers shall be allowed. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 34, § 2) 
Sec. 18-218. - Manner of numbering. 
(a)  The numbering of property shall be done in the following manner: commencing at Commerce Street on streets running northerly and southerly, and at Main Street on streets running easterly and westerly; properties lying on streets running northerly and southerly, if north of Commerce Street, shall be known as No._______N._______Street, and if south, as No._______S._______Street; and on streets running easterly and westerly, if east of Main Street, as No._______E._______Street, and if west of Main Street, as No._______W._______Street. In numbering, the even numbers shall be placed on the east side and the odd numbers on the west side of streets running northerly and southerly; and the even numbers on the north side and the odd numbers on the south side of streets running easterly and westerly. On short streets, which do not touch either of the bases hereby ordained, the numbers shall be the same as though the street had been extended to one or the other of such bases. On streets running diagonally the numbers shall correspond with those of the street to which it is nearest parallel. Houses on the corners shall be numbered on the street on which they front; or if fronting on two streets, they shall be numbered on both streets. 
(b)  In numbering the following rules shall be observed: No. 1 north and south shall be the first number from Commerce Street, north and south; No. 101 south shall be the first number south of South Street; No. 101 north shall be the first number north of Mt. Vernon Street; No. 201 north shall be the first number north of North Street. On streets running east and west, No. 1 east and west shall be respectively the first numbers east and west of Main Street; No. 101 east shall be the first number east of East Street; No. 101 west shall be the first number west of Delaware Street extended; No. 201 west shall be the first number west of Union Street; No. 301 west shall be the first number west of School Lane extended. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 34, §§ 3, 4) 
Sec. 18-219. - Property owner's or tenant's duties. 
    The owner or tenant of any property, immediately after having the number or numbers of his property duly assigned, shall procure suitable numbers of not less than three inches in height and have the same placed in a conspicuous place at the front entrance of the building; provided, however, that if more than one number is assigned to any property having only one building with but one public entrance thereto erected thereon, it shall only be necessary to place the number corresponding to such main entrance thereon; or if there are two public entrances, then the two corresponding numbers. In case of numbers being allotted to vacant lots the procuring and posting of numbers shall be optional with the owner. The marking or lettering of the numbers on the transom over the door or main entrance of any property shall be a good and sufficient numbering within the provisions of this article. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 34, § 5) 
Sec. 18-220. - Manager to appoint person to apportion and readjust numbers. 
    The town manager shall, from time to time, as he may deem necessary, appoint some suitable person to apportion and readjust the property numbers as may seem necessary. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 34, § 6) 
Sec. 18-221. - Manager to cause placement of numbers, collect expense upon owner's or tenant's failure to number building. 
    If the owner or tenant of any building shall neglect or refuse to place the proper number or numbers thereon, within 30 days after the same shall have been duly assigned, as provided in this article, it shall be the duty of the town manager to have the same placed thereon, and the town manager shall collect the necessary expense thereby incurred from the owner or tenant, together with the costs, by suit before any court of competent jurisdiction as provided by law. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 34, § 7) 
Secs. 18-222-18-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SWIMMING POOLS 

Sec. 18-241. - Building permit required. 
    No swimming pool shall be installed or constructed within the town unless a building permit has first been obtained in accordance with the building code adopted under article II, building code. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 16, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 18-242. - Compliance with electrical code. 
    Any pool installed or to be installed within the limits of the town on which electrical work is to be performed, either on the pool structure itself or within a distance of 15 feet from the outer edge of the pool, shall be inspected and installed in compliance with the National Electrical Code and shall be installed with the approval of the electrical inspector of the town. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 54, § 2) 
Secs. 18-243-18-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PLUMBING CODE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 70. 

Sec. 18-271. - Adoption. 
    The provisions of the 2015 State of Delaware Plumbing Code, as adopted by the State of Delaware in Title 16 of the Delaware Administrative Code, section 4455 ("Delaware Regulations Governing a Detailed Plumbing Code"), including any future amendments thereto and any other existing or future corresponding provisions of law, as administered by the state division of public health, is hereby adopted by the Town and shall apply to the installation, alterations, repairs and replacement of plumbing systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, where connected to a water or sewer system. 
(Ord. of 7-3-95(2), § 1; Ord. of 11-16-98(3), § 1; Ord. No. 016-05, § 17, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 003-10, § 1, 3-1-10; Ord. No. 004-17, § 9, 5-15-17) 
Sec. 18-272. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 004-17, § 9, adopted May 15, 2017, repealed § 18-272. Former § 18-272 pertained to additions, deletions and changes and derived from Ord. of 7-3-95(2); Ord. of 11-16-98(3); Ord. of 8-5-02(1); Ord. No. 016-05, adopted August 15, 2005; Ord. No. 006-06, adopted March 6, 2006; and Ord. No. 003-10, adopted March 1, 2010. 
Sec. 18-273. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 004-17, § 9, adopted May 15, 2017, repealed § 18-273. Former § 18-273 pertained to scope and derived from Ord. No. 016-05, adopted August 15, 2005. 
Secs. 18-274-18-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

Sec. 18-301. - Adoption. 
    That certain document, at least one copy of which is on file in the office of the department of planning and inspections, being marked and designated the International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and hereby is adopted as the property maintenance code of the town for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International Property Maintenance Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part of hereof as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in this article. 
(Ord. of 7-3-95(3), § 1; Ord. of 11-16-98(2), § 1; Ord. No. 016-05, § 20, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 004-10, § 1, 3-1-10; Ord. No. 004-17, § 10, 5-15-17) 
Sec. 18-302. - Additions, insertions, deletions and changes. 
    The town hereby adopts specific amendments to the International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition, as follows: 
Chapter 1, ADMINISTRATION, delete the chapter in its entirety. Refer to Article I of this chapter. 
Chapter 3, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS, is amended as follows: 
a.  Section 304.14 Insect Screens, delete this section in its entirety and insert in lieu thereof the following: 
304.14 Insect screens. During the period from March 1 st to November 30th, every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. 
Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means such as air curtains or insect repellent fans are employed. 
b.  Section 602.3 Heat supply, delete this section in its entirety and insert in lieu thereof the following: 
602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from September 15 th to May 1 st to maintain a temperature of not less than 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms. 
c.  Section 602.4 Occupiable work spaces, delete this section in its entirety and insert in lieu thereof the following: 
602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat during the period from September 15 th to May 1 st to maintain a temperature of not less than 65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are occupied. 
(Ord. of 7-3-95(3), § 3; Ord. of 11-6-95(2), § 1; Ord. of 9-16-96(1), § 1; Ord. of 11-16-98(2), § 4; Ord. of 7-19-99, § 1; Ord. of 8-5-02(1), § 40; Ord. No. 016-05, § 21, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 004-10, § 2, 3-1-10; Ord. No. 004-17, § 10, 5-15-17) 
Sec. 18-303. - Scope. 
(a)  The provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code shall apply to the repair, maintenance, alteration, change of occupancy, addition, and relocation of existing buildings. 
(b)  Exception. A building or portion of a building that has not been previously issued a certificate of occupancy or used for its intended purpose shall comply with the provisions of the International Building Code for new construction. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 22, 8-15-05) 
Secs. 18-304-18-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - RENTAL PROPERTIES 

Sec. 18-401. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article XI, the following words shall be defined as follows: 
    Criminal activity. Any crime classified by applicable law as a: 
(1)  Felony, 
(2)  Class A misdemeanor, or 
(3)  Any of the following offenses: any drug offense defined by title 16 of the Delaware Code, and the following misdemeanors in addition to any class A misdemeanor, as defined by title 11 of the Delaware Code: § 601-offensive touching, § 602-menacing, § 628-vehicular assault 3, § 763-sexual harassment, § 764-indecent exposure, § 811-criminal mischief, § 812-graffiti, § 820-trespassing, § 821/2/3-criminal trespassing, § 1105-crime against a vulnerable adult, § 1106-unlawfully dealing with a child, § 1301-disorderly conduct, § 1313-malicious interference with emergency communications, § 1315-public intoxication, § 1321-loitering, § 1322-criminal nuisance, § 1323-obstructing of public passage, § 1341-lewdness, § 1342-prostitution, § 1343-patronizing a prostitute, § 1445-unlawfully dealing with a dangerous weapon, § 1446-unlawfully dealing with a switchblade knife. 
    Directly related to the owner. Any person who is related by blood or marriage (i.e. "in-laws") to the following degrees of kinship: husband, wife, father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, uncle, aunt, niece, nephew. 
    Drug-related criminal activity. The illegal manufacture, sale, distribution, use, or possession of any illegal or controlled substance defined by title 16 chapter 47, as the same may be amended from time to time and in accordance with any future corresponding provision of law. 
    Dwelling unit. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. 
    Owner. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. 
    Premises. A dwelling unit, apartment or commercial lodging room, together with the lands and ways, if any, under the control of the person(s) in possession. 
    Rental unit. Any dwelling unit which is required to obtain a rental license under the terms of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-16-96(2); Ord. No. 014-15, § 1, 10-5-15) 
Sec. 18-402. - Rental license required; exceptions; application and fee. 
(a)  No dwelling unit may be leased, subleased, or occupied by any person other than the owner until a rental license has been issued by the town. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  No rental license shall be required where the owner occupies the dwelling unit; 
(2)  No fee shall be charged if the occupant provides written verification that they are directly related to the owner. 
(c)  Application. Application for a rental license shall be on forms provided by the town and signed by at least one co-owner of the subject property. Such forms shall require, among other information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of each owner; 
(2)  The address of the unit(s); 
(3)  The maximum occupancy of each unit which shall not exceed the maximum allowed by town ordinance; 
(4)  The name, address, and telephone number of the "caretaker" and "alternate caretaker" as required under section 18-406. 
(5)  Certification that the owner will provide the tenant(s)/occupant(s) with written notice of the conditions of the occupancy agreement required by section 18-404. 
(d)  Fee. The annual fee for a rental license shall be as set forth in the fee schedule per unit per calendar year, payable in advance at time of application. Rental license fees are payable by the first day of each calendar year. Licenses applied for and paid for in December of any year shall be issued for the following calendar year. 
(Ord. of 9-16-92(2); Ord. of 12-15-97(1), § 1; Ord. of 5-15-00, § 3; Ord. No. 012-08, § 1, 12-15-08) 
Sec. 18-403. - Rental certificate of occupancy; inspections; exceptions; fee. 
(a)  Rental certificate of occupancy required before re-occupancy. No rental unit shall be occupied after a vacancy by any person other than the owner or persons related directly to the owner unless a rental certificate of occupancy has been issued by the town as herein provided. 
(b)  Inspection; rental certificate of occupancy. No rental certificate of occupancy shall be issued until an inspection shall have been conducted by the town to insure that the dwelling unit is in substantial compliance with the building, plumbing, housing, electrical, fire, and property maintenance codes of the town. After notification of vacancy by the owner, the town will conduct the inspection within five working days. A rental unit shall be deemed to be not in substantial compliance if: 
(1)  There are one or more violations which pose a serious and substantial threat to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants; or 
(2)  There is an extensive number of minor violations which, cumulatively, pose a significant threat to the health, safety, welfare or morale of the occupants. 
It is the intent of this article, and the code enforcement official shall be guided accordingly, that the greater the cumulative number of violations observed in a rental unit, the less serious any of them must be to result in a determination that a unit is not in substantial compliance; and conversely, the more serious the violations, the fewer there need be to result in a determination that a rental unit is not in substantial compliance. 
(c)  Exceptions. No rental certificate of occupancy and no inspection shall be required for any of the following: 
(1)  Any rental unit occupied by the owner or by persons directly related to the owner; 
(2)  Any rental unit for which a certificate of occupancy has been issued within the past 12 months following construction or substantial reconstruction of such rental unit; 
Provided however, anything in this article to the contrary notwithstanding, where any dwelling unit otherwise excepted from the requirement of a rental certificate of occupancy and inspection is determined to be in significant violation of any town building, housing, electrical, plumbing, fire or property maintenance code, such dwelling unit shall not thereafter be reoccupied after the first vacancy following such determination until a rental certificate of occupancy shall be issued following an inspection as provided herein. "Significant violation" for purposes hereof shall mean violations which because of their seriousness or because of their extensive number, in the aggregate, pose a significant threat to the health, safety, welfare or morale of the occupants. 
(d)  Inspection fee. The fee shall be $35.00 for the inspection prior to issuance of a rental certificate of occupancy. 
When an inspection is scheduled with the town, it is the responsibility of the property owner to make sure the structure/property is ready by the time the inspector arrives on site. A minimum of one-hour's notice is required to cancel or reschedule an inspection. All inspections require 24 [hours'] advance notice. 
If an inspector arrives on-site and the structure/property is not ready and the inspection was not cancelled at least one hour in advance, a $50.00 fee must be paid at the town hall before the inspection may be rescheduled. An additional fee of $50.00 shall be charged for each follow-up inspection required because of uncompleted or unsatisfactorily completed items found by the inspector on a previous inspection. 
(Ord. of 9-16-96(2); Ord. No. 12-18-00(3), §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 12-18-00(4), § 1; Ord. of 1-22-02(1), § 1; Ord. No. 016-05, § 23, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 18-404. - Conditions of lease or occupancy agreement; crime-free lease requirement. 
(a)  Any agreement (written or oral) for occupancy of a rental unit shall be subject to the condition, which shall be incorporated into and made a material provision of the occupancy agreement, that the occupancy agreement shall be terminated by the owner for any of the following: 
(1)  Occupancy by more persons than permitted under the housing code of the town. 
(2)  Two convictions of any occupant and/or user for violation of subsection 42-107(d) of the town code. (Disorderly dwelling unit-Unlawful acts by occupants and/or users) for violations occurring within any three consecutive month period. 
(3)  Engaging in any use prohibited by the zoning code of the town after written notice of such violation from the town; 
(4)  Using or permitting the use of the rental unit or common areas thereof for purposes of prostitution, gambling and/or any drug offense in violation of applicable state statute. 
(5)  A violation of the provisions of subsection 18-404(b) of the town Code. 
(b)  Tenants, any members of the tenant's household, any guest, or any other person under the tenant's control, on or within 500 feet of the leased premises, shall not engage in criminal activity or drug-related criminal activity, any act intended to facility criminal activity or drug-related criminal activity, or permit the leased premises to be used for or to facilitate any criminal activity or drug-related criminal activity. All residential leases renewed or otherwise entered into after the effective date of this section, whether the original lease is in writing or verbal, shall include a written lease addendum, signed by the property owner and tenant, which shall include the following provisions: 
In addition to all other terms of the lease, property owner and tenant agree as follows: 
(1)  The tenant, any member of the tenant's household, any guest, or any other person under the tenant's control, on or within 500 feet of the leased premises: 
a.  Shall not engage in criminal activity, including drug-related criminal activity. 
b.  Shall not engage in any act intended to facilitate criminal activity or drug-related criminal activity. 
c.  Shall not permit the dwelling unit to be used for or to facilitate any criminal activity or drug-related criminal activity. 
d.  Criminal activity is defined as any crime classified by applicable law as a: 
1.  Felony, 
2.  Class A misdemeanor, or 
3.  Any of the following offenses: any drug offense defined by Title 16 of the Delaware Code, and the following misdemeanors in addition to any class A misdemeanor, as defined by title 11 of the Delaware Code: § 601-offensive touching, § 602-menacing, § 628-vehicular assault 3, § 763-sexual harassment, § 764-indecent exposure, § 811-criminal mischief, § 812-graffiti, § 820-trespassing, § 821/2/3-criminal trespassing, § 1105-crime against a vulnerable adult, § 1106-unlawfully dealing with a child, § 1301-disorderly conduct, § 1313-malicious interference with emergency communications, § 1315-public intoxication, § 1321-loitering, § 1322-criminal nuisance, § 1323-obstructing of public passage, § 1341-lewdness, § 1342-prostitution, § 1343-patronizing a prostitute, § 1445-unlawfully dealing with a dangerous weapon, § 1446-unlawfully dealing with a switchblade knife. 
e.  Drug-related criminal activity means the illegal manufacture, sale, distribution, use, or possession of any illegal or controlled substance defined by title 16, chapter 47, as the same may be amended from time to time and in accordance with any future corresponding provision of law. 
(2)  Any activity prohibited by this agreement shall constitute a substantial violation of the lease, material noncompliance with the lease, material breach of an obligation imposed upon tenants by a municipal ordinance under 25 Del. C. § 5513(a)(3), and grounds for termination of tenancy and eviction. 
(c)  The town shall provide a template lease addendum. 
(d)  A copy of the signed crime free lease addendum, together with a copy of the signed written lease if one exists, shall be submitted to the town upon the request of the town manager. 
(e)  In order to facilitate compliance with this section, copies of a suitable notice form shall be provided to owners by the town and shall be provided by the owner to the occupant(s) at or prior to the time of entering into such occupancy agreement. Such notice be filled out in triplicate, with one copy being filed with the town by the owner. Such notice shall specify the maximum number of occupants permitted in the rental unit and the names and ages of the occupants. Failure of the owner to provide the occupants with a copy of such notice, failure of the owner to obtain the names and ages of the occupants, and/or failure to file a completed copy of such notice with the town hall shall constitute a violation of this article. Such information shall be deemed to be confidential information not available for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 9-16-96(2); Ord. of 12-15-97(1), §§ 2, 3; Ord. No. 014-15, § 2, 10-5-15) 
Sec. 18-405. - Owners duty to terminate lease and commence proceedings for summary possession; revocation of rental license for failure to do so. 
(a)  Any violation of the conditions of occupancy established by subsection 18-404(a), or engaging in three or more of the activities prohibited under subsection 18-404(b) within a twelve month period, is hereby declared to be a "material breach of an obligation imposed upon tenants" by the code of the town in accordance with 25 Del. C. Section 5513(a)(3) or any future corresponding provision of law. Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, any individual who was the victim of criminal activity and who did not engage in criminal activity shall not be in violation of any of the provisions under subsection 18-404(b). 
(b)  Whenever an owner receives written notice from the town of a breach of any of the conditions set out in subsections 18-404(a) or 18-404(b), the owner shall, within three business days, initiate and diligently and in good faith pursue all necessary steps and procedures required by 25 Del. C. Part III (Residential landlord/tenant code) to obtain an order of summary possession. The owner shall provide the town copies of all required letters, notices, and court documents, contemporaneously upon the mailing, filing, or receipt of same by the owner so as to allow the town to monitor the progress of such efforts by the owner. The owner shall not be required to evict an individual who was the victim of criminal activity and who did not engage in criminal activity. 
(c)  Failure of the owner to initiate and diligently pursue such steps in a timely manner shall constitute a violation of this section and shall also authorize the town to revoke the owners rental license for a period of not less than one month and not more than one year; provided, however, that no rental license shall be revoked for violation hereunder unless the owner shall have been given prior written warning by the town of such intention to revoke, stating the grounds therefore, and the owner shall not have corrected such violation or appealed such decision to the town manager as outlined in subsection 18-405(e). 
(d)  Notice of a breach of the conditions imposed by subsection 18-404(a) or subsection 18-404(b), and notice of a violation under subsection 18-405(c) shall be given to the owner by any of the following: 
(1)  Certified mail, return receipt requested addressed to the owners address as provided by the owner on the application for rental license; provided however, that notice shall be deemed complete if the notice is returned marked "refused." If such notice is returned marked "unclaimed," the town shall publish notice once in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. 
(2)  Facsimile transmission (fax) to a tax telephone number provided to the town by the owner; 
(3)  Personal delivery to the owner or to the owners agent or by leaving a copy thereof at the owners usual place of abode in the presence of some person residing there of suitable age and discretion who shall be informed of the contents thereof. 
(e)  The property owner and tenant shall have 15 days from the date of the notice of mandatory eviction to file a written appeal with the town manager contesting the determination that eviction is required under the town Code, and the property owner and tenant shall be notified of this right of appeal in the notice of mandatory eviction. Any appeal filed by the property owner or the tenant with the town council shall be heard at any special or regular council meeting to be held within 30 days of the date the appeal was filed. The party filing the appeal shall receive prior written notice of the date the appeal will be heard. In addition to any other lawful grounds upon which an appealing party may challenge an eviction requirement, the town council may find that eviction is not required where the town council finds that the tenant was wholly without knowledge of the unlawful activities outlined in section 18-404 of the town code or did everything reasonably possible to prevent or curtail the same unlawful activities. 
(Ord. of 9-16-96(2); Ord. No. 014-15, § 2, 10-5-15) 
Sec. 18-406. - Caretaker and alternate. 
    Every rental unit shall have a "caretaker" and "alternate caretaker" designated by the owner. The caretaker and alternate caretaker shall each be adult persons, specifically identified in writing by the owner on the rental license application (stating their name, address and telephone numbers) who reside in such proximity to the town as to allow them to meet with the code enforcement official at the rental unit within 24 hours of receipt of notice from the code enforcement official. 
    The caretaker and alternate caretaker shall be persons charged, by the owner, with responsibility and authority to deal with occupants of the premises on behalf of the owner, to make repairs to the rental unit, to maintain the premises and the common areas thereof, and to accept service of process on behalf of the owner. 
    The owner shall notify the town in writing of any changes in the name, address, and/or telephone number of the caretaker or alternate caretaker. Failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-16-96(2)) 
Sec. 18-407. - Penalties; enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Penalties. 
(1)  Owners. Any owner who shall violate any section of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 plus court costs and victim's compensation fund assessment, where applicable. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(2)  Occupants. Any tenant, lessee, sub-lessee, or other person occupying or in possession of a rental unit in violation of section 18-402 and/or section 18-403 who shall fail to comply with a notice and order to vacate as provided in subparagraph (b) of this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $500.00 plus court costs and victim's compensation fund assessment, where applicable. Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Notice and order to vacate; appeal. Whenever the code enforcement constable determines that a rental unit has been occupied in violation of section 18-402 and/or section 18-403 of this Code, he/she may provide the occupant(s) of such rental unit with a written notice and order to vacate, substantially in the form attached to the ordinance from which this section derives as "exhibit A," ordering the occupant(s)/person(s) in possession of such rental unit to vacate the rental unit within 60 days unless the town subsequently provides such person(s) with notice that such violations has/have been corrected. A copy of such notice shall be sent, certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner(s) at the owner's last known address as shown on the town's assessment records unless the owner has provided the town with written notice of another preferred address. 
Any person subject to a notice and order to vacate under this subparagraph (b) and any owner of such unit shall have a right of appeal to the town manager within 15 days of the date of the notice and order on the limited issue of whether or not the rental unit is in violation of section 18-402 and/or section 18-403. 
(c)  Termination of town utilities. In addition to or in lieu of seeking the imposition of civil penalties against the occupants under paragraph (a) hereof, the town may enforce compliance with this ordinance by terminating electric, water, and/or sanitary sewer service to the rental unit where any occupants has/have failed to comply with a notice and order to vacate as herein provided. 
(Ord. of 9-16-96(2); Ord. of 7-20-98(2)) 
Sec. 18-408. - Conflict with state or federal laws or regulations. 
    Whenever any provision of this article is in irreconcilable conflict with any provision of state or federal law or regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the provisions of the federal or state law or regulations shall control and supersede the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-16-96(2)) 
Secs. 18-409-18-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
DIVISION 1. - REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY PURSUANT TO DELAWARE CODE 

Sec. 18-501. - Definitions. 
    Any words, terms or phrases not defined in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them by chapter 45 ("slum clearance and redevelopment law") of title 31 ("welfare") of the Delaware Code, as amended, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Authority, redevelopment authority or slum clearance and redevelopment authority means the Smyrna Slum Clearance and Redevelopment Authority appointed by the town council of the town of Smyrna and authorized to exercise the powers, rights and duties of a slum clearance and redevelopment authority pursuant to chapter 45 ("slum clearance and redevelopment law") of title 31 ("welfare") of the Delaware Code, as amended, and such other powers, rights, and duties outlined in the Town Code. 
    Blighted area means that area of a municipality, being either a single building, structure or improvement or an area which there is a predominance of buildings, structures, or improvements, which is detrimental to the public health, safety, morals or welfare by reason of any of the following conditions (or combination thereof): 
(1)  Dilapidation, deterioration, disrepair, age or obsolescence; 
(2)  Inadequate provisions for ventilation, light, air, open space or sanitation; 
(3)  High density of population and overcrowding; 
(4)  The existence of conditions which endanger life or property by fire or other causes; or 
(5)  Any other factor(s) as provided by chapter 45 ("slum clearance and redevelopment law") of title 31 ("welfare") of the Delaware Code, as amended, or by the town building inspector that have a direct and adverse relationship to public health, safety, morals or welfare. 
    Community means the Town of Smyrna. 
    Governing body means the town council of the Town of Smyrna. 
(Ord. No. 011-04, § 1, 6-21-04; Ord. No. 009-14, § 1, 6-16-14) 
Sec. 18-502. - Declaration of necessity by town council. 
    The town council hereby adopts the legislative finding declared in section 4502 of title 31 ("welfare") of the Delaware Code (as amended). The town council has determined that there exist in the town one or more slum and blighted areas (as defined in section 4501 and pursuant to section 4504 of title 31 of the Delaware Code). These areas constitute a serious and growing menace, injurious and inimical to public health, safety, morals and welfare of the residents of the town, and constitute an economic and social liability which substantially impairs the sound growth of the town. The existence of such slum and blighted areas necessitates expenditure of public funds for the preservation of public health and safety. The town council has determined it is in the public interest that conditions of slum and blight be eliminated and that the redevelopment, rehabilitation, conservation, or combination thereof, of such areas is necessary in the interest of public health, safety, morals and welfare of the residents of the town (pursuant to section 4504 of title 31 ("welfare") of the Delaware Code). Such areas shall be redeveloped and reused for viable purposes in accordance with redevelopment plans of the town, thereby improving the economy of the town, reducing the threat of deterioration and blight, efficiently utilizing limited land resources, and improving the overall appearance and attractiveness of the town. The town council desires to encourage the rehabilitation, renovation, reconstruction, restoration, redevelopment and reuse of such areas by establishing a public body vested with the powers, functions and duties provided in chapter 45 ("slum clearance and redevelopment law") of title 31 ("welfare") of the Delaware Code for a "slum clearance and redevelopment authority". On the 21st day of June, 2004, and again on the 6th day of June, 2014, the town council adopted a resolution, pursuant to sections 4504 and 4518 of title 31 ("welfare") of the Delaware Code, wherein the town council adopted the aforementioned declaration of necessity. 
(Ord. No. 011-04, § 1, 6-21-04; Ord. No. 009-14, § 2, 6-16-14) 
Sec. 18-503. - Creation of authority. 
    On the 6th day of June, 2014, the town council adopted a resolution, pursuant to section 4503 of title 31 ("welfare") of the Delaware Code, establishing a public body vested with the powers, functions and duties provided in chapter 45 ("slum clearance and redevelopment authority law") of title 31 ("welfare") of the Delaware Code for a "slum clearance and redevelopment authority". This body shall hereafter be formally referred to as the Smyrna Slum Clearance and Redevelopment Authority or informally as the Smyrna Redevelopment Authority. 
(Ord. No. 011-04, § 1, 6-21-04; Ord. No. 009-14, § 3, 6-16-14) 
Sec. 18-504. - Powers, functions and duties of authority. 
    Pursuant to chapter 45 ("slum clearance and redevelopment authority law") of title 31 ("welfare") of the Delaware Code (as amended), the Smyrna Slum Clearance and Redevelopment Authority is authorized and empowered to exercise the powers, functions and duties provided in chapter 45 of title 31 of the Delaware Code for a "slum clearance and redevelopment authority", said powers, function and duties being incorporated herein by reference. In order to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of 31 Del. C. chapter 45, the Smyrna Slum Clearance and Redevelopment Authority is authorized to act on behalf of the town as an Intermediary (as defined in 7 CFR 4274.302) in the United States Department of Agriculture Intermediary Relending Program. 
(Ord. No. 011-04, § 1, 6-21-04; Ord. No. 009-14, § 4, 6-16-14) 
Secs. 18-505-18-600. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY PURSUANT TO TOWN CHARTER 

Sec. 18-601. - Declaration of necessity by town council. 
    The town council has determined that there exist throughout the town one or more blighted areas, including dangerous buildings. These areas constitute a serious and growing menace, injurious and inimical to public health, safety, morals and welfare of the residents of the town, and constitute an economic and social liability which substantially impairs the sound growth of the town. The existence of such blighted areas necessitates expenditure of public funds for the preservation of public health and safety. The town council has determined it is in the public interest that conditions of blight be eliminated and that the redevelopment, rehabilitation, conservation, or combination thereof, of such areas is necessary in the interest of public health, safety, morals and welfare of the residents of the town. Such areas shall be redeveloped and reused for viable purposes under conditions that prevent the recurrence of the same, thereby improving the economy of the town, reducing the threat of deterioration and blight, efficiently utilizing limited land resources, and improving the overall appearance and attractiveness of the town. To date, neither the exercise of the police power under the town housing code (chapter 18 "buildings and building regulations", article III "housing code") or the dangerous building ordinance (chapter 18 "buildings & building regulations", article IV "dangerous buildings") nor the operation of private enterprise has abolished blighted properties throughout the town. The town council has determined that a different and more far reaching remedy must be applied to remedy blighted areas and dangerous buildings located throughout the town. The town council desires to encourage the rehabilitation, renovation, reconstruction, restoration, redevelopment and reuse of such areas by vesting in the town council the power to eliminate blighted areas and dangerous buildings through condemnation for a public purpose to protect the public health, safety, morals and welfare of the residents of the town pursuant to section 4.2.2 of the Town Charter. It is not the purpose of this division to require the town council to adopt a plan of redevelopment. The purpose of this division is to provide the town council with the powers to eliminate property(s) of blight and dangerous buildings which: 
(1)  Are not located within the redevelopment plans of division 1 of this article; and 
(2)  Threaten the public health, safety, morals and welfare of the residents of the town. 
(Ord. No. 011-04, § 1, 6-21-04) 
Sec. 18-602. - Creation of authority. 
    The town council shall be vested with the powers, functions and duties of the authority under this division. 
(Ord. No. 011-04, § 1, 6-21-04) 
Sec. 18-603. - Powers, functions and duties of authority. 
    Pursuant to section 4.2.2 of the Town Charter, the town council is authorized and empowered to hold and acquire by gift, negotiation and purchase, devise, lease, or condemnation, property both real (improved and unimproved) and personal, or mixed, within the boundaries of the town, in fee or lesser estate or interest, necessary and desirable for any municipal or public purpose, including, but not limited to, providing sites for constructing, improving, extending, altering, or demolishing for urban renewal, revitalization, redevelopment or rehabilitation of blighted areas or the removal of dangerous buildings. The town council, acting as the authority, shall have all the powers necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this division, including, but not limited to, the following powers in addition to others granted in this division: 
(1)  To make and execute contracts and other instruments necessary or convenient to the exercise of the powers of the authority and to effectuate the purposes of this division; 
(2)  To arrange or contract for the furnishing or repair, by any person or agency, public or private, of services, privileges, works, streets, roads, public utilities or other facilities for or in connection with the urban renewal, revitalization, redevelopment, or rehabilitation of blighted areas or the removal of dangerous buildings; 
(3)  To purchase, lease, obtain options upon, acquire by gift, grant, bequest, devise, eminent domain or otherwise, any real or personal property (improved or unimproved) or any interest therein, together with any improvements thereon, necessary or incidental to providing sites for constructing, improving, extending, altering, or demolishing for urban renewal, revitalization, redevelopment or rehabilitation of blighted areas or the removal of dangerous buildings; to hold, improve, clear or prepare for redevelopment any such property; to sell, lease, exchange, transfer, assign, subdivide, retain for its own use, mortgage, pledge, hypothecate or otherwise encumber or dispose of any such real or personal property or any interest therein; 
(4)  To enter into contracts with redevelopers of property containing covenants, restrictions and conditions regarding the use of such property for residential, commercial, industrial, recreational purposes, municipal purposes or for public purposes and such other covenants, restrictions and conditions as the authority may deem necessary to prevent a recurrence of blighted areas or dangerous buildings to effectuate the purposes of this division; to make any of the covenants, restrictions or conditions of the foregoing contracts covenants running with the land, and to provide appropriate remedies for any breach of any such covenants or conditions, including the right in the authority to terminate such contracts and any interest in the property created pursuant thereto; 
(5)  To enter into any building or property in order to make inspections, surveys, appraisals, soundings or test borings, and to obtain an order for this purpose from a court of competent jurisdiction in the event entry is denied or resisted; 
(6)  To pay for the acquisition, construction, improvement, repair, extension, alteration, or demolition of any property, real, personal, or mixed, from the general funds of the town, from the proceeds of any bond issue which may be authorized and sold for the purposes of this division as provided by the Town Charter, and/or from the proceeds of any grant or loan made to the town to effectuate the purpose of this division as provided in the Town Charter; 
(7)  To borrow money and to apply for and accept advances, loans, grants, contributions and any other form of financial assistance from the federal government, the state, county or other public body or from any sources, public or private, to effectuate the purposes of this division as provided by the Town Charter, to give such security as may be required and to enter into and carry out contracts in connection therewith; 
(8)  Acting through the authority or other persons designated by the authority, to conduct examinations and investigations and to hear testimony and take proof under oath at public hearings on any matter material for its information; to make available the findings and recommendations of appropriate agencies or public officials (including those charged with the duty of abating or requiring the correction of nuisances or like conditions or of demolishing unsafe or insanitary structures or eliminating conditions of blight) regarding the condition of any building or property which is dangerous to the public health, safety, morals or welfare and/or a blight upon the community; 
(9)  To engage in rehabilitation, redevelopment and conservation activities to effectuate the purpose of this division; 
(10)  To make such expenditures as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this division. 
(Ord. No. 011-04, § 1, 6-21-04) 
Sec. 18-604. - Disposal of property. 
(a)  The authority may sell, lease, exchange or otherwise transfer real property or any interest therein acquired pursuant to this division to any redeveloper for residential, recreational, commercial, industrial or other uses or for public use, subject to such covenants, conditions and restrictions as it may deem to be in the public interest or to carry out the purposes of this division, including covenants, restrictions and conditions as the authority may deem necessary to prevent a recurrence of blighted areas or dangerous buildings to effectuate the purposes of this division. Such real property shall be sold, leased or transferred at its fair value, notwithstanding such value may be less than the cost of acquiring and preparing such property for redevelopment. In determining the fair value of real property, the authority shall give consideration to appraisals of the property made by land experts employed by the authority. 
(b)  The authority shall, by public notice by publication once each week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper having a general circulation in the community, prior to the consideration of any contract proposal, invite proposals from, and make available all pertinent information to private redevelopers or any persons interested in undertaking the redevelopment of an area, or any part thereof, which the authority has declared to be in need of redevelopment. Such notice shall identify the area and shall state that such further information as is available may be obtained at the town office. The authority shall consider all redevelopment proposals and the financial and legal ability of the prospective redevelopers to carry out their proposals and may negotiate with any redevelopers for proposals for the purchase or lease of any real property to be redeveloped pursuant to such contract. The authority may accept such contract proposal as it deems to be in the public interest and in furtherance of the purposes of this division. The authority may execute such contract in accordance with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section and deliver deeds, leases and other instruments and take all steps necessary to effectuate such contract. At its discretion, the authority may, without regard to the foregoing provisions of this paragraph, dispose of real property to private redevelopers for redevelopment under such reasonable competitive bidding procedures as it shall prescribe, subject to the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 011-04, § 1, 6-21-04) 
Sec. 18-605. - Eminent domain. 
    The authority may acquire by the exercise of the power of eminent domain any real property which it may deem necessary for a redevelopment for purposes under this division after the adoption by the town council of a resolution declaring that the acquisition of the real property described therein is necessary for such purposes. The authority may exercise the power of eminent domain in the manner prescribed by chapter 61 of title 10 of the Delaware Code. 
(Ord. No. 011-04, § 1, 6-21-04) 
Secs. 18-606-18-700. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FAÇADE IMPROVEMENT GRANT PROGRAM[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Retitled from "Facade Improvement Matching Grant Program" by Ord. No. 002-15, § 1, 4-6-15. 

Sec. 18-701. - Declaration of necessity by town council. 
    The town council hereby adopts and affirms the legislative finding declared in section 4502 of title 31 ("welfare") of the Delaware Code (as amended) and the declarations of necessity under division 1 and 2 hereunder. The town council has determined it is in the public interest that slum conditions and conditions of blight, dilapidation, obsolescent, decay, and deterioration be eliminated and that the redevelopment, rehabilitation, renovation, reconstruction, restoration, conservation, or combination thereof, of such conditions is necessary in the interest of public health, safety, morals and welfare of the residents of the town. The existence of such conditions eventually necessitates excessive and disproportionate expenditure of public funds upon the structures falling into such a great state of disrepair that they become unsalvageable. The town council desires to encourage the redevelopment, rehabilitation, renovation, reconstruction, restoration, and conservation of the aforementioned conditions by the expenditure of public money through a façade improvement grant program conditioned upon such terms to prevent the recurrence of the condition(s). Thereby eliminating, remedying, or preventing, to the extent feasible, the conditions enumerated hereunder so that the same do not constitute an economic and social liability upon the residents of the town. The town council is exercising such powers, rights and duties pursuant to chapter 45 ("slum clearance and redevelopment law") of title 31 ("welfare") of the Delaware Code, as amended, and the Town Charter. 
(Ord. No. 006-05, § 1, 3-21-05; Ord. No. 002-15, § 1, 4-6-15) 
Sec. 18-702. - Creation of authority. 
    The slum clearance and redevelopment authority shall be vested with the powers, functions and duties specified in this division. 
(Ord. No. 006-05, § 1, 3-21-05; Ord. No. 002-15, § 1, 4-6-15) 
Sec. 18-703. - Powers, functions and duties of authority. 
    Pursuant to the Town Charter and chapter 45 ("slum clearance and redevelopment authority law") of title 31 ("welfare") of the Delaware Code (as amended), the slum clearance and redevelopment authority shall have all the powers necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this division, including, but not limited to, those powers necessary or convenient to engage in redevelopment, rehabilitation, renovation, reconstruction, restoration, and conservation to eliminate, remedy or prevent slum conditions and conditions of blight, dilapidation, obsolescent, decay, and deterioration. The slum clearance and redevelopment authority may expend public money through the façade improvement grant program if the expenditure is conditioned upon such terms to prevent the recurrence of the condition(s) eliminated, remedied or prevented and if the expenditure will result in improvements that are compatible with the architectural features of the existing structure or neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 006-05, § 1, 3-21-05; Ord. No. 002-15, § 1, 4-6-15) 
Sec. 18-704. - Eligible properties. 
    Commercial and residential properties located within the town's boundaries shall be eligible to participate in the façade improvement grant program. 
(Ord. No. 006-05, § 1, 3-21-05; Ord. No. 002-15, § 1, 4-6-15) 
Sec. 18-705. - Eligible applicants. 
    The property owner(s) and any person or entity holding an equitable or legal interest in the property are eligible to make application for monies under the façade improvement grant program. All applications by any person or entity other than the property owner shall be supported by a notarized letter of permission from the property owner. An applicant's financial resources, or lack thereof, shall not be considered in the application review process. 
(Ord. No. 006-05, § 1, 3-21-05; Ord. No. 002-15, § 1, 4-6-15) 
Sec. 18-706. - Eligible improvements. 
(a)  The exterior front façade improvements eligible for grant monies include, but are not limited to,the rehabilitation, renovation, reconstruction (photographic documentation and/or historic documentation must be provided), restoration, replacement, installation, conservation, or any other similar construction activity of the following improvements (which is not intended to be an exhaustive list of eligible improvements): 
(1)  Doors. An exterior façade door (including a storm door and screen door) and/or door hardware (knobs, knockers, door plates, numbers, etc.) which are visible from a public street and/or sidewalk. 
(2)  Lighting. Exterior façade lighting which is visible from a public street and/or sidewalk. 
(3)  Roofs. The front, side and back of a sloping roof, part of which is visible from a public street and/or sidewalk. The authority may not grant monies for a flat roof unless a significant portion of the roof area is visible from a public street and/or sidewalk. 
(4)  Shutters or awnings. Exterior façade shutters or awnings visible from a public street and/or sidewalk. 
(5)  Stairs, railings, columns, porches and balconies. Exterior stairs, railings, columns, porches and balconies visible from a public street and/or sidewalk. 
(6)  Walkways. Any sidewalk, paver system or other permanent walkway improvement designed for pedestrian use from a public street or sidewalk. The walkway does not have to be primarily used for public pedestrian use, but the walkway must provide access for the general public from a public street or sidewalk to the property. 
(7)  Walls. The exterior façade wall of a property visible from a public street or sidewalk. In addition to the "construction activities" enumerated in the opening paragraph of this section, the cleaning, sealing, tuck pointing, and painting of an exterior façade wall are eligible improvements. 
(8)  Windows. Exterior façade windows visible from a public street and/or sidewalk. In addition to the "construction activities" enumerated in the opening paragraph of this section, the glazing or re-glazing of sills are eligible improvements. 
(9)  Architectural decorative ornamentation. Architectural decorative ornamentation, including, but not limited to, finials, balustrades, brackets, braces, dentils, cornices, moldings, and decorative siding, visible from a public street and or sidewalk. 
(10)  Chimneys. The sealing, tuck pointing, stuccoing, re-stuccoing and painting of an exterior chimneys which are visible from a public street and/or sidewalk. Decorative corbelling and capping are eligible improvements. 
(11)  Privacy fences around exterior mechanical units. Privacy fences around exterior mechanical units that are visible from a public street and/or sidewalk. Privacy fences are defined as those types of fences which enclose only a small area in close proximity to the primary structure. Such fences are permitted, subject to prior written approval from the town, if the fence does not exceed a height of six feet and is constructed of PVC, vinyl, or wood. 
All improvements shall be permanent and fixed in type or nature. The applicant is responsible for securing a building permit before beginning any construction activity. The applicant is responsible for ensuring that all improvements satisfy any code requirements of the town, including, but not limited to, zoning, building and safety. 
(b)  The authority reserves the right to make the final and conclusive determination of all eligible improvements on an application to ensure the proposed improvements are compatible with the architectural features of the structure or neighborhood. When reviewing an application for approval the authority shall consider all relevant factors, which may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The height of the proposed improvement and its compatibility with adjacent structures. 
(2)  The proportion of the structure's front and, where relevant, side façadeade to ensure that the relationship of the width of the improvement to the height of its front elevation shall be compatible with structures to which it is visually related. 
(3)  The proportionality of the openings within the façadeade and the relationship of solids and voids on the façadeade to those of adjacent buildings. 
(4)  The relationship of the structure to the open spaces between it and adjoining buildings. 
(5)  The relationship of entrances and porch projections to the street and their compatibility with the area to which the structure is visually related. 
(6)  The scale of the structure in terms of its size, its mass, the nature of window and door openings, the directional compatibility of the façadeade, and the appropriateness of other architectural features. 
(7)  The shape of the roof and its compatibility to adjacent buildings and the area to which it is visually related. 
(8)  The compatibility of materials, textures and colors to the predominant materials used in buildings to which the proposed improvement is visually related. 
(9)  The appropriateness of materials proposed for use in relationship to the existing materials on the structure. 
(10)  The compatibility of the structure's exterior features, such as lighting, fences, signs, sidewalks, steps, doorways and surrounds, or driveways with the features of those structures to which it is visually related, and the appropriateness of those features to the neighborhood in which the structure is located. However, a dissimilar architectural style may be acceptable if it appropriately furthers the evolution of the neighborhood or promotes the compatible adaptive reuse of the structure. 
(11)  The extent to which the proposed action removes or reduces prior inappropriate modifications to a structure such that its future appearance will be more compatible with the character of the neighborhood in which the structure is located. 
(c)  Recommendation by historic preservation overlay district review board. For those properties located within the Historic Preservation Overlay District, prior to the approval of any application by the authority, the historic preservation overlay district review board shall review the application and make a recommendation to the authority as to whether or not the improvements are consistent with any historic district design guidelines adopted by the town and any other consideration provided for in chapter 19 of the Town Code. Only those improvements consistent with any historic district design guidelines and chapter 19 are eligible for grant monies. The board shall make the final determination as to whether or not the improvements are consistent with any historic district design guidelines adopted by the town; except for appeals to the town council under chapter 19. 
(Ord. No. 006-05, § 1, 3-21-05; Ord. No. 009-08, § 1, 11-17-08; Ord. No. 002-15, § 1, 4-6-15) 
Sec. 18-707. - Grant application. 
    The applicant must complete and return to the authority the application and the following: 
(1)  An affidavit signed by the property owner and all persons or entities holding an equitable or legal interest in the property stating: 
a.  The same do not have any pending litigation with the town; and 
b.  The amount of grant monies already applied for and/or distributed for the property listed on the application does not exceed the amounts authorized hereunder for grants. 
(2)  A notarized letter of permission from the property owner if the application includes persons or entities other than the property owner. 
(3)  The property owner shall provide to the authority acceptable proof of ownership of the property, as reasonable determined by the authority (e.g., a certified copy of the deed). 
(4)  A signed town treasury information form (or similar document) which shall state that the property owner and all persons or entities holding an equitable or legal interest in the property are not delinquent on any debts owed to the town, including, but not limited to, property taxes and water, electric and sewer charges. 
(5)  A letter of recommendation from the historic preservation overlay district review board, where applicable. 
(6)  A detailed description and itemized costs of the improvements to be completed with grant monies. 
(Ord. No. 006-05, § 1, 3-21-05; Ord. No. 002-15, § 1, 4-6-15) 
Sec. 18-708. - Reimbursement grant amounts. 
(a)  Commercial properties. Subject to the availability of funds and approval of an application, the authority shall reimburse 25 percent of the monies invested on eligible improvements by the property owner and/or any person or entity holding an equitable or legal interest in the property. The total amount of all grants by the authority shall not exceed $2,500.00 for a single property in one calendar year. 
(b)  Residential properties. Subject to the availability of funds and approval of an application, the authority shall reimburse 25 percent of the monies invested on eligible improvements by the property owner and/or any person or entity holding an equitable or legal interest in the property. The total amount of all grants by the authority shall not exceed $2,500.00 for a single property in one calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 006-05, § 1, 3-21-05; Ord. No. 002-15, § 1, 4-6-15) 
Sec. 18-709. - Funding of grant program. 
(a)  Availability of grant monies. Every application shall be conditioned upon the availability of grant funds. Applications shall be considered in the order received, on a first come, first served basis. Applicants shall be subject to a waiting list if funds are not available for the façade improvement grant program. 
(b)  Reconciliation of grant funds. The authority shall reconcile grant funds on a monthly basis and temporarily assign grant funds to an applicant subject to the approval of the application by the authority. 
(Ord. No. 006-05, § 1, 3-21-05; Ord. No. 002-15, § 1, 4-6-15) 
Sec. 18-710. - Completion of improvement(s). 
    The applicant(s) shall complete the improvement within one year from the date that the application was approved by the authority to maintain eligibility for grant monies. Failure to do so will result in the automatic forfeiture of grants funds assigned to applicant without any further notice from the authority. 
(Ord. No. 006-05, § 1, 3-21-05) 
Sec. 18-711. - Disbursement of grant monies. 
    Prior to the disbursement of grant monies, the applicant(s) shall provide the following to the authority: 
(1)  A letter from the town manager that the improvement(s) have passed all final inspections required under the town codes. 
(2)  A letter from the historic preservation overlay district review board, where applicable, stating that the improvements satisfy the historic district design guidelines and the provisions of chapter 19. 
(3)  An itemized invoice or receipts of the improvement(s) constructed marked "paid in full." 
(4)  A waiver of lien signed by each contractor performing work upon the property. 
(5)  An affidavit signed by the applicant(s) stating the amount of monies expended by the applicant(s) which is eligible to be reimbursed with grant monies by the authority as provided hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 006-05, § 1, 3-21-05; Ord. No. 002-15, § 1, 4-6-15) 
Sec. 18-712. - Deed restriction upon the subject real property. 
    Prior to the disbursement of grant monies, the applicant(s) and authority shall enter into a covenant which shall run with the land of the subject real property. If subject real property is sold within five years of receipt of grant funds, the applicant must repay grant funds to the Town of Smyrna. The covenant shall include restrictions and conditions as the authority may deem necessary to prevent slum conditions and conditions of blight, dilapidation, obsolescent, decay, and deterioration, and provide appropriate remedies for any breach of any such covenants, restrictions or conditions, including the right of the authority to be reimbursed for any funds disbursed hereunder. The covenant shall be executed by the property owner prior to the disbursement of funds and recorded as a lien on the property with the Town of Smyrna. The amount of the lien shall be decreased by 20 percent of the original grant amount on the anniversary date of the grant each year until the amount is reduced to zero. If the property is sold prior to the amount being reduced to zero, then the Town of Smyrna shall be paid the amount of the existing lien at the time of sale. 
(Ord. No. 006-05, § 1, 3-21-05; Ord. No. 009-08, § 2, 11-17-08) 
Secs. 18-713-18-800. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - WAIVER OF TOWN TAXES, CHARGES AND FEES 

Sec. 18-801. - Waiver of town taxes, charges and fees. 
    The town council may waive, in whole or part, by resolution, any tax, charge, fee, obligation and/or duty (collectively referred to as "charges") owed to the town if such waiver is necessary to effectuate the purposes and intent of this article ("redevelopment authority"). The waiver shall include, but is not limited to, property taxes, impact fees, building permit fees and the monthly metered electric utility charge (excluding any public utility tax, state and/or federal tax/surcharge, purchase power adjustment, and/or transmission/distribution fees). With regards to the waiver of impacts fees, the town council shall consider in its determination: 
(1)  The kind, use or intensity of the proposed construction; and 
(2)  The increase in demand, if any, upon "municipal and/or public services" as defined in chapter 32. 
The town council may extend the waiver to charges for any project necessitated by or directly related to a project of redevelopment, including, by way of example, the waiver of charges that result from the development and use of a site to be used for the relocation of any persons and/or businesses displaced by redevelopment. If necessary to effectuate the purposes and intent of this article, the waiver may extend to projects not identified in a plan of redevelopment. 
(Ord. No. 014-05, § 1, 4-4-05) 
Secs. 18-802-18-900. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - RESIDENTIAL CODE 

Sec. 18-901. - Adoption. 
    That certain document, at least one copy of which is on file in the office of the department of planning and inspections, being marked and designated the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, including Appendix G-Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs, Appendix J-Existing Buildings and Structures, and no other appendices. as published by the International Code Council, be and hereby is adopted as the residential code of the town for regulating and governing the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, location, removal and demolition of detached one and two family dwellings and multiple single family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories in height with separate means of egress as herein provided. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International Residential Code, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part of hereof as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in this article. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 24, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 005-10, § 1, 3-1-10; Ord. No. 004-17, § 11, 5-15-17) 
Sec. 18-902. - Additions, insertions, deletions and changes. 
    The town hereby adopts these specific amendments to the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, as follows: 
Chapter 1, ADMINISTRATION, delete the chapter in its entirety. Refer to Article I of this chapter. 
Chapter 3, BUILDING PLANNING, is amended as follows: 
a.  Table R301.2(1), CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA, is filled in as follows: 
TABLE R301.2(1) 
CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHICAL DESIGN CRITERIA 
Ground Snow Load Wind Design Seismic Design Category f Subject to Damage From Winter Design Temp e Summer Wet bulb/dry bulb Ice Barrier Underlayment Required h Flood Hazards gl Air 
Freezing 
Index i Mean Annual Temp j Assumed Soil 
Bearing Speed d 
(mph) Topographic Effects k Weathering a Frost line depth b Termite c 25 90 No A&B Severe 24" Moderate to heavy 18 89/75 No March 15, 1978 
May 5, 2003 325 56.2 2,000 psf  
For SI: 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s 
a.  Weathering may require a higher strength concrete or grade of masonry than necessary to satisfy the structural requirements of this code. The weathering column shall be filled in with the weathering index (i.e., "negligible," "moderate" or "severe") for concrete as determined from the Weathering Probability Map Figure R301.2(3). The grade of masonry units shall be determined from ASTM C 34, C 55, C 62, C 73, C 90, C 129, C 145, C 216 or C 652. 
b.  The frost line depth may require deeper footings than indicated in Figure R403.1 (1). The jurisdiction shall fill in the frost line depth column with the minimum depth of footing below finish grade. 
c.  The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table to indicate the need for protection depending on whether there has been a history of local subterranean termite damage. 
d.  The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the wind speed from the basic wind speed map [Figure 301.2(4)]. Wind exposure category shall be determined on a site-specific basis in accordance with Section R301.2.1.4. 
e.  The outdoor design dry-bulb temperature shall be selected from the columns of 97 1/2 percent values for winter from Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code. Deviations from the Appendix D temperatures shall be permitted to reflect local climates or local weather experience as determined by the building official. 
f.  The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the Seismic Design Category determined from Section R301.2.2.1. 
g.  The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with (a) the date of the jurisdiction's entry into the National Flood Insurance Program (date of adoption of the first code or ordinance for management of flood hazard areas), (b) the date(s) of the Flood Insurance Study and (c) the panel numbers and dates of all currently effective FIRMs and FBFMs or other flood hazard map adopted by the authority having jurisdiction, as amended. 
h.  In accordance with Sections R905.2.7.1, R905.4.3, R905.5.3, R905.6.3, R905.7.3 and R905.8.3, for areas where the average daily temperature in January is 25 o F (-4 o C) or less, or where there has been a history of local damage from the effects of ice damming, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with "YES." Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with "NO." 
i.  The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the 100-year return period air freezing index (BF-days) from Figure R403.3(2) or from the 100-year (99%) value on the National Climatic Data Center data table "Air Freezing Index- USA Method (Base 32 o Fahrenheit)" at www.ncdc.noaa.gov/fpsf.html. 
j.  The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the mean annual temperature from the National Climatic Data Center data table "Air Freezing Index- USA Method (Base 32 o Fahrenheit)" at www.ncdc.noaa.gov/fpsf.html. 
k.  In accordance with Section R301.2.1.5, where there is local historical data documenting structural damage to buildings due to topographic wind speed-up effects, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with "YES." Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate "NO" in this part of the table. 
l.  Including all subsequent amendments and/or the most current revision thereof. 
b.  Section R311.7.5 Stair treads and risers, delete the section in its entirety and insert in lieu thereof the following: 
R311.7.5 Stair treads and risers. Stair treads and risers shall meet the requirements of this section. For the purposes of this section all dimensions and dimensioned surfaces shall be exclusive of carpets, rugs or runners. 
c.  Section R311.7.5.1 Risers, delete the section in its entirety and insert in lieu thereof the following: 
R311.7.5.1 Risers. The maximum riser height shall be 8-1/4 inches (209.6 mm). The riser shall be measured vertically between leading edges of the adjacent treads. The greatest riser height within any flight of stairs shall not exceed the smallest by more than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm). The riser height at landings with hinged doors shall be measured from the landing vertically to the top of the threshold (not the compression strip). The riser height at landings with sliding doors shall be measured from the landing vertically to the top of the highest projection of the door track. Risers shall be vertical or sloped from the underside of the nosing of the tread above at an angle not more than 30 degrees (0.51 rad) from the vertical. Open risers are permitted provided that the opening between treads does not permit the passage of a 6-inch-diameter (102 mm) sphere. 
Exception: The opening between adjacent treads is not limited on stairs with a total rise of 81/4 inches (209.55 mm) or less. 
d.  Section R311.7.5.2 Treads, delete the section in its entirety and insert in lieu thereof the following: 
R311.7.5.2 Treads. The minimum tread depth shall be 9 inches (229 mm). The tread depth shall be measured horizontally between the vertical planes of the foremost projection of adjacent treads and at a right angle to the tread's leading edge. The greatest tread depth within any flight of stairs shall not exceed the smallest by more than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm). 
e.  Section R312.1.2 Height, delete the section in its entirety and insert in lieu thereof the following: 
R312.1.2 Height. Required guards at open-sided walking surfaces, including stairs, porches, balconies or landings, shall not be less than 36 inches (914 mm) high measured vertically above the adjacent walking surface or the line connecting the leading edges of the treads. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Guards on the open sides of stairs shall have a height not less than 34 inches (864 mm) and not more than 38 inches (965 mm) measured vertically from a line connecting the leading edges of the treads. 
2.  Where the top of the guard also serves as a handrail on the open sides of stairs, the top of the guard shall not be less than 34 inches (864 mm) and not more than 38 inches (965 mm) measured vertically from a line connecting the leading edges of the treads. 
f.  Section R313 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems, delete the section in its entirety 
g.  Section R314.3 Location, delete the section in its entirety and insert in lieu thereof the following: 
R314.3 Location. Smoke alarms shall be installed in the following locations: 
1.  In each sleeping room. 
2.  Outside each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity, within 10 feet (3,048 mm) of the bedrooms. 
3.  On each additional story of the dwelling, including basements and habitable attics, but not including crawlspaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level, provided that the lower level is less than one full story below the upper level. 
h.  Section R319.2 Street identification , add directly after R319.1 Address numbers. 
R319.2 Street identification. Permanent street signs shall be in place prior to the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. 
i.  Section R322.1.4 Establishing the design flood elevation., delete the section in its entirety and insert in lieu thereof the following: 
R322.1.4 Establishing the design flood elevation. The design flood elevation shall be used to define flood hazard areas. At a minimum, the design flood elevation is the higher of: 
1.  The base flood elevation at the depth of peak elevation of flooding (including wave height), which has a 1 percent (100-year flood) or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year; or 
2.  The elevation of the design flood associated with the area designated on a flood hazard map plus the freeboard as adopted by the community, or otherwise legally designated. 
j.  Section R322.1.4.1 Determination of design flood elevations, delete the section in its entirety and insert in lieu thereof the following: 
R322.1.4.1 Determination of design flood elevations. Submit a current FEMA Form 81-31, Elevation Certificate, completed by a registered design professional, licensed in the State of Delaware, and if the design flood elevations are not specified, the building official is authorized to require the applicant to: 
1.  Obtain and reasonably use data available from a federal, state or other source; or 
2.  Determine the design flood elevation in accordance with accepted hydrologic and hydraulic engineering practices used to define special flood hazard areas. Determinations shall be undertaken by a registered design professional who shall document that the technical methods used reflect currently accepted engineering practice. Studies, analyses and computations shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow thorough review and approval. 
k.  Section R322.1.6 Protection of mechanical and electrical systems, delete the section in its entirety and insert in lieu thereof the following: 
R322.1.6 Protection of mechanical and electrical systems. Electrical systems, equipment and components; heating, ventilating, air conditioning equipment; plumbing appliances and plumbing fixtures; duct systems; and other service equipment shall be located at or above the base flood elevation noted on the FIRM's elevation required in Sections R322.2 or R322.3. If replaced as part of a substantial improvement, electrical systems, equipment and components; heating, ventilating, air conditioning equipment; plumbing appliances and plumbing fixtures; duct systems; and other service equipment shall meet the requirements of this section. Systems, fixtures, equipment and components shall not be mounted on or penetrate through walls intended to break away under flood loads. 
Exception: Locating electrical systems, equipment and components; heating, ventilating, air conditioning equipment; plumbing appliances and plumbing fixtures; duct systems; and other service equipment is permitted below the elevation required in Sections R322.2 and R322.3, provided that they are designed and installed to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components and to resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses, including the effects of buoyancy, during the occurrence of flooding to the design flood elevation in accordance with ASCE 24. Electrical wiring systems are permitted to be located below the required elevation, provided they conform to the provisions of the electrical part of this code for wet locations. 
l.  Section R322.1.9 Manufactured homes, delete the section in its entirety and insert in lieu thereof the following: 
R322.1.9 Manufactured homes: placement of buildings and structures. New or replacement manufactured homes, buildings, or structures shall be elevated in accordance with Sections R322.2 or R322.3. The foundation and anchorage of manufactured homes to be located in identified floodways shall be designed and constructed in accordance with ASCE 24. 
For additional requirements, see the Municipal Code of the Town of Smyrna, Appendix C, Article 3 & Article 4. 
Chapter 4, FOUNDATIONS, is amended as follows: 
a.  Section R403.1.1, Minimum size, delete the section in its entirety and insert in lieu thereof the following: 
R403.1.1 Minimum size. Minimum sizes for concrete and masonry footings shall be as set forth in Table R403.1 and Figure R403.1(1). The footing width, W, shall be based on the load-bearing value of the soil in accordance with Table R401.4.1. Spread footings shall be at least 6 inches (152 mm) in thickness, T. Footing projections, P, shall be at least 2 inches (51 mm) and shall not exceed the thickness of the footing. See Figure R403.1(1) in the International Residential Code 2012. 
CONCRETE AND MASONRY FOUNDATION DETAILS. The size of footings supporting piers and columns shall be based on the tributary load and allowable soil pressure in accordance with Table R401.4(1). Footings for wood foundations shall be in accordance with the details set forth in Section R403.2, and Figures R403.1 (2) and R403.1 (3). 
Exception: 
1.  Footings for single story decks shall be in accordance with the American Forest and Paper, Design for Acceptance #6, Prescriptive Residential Wood Deck Construction Guide. 
2.  Decks having vertical members spaced 6 feet (1289 mm) on center or less may be placed on a 4 inch (101 mm) concrete pad, provided the vertical members are placed 12 inches (305 mm) inside the perimeter of the pad and are anchored on all corners with approved anchoring devices. Decks 20 feet (6096 mm) or more in length shall have two additional anchors installed on each side mid-span. 
3.  Residential accessory structures less than 300 square feet (27 sq. meters) in area, with the exception of a pole building and garage, shall be leveled and secured with tie-downs or equivalent manufactured home anchoring devices, one in each corner. Structures 20 feet (6096 mm) or more in length shall have two additional anchors installed on each side mid-span. All lumber and wood siding is to be pressure treated from grade to 8 inches (203 mm) above finished grade. Pressure treated lumber shall meet the requirements set forth in Section R317. 
4.  Prefabricated room enclosures are to be placed on an approved support system per the manufacturer's installation instructions. 
b.  Section R403.1.3 Seismic reinforcing, delete the section in its entirety. 
c.  Section R403.1.4 Minimum Depth, delete the section in its entirety and insert in lieu thereof the following: 
R403.1.4 Minimum depth. All exterior footings shall be placed at least 24 inches below the undisturbed ground surface. Where applicable, the depth of footings shall also conform to Sections R403.1.4.1 through 403.1.4.2. 
d.  Section R403.1.4.1 Frost protection, delete the section in its entirety and insert in lieu thereof the following: 
R403.1.4.1 Frost protection. Except where otherwise protected from frost, foundation walls, piers and other permanent supports of buildings and structures shall be protected from frost by one or more of the following methods: 
1.  Extended below the frost line specified in Table R301.2.(1); 
2.  Constructing in accordance with Section R403.3; 
3.  Constructing in accordance with ASCE 32; or 
4.  Erected on solid rock. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Protection of freestanding accessory structures with an area of 240 square feet or less, of light-framed construction, with an eave height of 10 feet or less shall not be required. 
2.  Protection of freestanding accessory structures with an area of 400 square feet or less, of other than light-framed construction, with an eave height of 10 feet or less shall not be required. 
3.  Decks not supported by a dwelling need not be provided with footings that extend below the frost line. 
Footings shall not bear on frozen soil unless the frozen condition is permanent. 
e.  Section R403.1.6 Foundation anchorage, delete the section in its entirety and insert in lieu thereof the following: 
R403.1.6 Foundation anchorage. Sill plates and walls supported directly on continuous foundations shall be anchored to the foundation in accordance with this section. Wood sole plates at all exterior walls on monolithic slabs, wood sole plates of braced wall panels at building interiors on monolithic slabs, and all wood sill plates shall be anchored to the foundation with anchor bolts spaced a maximum of 6 feet (1829 mm) on center. Bolts shall be at least 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) in diameter and shall extend a minimum of 7 inches (178 mm) into concrete or grouted cells of concrete masonry units. A nut and washer shall be tightened on each anchor bolt. There shall be a minimum of two bolts per plate section with one bolt located not more than 12 inches (305 mm) or less than seven bolt diameters (3 1/2 inches) from each end of the plate section. Interior bearing wall sole plates on monolithic slab foundation that are not part of a braced wall panel shall be positively anchored with approved fasteners. Sill plates and sole plates shall be protected against decay and termites where required by Sections R317 and R318. Cold-formed steel framing systems shall be fastened to wood sill plates or anchored directly to the foundation as required in Section R505.3.1 or R603.3.1. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Foundation anchorage, spaced as required to provide equivalent anchorage to 1/2-inch-diameter (12.7 mm) anchor bolts. 
2.  Walls 24 inches (610 mm) total length or shorter connecting offset braced wall panels shall be anchored to the foundation with a minimum of one anchor bolt located in the center third of the plate section and shall be attached to adjacent braced wall panels at corners, as shown in item 8 of Table R602.3(1). 
3.  Connection of walls 12 inches (305 mm) total length or shorter connecting offset braced wall panels to the foundation without anchor bolts shall be permitted. The wall shall be attached to adjacent braced wall panels at corners, as shown in item 8 of Table R602.3(1). 
f.  Section R405.1 Concrete or masonry foundations, delete the subsection in its entirety and insert in lieu thereof the following: 
R405.1 Concrete or masonry foundations. Drains shall be provided around all concrete or masonry foundations that retain earth and enclose habitable or usable spaces located below grade. Drainage tiles, gravel or crushed stone drains, perforated pipe or other approved systems or materials shall be installed at or below the area to be protected and shall discharge by gravity or installed mechanical means (sump pump) into an approved drainage system. Gravel or crushed stone drains shall extend at least 1 foot (305 mm) beyond the outside edge of the footing and 6 inches (152 mm) above the top of the footing and be covered with an approved filter membrane material. The top of open joints of drain tiles shall be protected with strips of building paper. Perforated drains shall be surrounded with an approved filter membrane or the filter membrane shall cover the washed gravel or crushed rock covering the drain. Drainage tiles or perforated pipe shall be placed on a minimum of 2 inches (51 mm) of washed gravel or crushed rock at least one sieve size larger than the tile joint opening or perforation and covered with not less than 6 inches (152 mm) of the same material. 
R405.1.1 Precast concrete foundation. Precast concrete walls that retain earth and enclose habitable or useable space located below-grade that rest on crushed stone footings shall have a perforated drainage pipe installed below the base of the wall on either the interior or exterior side of the wall, at least one foot (305 mm) beyond the edge of the wall. If the exterior drainage pipe is used, an approved filter membrane material shall cover the pipe. The drainage system shall discharge into an approved sewer system by gravity or installed mechanical means (sump pump) into an approved drainage system or to daylight. 
g.  Section R405.2.3, Drainage system, delete the subsection in its entirety and insert in lieu thereof the following: 
R405.2.3 Drainage system. In other than Group I soils, a sump shall be provided to drain the porous layer and footings. The sump shall be at least 24 inches (610 mm) in diameter or 20 inches square (0.0129 m 2 ), shall extend at least 24 inches (610 mm) below the bottom of the basement floor and shall be capable of positive gravity or installed mechanical drainage (sump pump) to remove any accumulated water. The drainage system shall discharge into an approved drainage system or to daylight. 
Chapter 5, FLOORS, is amended as follows: 
a.  Section R502.3.4 Deck floor joist spans , add directly after R502.3.3 Floor cantilevers. 
R502.3.4 Deck floor joist spans. Deck floor joist spans shall be in accordance with the American Forest and Paper, Design for Acceptance #6, Prescriptive Residential Wood Deck Construction Guide. 
b.  Section R502.5.1 Deck girder spans , add directly after R502.5 Allowable girder spans. 
R502.5.1 Deck girder spans. Deck girder spans shall be in accordance with the American Forest and Paper, Design for Acceptance #6, Prescriptive Residential Wood Deck Construction Guide. 
Chapter 6, WALL CONSTRUCTION, is amended as follows: 
a.  Section R602.10 Wall bracing , add the following exception: 
Exception: Porches with roofs and screen porches shall not be required to comply with the requirements of R602.10, Wall Bracing, when constructed with approved translucent or transparent plastic not more than 0.125 inch (3.2 mm) in thickness. 
b.  Add new Section R614-Plan Submittals 
R614.1 Design loads. Plans are required to meet the minimum design loads noted in Table R301.2(1). Uplift reaction forces involved are required to be provided. 
R614.2 Truss design drawings. Truss design drawings are required at the time of plan submittal. The building plans should specify the permanent bracing for cords and webs to meet the bracing requirements shown on the truss design drawings. 
R614.3 Size, grade, and species of wood members. All lumber shown on the submitted drawings should identify the size, grade and species or species group. Any engineered lumber should be identified by the product name, size and stress grade. 
R614.4 Isolation of siding. Methods and materials to isolate steel siding from preservatively treated lumber should be specified and detailed on the submitted plans. 
R614.5 Connection of truss carrier to bearing post. Submitted plans shall specify a bearing notch, properly designed bearing block, or other means for positive load transfer. 
R614.6 Fastener schedule. Submitted plans are required to include a fastener schedule completely describing the fasteners and quantities required at each connection. Power driven nails should specify the type, diameter and length. 
R614.7 Roofing and siding diaphragms. Submitted plans shall include metal roof and wall panel thickness, fastener type and size, and the fastener pattern for roof and siding panels. If stitch screws are required to attach metal sheet-to-sheet, the plans should show the locations. Shingled roofs shall meet the requirements of Section R905. 
c.  Add new Section R615-Footings: 
R615.1 Footing depth. Footings for post frame structures shall extend a minimum of 40 inches (914 mm) below grade. 
R615.2 Footing size. Footings for all post frame structures shall be sized to support the loads imposed. Minimum footing sizes for all post frame structures shall be 18 inches (457 mm) diameter and a minimum of 12 inches (203 mm) thick concrete under the support posts. 
R615.3 Resistance to uplift. A lumber cleat shall be attached to the bottom of all vertical support posts to resist uplift. 
Exception: Other means to resist uplift may be used and should be noted on the submitted plans. 
d.  Add new Section R616-Frame Construction: 
R616.1 Preservative treatment. All wood in contact with the ground shall be preservatively treated meeting the requirements of Section R319. 
R616.2 Support posts. Support posts fabricated from multiple plies shall have the number of plies of lumber, lumber species, grade, and connection system between plies noted. 
R616.3 Truss carrier spans. The allowable spans for truss carriers fabricated of dimensional lumber shall not exceed the values set forth in Tables R616.4(1) through R616.4(3). Spans exceeding the values set forth in Tables R616.4(1) through R616.4(3) shall be engineered. 
Table R616.4(1) Truss Carrier Spans 48" O.C. Support Post Spacing Truss Spacing Header 
Supporting a (2)2×6 (2)2×8 (2)2×10 (2)2×12 lbs b lbs b lbs b lbs b 24" Douglas fir-Larch 1,201 1,584 2,021 2,458 Hem-fir 948 1,250 1,595 1,940 Southern yellow pine 1,138 1,500 1,914 2,328 Spruce-pine-fir 885 1,167 1,489 1,811  
Table R616.4(2) Truss Carrier Spans 72" O.C. Support Post Spacing Truss Spacing Header 
Supporting a (2)2×6 (2)2×8 (2)2×10 (2)2×12 lbs b lbs b lbs b lbs b 24" Douglas fir-Larch 862 1,186 1,513 1,841 Hem- fir 710 936 1,195 1450 Southern yellow pine 851 1,124 1,434 1,744 Spruce- pine-fir 663 874 1,115 1,356 36" Douglas fir-Larch 1,130 1,584 2,021 2,458 Hem-fir 948 1,250 1,595 1,940 Southern yellow pine 1,138 1,500 1,914 2,328 Spruce- pine-fir 885 1,167 1,489 1,711  
Table R616.4(3) Truss Carrier Spans 96" O.C. Support Post Spacing Truss Spacing Header 
Supporting a (2)2×6 (2)2×8 (2)2×10 (2)2×12 lbs b lbs b lbs b lbs b 24" Douglas fir-Larch 487 782 1,162 1,413 Hem-fir 460 719 917 1,115 Southern yellow pine 654 862 1,100 1,339 Spruce-pine-fir 474 671 856 1,041 48" Douglas fir-Larch 847 1,360 2,021 2,458 Hem-fir 800 1,250 1,595 1,940 Southern yellow pine 1,138 1,500 1,914 2,328 Spruce-pine-fir 824 1,167 1,489 1,811  
a.  Tabulated values assume #2 grade lumber. 
b.  Truss reactions = Total load. 
Chapter 8, ROOF-CEILING CONSTRUCTION, is amended as follows: 
a.  Replaced Table 802.5.1(4) through Table 802.5.1(8) with Table 802.5.1(4) and Table 802.5.1(5). 
TABLE 802.5.1(4) Rafter Spans For 25 Psf Ground Snow Load 
(Ceiling not attached to rafters, L/? = 180) Rafter Spacing 
(Inches) Species And Grade Dead Load = 10 Psf 2 x 4 2 x 6 2 x 8 2 x 10 2 x 12 Maximum Rafter Spans 
(feet-inches) 12 Douglas fir-larch SS 10'-8" 16'-9" 22'-1" * * Douglas fir-larch #1 10'-3" 15'-9" 19'-1" 24'-4" * Douglas fir-larch #2 10'-1" 14'-11" 18'-11" 23'-1" * Douglas fir-larch #3 7'-10" 11'-5" 14'-5" 17'-8" 20'-5" Hem-fir SS 10'-1" 15'-10" 20'-10" * * Hem-fir #1 9'-10" 15'-6" 19'-8" 24'-0" * Hem-fir #2 9'-5" 14'-6" 18'-4" 22'-5" 26'-0" Hem-fir #3 7'-7" 11'-2" 14'-1" 17'-3" 20'-0" Southern pine SS 10'-5" 16'-5" 21'-8" * * Southern pine #1 10'-3" 16'-1" 21'-3" * * Southern pine #2 9'-0" 15'-5" 19'-11" 23'-9" 27'-11" Southern pine #3 6'-10" 11'-11" 15'-3" 18'-0" 21'-5" Spruce-pine-fir SS 9'-10" 15'-6" 20'-5" 26'-0" * Spruce-pine-fir #1 9'-7" 14'-9" 18'-8" 22'-9" * Spruce-pine-fir #2 9'-7" 14'-9" 18'-8" 22'-9" * Spruce-pine-fir #3 7'-7" 11'-2" 14'-1" 17'-3" 20'-0" 16 Douglas fir-larch SS 9'-8" 15'-2" 20'-0" 25'-7" * Douglas fir-larch #1 9'-4" 12'-8" 17'-3" 21'-1" 24'-5" Douglas fir-larch #2 8'-10" 12'-11" 16'-4" 20'-0" 23'-2" Douglas fir-larch #3 6'-9" 9'-11" 12'-6" 15'-3" 17'-9" Hem-fir SS 9'-2" 14'-4" 18'-11" 24'-2" * Hem-fir #1 8'-11" 13'-5" 17'-1" 20'-10" 24'-2" Hem-fir #2 8'-6" 12'-7" 15'-11" 19'-5" 22'-6" Hem-fir #3 6'-7" 9'-8" 12'-2" 14'-11" 17'-2" Southern pine SS 9'-6" 14'-11" 19'-8" 23'-7" * Southern pine #1 9'-4" 14'-8" 19'-4" 23'-11" * Southern pine #2 7'-10" 13'-4" 17'-3" 20'-7" 24'-2" Southern pine #3 5'-11" 10'-4" 13'-2" 15'-7" 18'-6" Spruce-pine-fir SS 8'-11" 14'-1" 18'-6" 23'-7" * Spruce-pine-fir #1 8'-9" 12'-9" 16'-2" 19'-9" 22'-10" Spruce-pine-fir #2 8'-9" 12'-9" 16'-2" 19'-9" 22'-10" Spruce-pine-fir #3 6'-7" 9'-8" 12'-2" 14'-11" 17'-3" 19.2 Douglas fir-larch SS 9'-1" 14'-4" 18'-10" 23'-7" * Douglas fir-larch #1 8'-6" 14'-4" 15'-9" 19'-3" 22'-4" Douglas fir-larch #2 8'-1" 11'-10" 14'-11" 18'-3" 21'-2" Douglas fir-larch #3 6'-2" 9'-0" 11'-5" 13'-11" 16'-2" Hem-fir SS 8'-7" 13'-6" 17'-10" 22'-8" * Hem-fir #1 8'-5" 12'-3" 15'-7" 19'-6" 22'-0" Hem-fir #2 7'-10" 11'-6" 14'-6" 17'-9" 20'-7" Hem-fir #3 6'-0" 8'-10" 11'-2" 13'-7" 15'-9" Southern pine SS 8'-11" 14'-1" 18'-6" 23'-8" * Southern pine #1 8'-9" 13'-9" 17'-7" 20'-11" 24'-11" Southern pine #2 7'-1" 12'-2" 15'-9" 18'-10" 22'-0" Southern pine #3 5'-5" 9'-5" 12'-0" 14'-3" 16'-11" Spruce-pine-fir SS 8'-5" 13'-3" 17'-5" 21'-6" 24'-11" Spruce-pine-fir #1 7'-11" 11'-8" 14'-9" 18'-0" 20'-11" Spruce-pine-fir #2 7'-11" 11'-8" 14'-9" 18'-0" 20'-11" Spruce-pine-fir #3 6'-0" 8'-10" 11'-2" 13'-7" 5'-9" 24 Douglas fir-larch SS 8'-5" 13'-3" 17'-3" 21'-1" 24'-5" Douglas fir-larch #1 7'-7" 11'-2" 14'-1" 17'-3" 20'-0" Douglas fir-larch #2 7'-3" 10'-7" 13'-4" 16'-4" 18'-11" Douglas fir-larch #3 5'-6" 8'-1" 10'-3" 12'-6" 14'-6" Hem-fir SS 8'-0" 12'-6" 16'-6" 20'-4" 23'-7" Hem-fir #1 7'-6" 11'-0" 13'-11" 17'-0" 19'-9" Hem-fir #2 7'-0" 10'-3" 13'-0" 15'-10" 18'-5" Hem-fir #3 5'-5" 7'-10" 10'-0" 12'-2" 14'-1" Southern pine SS 8'-4" 13'-1" 17'-2" 21'-11" * Southern pine #1 8'-2" 12'-6" 15'-9" 18'-9" 22'-4" Southern pine #2 6'-4" 10'-11" 14'-1" 16'-10" 19'-9" Southern pine #3 4'-10" 8'-5" 10'-9" 12'-9" 15'-2" Spruce-pine-fir SS 7'-10" 12'-3" 15'-9" 19'-3" 22'-4" Spruce-pine-fir #1 7'-1" 10'-5" 13'-2" 16'-1" 18'-8" Spruce-pine-fir #2 7'-1" 10'-5" 13'-2" 16'-1" 18'-8" Spruce-pine-fir #3 5'-5" 7'-10" 10'-0" 12'-2" 14'-1"  
Check sources for availability of lumber in lengths greater than 20 feet. 
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound = 0.0479 kPa. 
a.  The tabulated rafter spans assume that ceiling joists are located at the bottom of the attic space or that some other method of resisting the outward push of the rafters on the bearing walls, such as rafter ties, is provided at that location. When ceiling joists or rafter ties are located higher in the space, the rafter spans shall be multiplied by the factors given below. 
H C /H R Rafter Span 
Adjustment Factor 1/3 0.67 1/4 0.76 1/5 0.83 1/6 0.90 1/7.5 or less 1.00  
Where: 
H C = Height of ceiling joists or rafter ties measured vertically above the top of the rafter support walls. 
H R = Height of roof ridge measured vertically above the top of the rafter support walls. 
TABLE 802.5.1(5) Rafter Spans For 25 Psf Ground Snow Load 
(Ceiling attached to rafters, L/? = 240 Rafter Spacing 
(Inches) Species And Grade Dead Load = 10 Psf 2×4 2×6 2×8 2×10 2×12 Maximum Rafter Spans 
(feet-inches) 12 Douglas fir-larch SS 9'-8" 15'-2" 20'-0" 25'-7" * Douglas fir-larch #1 9'-4" 14'-8" 19'-4" 24'-4" * Douglas fir-larch #2 9'-2" 14'-4" 18'-11" 23'-1" * Douglas fir-larch #3 7'-0" 11'-5" 14'-5" 17'-8" 20'-5" Hem-fir SS 9'-2" 14'-4" 18'-11" 24'-2" * Hem-fir #1 8'-11" 14'-1" 18'-6" 23'-8" * Hem-fir #2 8'-6" 13'-5" 17'-8" 22'-5" 26'-0" Hem-fir #3 7'-7" 11'-2" 14'-1" 17'-3" 20'-0" Southern pine SS 9'-6" 14'-11" 19'-8" 25'-1" * Southern pine #1 9'-4" 14'-8" 19'-4" 24'-8" * Southern pine #2 8'-9" 14'-4" 18'-11" 23'-9" * Southern pine #3 6'-10" 11'-11" 15'-3" 18'-0" 21'-5" Spruce-pine-fir SS 8'-11" 14'-1" 18'-6" 23'-8" * Spruce-pine-fir #1 8'-9" 13'-9" 18'-1" 22'-9" * Spruce-pine-fir #2 8'-9" 13'-9" 18'-1" 22'-9" * Spruce-pine-fir #3 7'-7" 11'-2" 14'-1" 17'-3" 20'-0" 16 Douglas fir-larch SS 8'-9" 13'-10" 18'-10" 23'-3" * Douglas fir-larch #1 8'-6" 13'-4" 17'-3" 21'-1" * Douglas fir-larch #2 8'-4" 12'-11" 16'-4" 20'-0" 23'-2" Douglas fir-larch #3 6'-9" 9'-11" 12'-6" 15'-3" 17'-9" Hem-fir SS 8'-4" 13'-1" 17'-2" 21'-11" * Hem-fir #1 8'-1" 12'-9" 16'-10" 20'-10" 24'-2" Hem-fir #2 7'-9" 12'-2" 15'-11" 19'-5" 22'-6" Hem-fir #3 6'-7" 9'-8" 12'-2" 14'-11" 17'-3" Southern pine SS 8'-8" 13'-7" 17'-11" 23'-10" * Southern pine #1 8'-6" 13'-4" 17'-7" 22'-5" * Southern pine #2 7'-10" 13'-1" 17'-2" 20'-7" 24'-2" Southern pine #3 5'-11" 10'-4" 13'-2" 15'-7" 18'-6" Spruce-pine-fir SS 8'-1" 12'-9" 16'-10" 21'-6" * Spruce-pine-fir #1 7'-11" 12'-6" 16'-2" 19'-9" 22'-10" Spruce-pine-fir #2 7'-11" 12'-6" 16'-2" 19'-9" 22'-10" Spruce-pine-fir #3 6'-7" 9'-8" 12'-2" 14'-11" 17'-3" 19.2 Douglas fir-larch SS 8'-3" 13'-0" 17'-2" 21'-10" 26'-7" Douglas fir-larch #1 8'-0" 12'-5" 15'-9" 19'-3" 22'-7" Douglas fir-larch #2 7'-10" 11'-10" 14'-11" 18'-3" 21'-2" Douglas fir-larch #3 6'-2" 9'-0" 11'-5" 13'-11" 16'-2" Hem-fir SS 7'-10" 12'-3" 16'-2" 20'-8" 25'-1" Hem-fir #1 7'-8" 12'-0" 15'-7" 19'-0" 22'-0" Hem-fir #2 7'-3" 11'-5" 14'-6" 17'-9" 20'-7" Hem-fir #3 6'-0" 8'-10" 11'-2" 13'-7" 15'-9" Southern pine SS 8'-1" 12'-9" 16'-10" 21'-6" * Southern pine #1 8'-0" 12'-6" 16'-6" 20'-11" 24'-11" Southern pine #2 7'-1" 12'-2" 15'-9" 18'-10" 22'-0" Southern pine #3 5'-5" 9'-5" 12'-0" 14'-3" 16'-11" Spruce-pine-fir SS 7'-8" 12'-0" 15'-10" 20'-2" 24'-7" Spruce-pine-fir #1 7'-6" 11'-8" 14'-9" 18'-0" 21'-11" Spruce-pine-fir #2 7'-6" 11'-8" 14'-9" 18'-0" 21'-11" Spruce-pine-fir #3 6'-0" 8'-10" 11'-2" 13'-7" 15'-9" 24 Douglas fir-larch SS 7'-8" 12'-1" 15'-11" 20'-3" 24'-5" Douglas fir-larch #1 7'-5" 11'-2" 14'-1" 17'-3" 20'-0" Douglas fir-larch #2 7'-3" 10'-7" 13'-4" 16'-4" 18'-11" Douglas fir-larch #3 5'-6" 8'-1" 10'-3" 12'-6" 14'-6" Hem-fir SS 7'-3" 11'-5" 15'-0" 19'-2" 23'-4" Hem-fir #1 7'-1" 11'-0" 13'-11" 17'-0" 19'-9" Hem-fir #2 6'-9" 10'-3" 13'-0" 15'-10" 18'-5" Hem-fir #3 5'-5" 7'-10" 10'-0" 12'-2" 14'-1" Southern pine SS 7'-8" 12'-1" 15'-11" 20'-3" 24'-8" Southern pine #1 7'-5" 11'-8" 15'-4" 18'-9" 22'-4" Southern pine #2 6'-4" 10'-11" 14'-1" 16'-10" 19'-9" Southern pine #3 4'-10" 8'-5" 10'-9" 12'-4" 15'-2" Spruce-pine-fir SS 7'-1" 11'-2" 14'-8" 18'-9" 22'-4" Spruce-pine-fir #1 6'-11" 10'-5" 13'-2" 16'-1" 18'-8" Spruce-pine-fir #2 6'-11" 10'-5" 13'-2" 16'-1" 18'-8" Spruce-pine-fir #3 5'-5" 7'-10" 10'-0" 12'-2" 14'-1"  
Check sources for availability of lumber in lengths greater than 20 feet. 
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound = 0.0479 kPa. 
a.  The tabulated rafter spans assume that ceiling joists are located at the bottom of the attic space or that some other method of resisting the outward push of the rafters on the bearing walls, such as rafter ties, is provided at that location. When ceiling joists or rafter ties are located higher in the space, the rafter spans shall be multiplied by the factors given below. 
H C /H R Rafter Span 
Adjustment Factor ? 0.67 1/4 0.76 ? 0.83 ? 0.90 1/7.5 or less 1.00  
Where: 
H C = Height of ceiling joists or rafter ties measured vertically above the top of the rafter support walls. 
H R = Height of roof ridge measured vertically above the top of the rafter support walls. 
Chapter 11, ENERGY EFFICIENCY, is deleted in its entirety, and the Delaware Residential Building Energy Code, as adopted by the State of Delaware in Title 7 of the Delaware Administrative Code, section 2101 "Regulations for State Energy Conservation Code," including any future amendments thereto and any other existing or future corresponding provisions of law, shall be enforced by the Town. 
Chapter 15, EXHAUST SYSTEMS, is hereby amended as follows: 
a.  Add the following directly after M1501.1 Outdoor discharge: 
M1501.1.1 When Required. Where a compartment or space for domestic clothes dryer is provided, an exhaust system shall be installed in accordance with Section M1502 
Chapter 25, PLUMBING ADMINISTRATION, is hereby deleted in its entirety, and the 2015 State of Delaware Plumbing Code, as adopted by the State of Delaware in Title 16 of the Delaware Administrative Code, section 4455 ("Delaware Regulations Governing a Detailed Plumbing Code"), including any future amendments thereto and any other existing or future corresponding provisions of law, shall be enforced by the Town. 
Chapter 26, GENERAL PLUMBING REQUIREMENTS, is hereby deleted in its entirety, and the 2015 State of Delaware Plumbing Code, as adopted by the State of Delaware in Title 16 of the Delaware Administrative Code, section 4455 ("Delaware Regulations Governing a Detailed Plumbing Code"), including any future amendments thereto and any other existing or future corresponding provisions of law, shall be enforced by the Town. 
Chapter 27, PLUMBING FIXTURES, is hereby deleted in its entirety, and the 2015 State of Delaware Plumbing Code, as adopted by the State of Delaware in Title 16 of the Delaware Administrative Code, section 4455 ("Delaware Regulations Governing a Detailed Plumbing Code"), including any future amendments thereto and any other existing or future corresponding provisions of law, shall be enforced by the Town. 
Chapter 28, WATER HEATERS, is hereby deleted in its entirety, and the 2015 State of Delaware Plumbing Code, as adopted by the State of Delaware in Title 16 of the Delaware Administrative Code, section 4455 ("Delaware Regulations Governing a Detailed Plumbing Code"), including any future amendments thereto and any other existing or future corresponding provisions of law, shall be enforced by the Town. 
Chapter 29, WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION, is hereby deleted in its entirety, and the 2015 State of Delaware Plumbing Code, as adopted by the State of Delaware in Title 16 of the Delaware Administrative Code, section 4455 ("Delaware Regulations Governing a Detailed Plumbing Code"), including any future amendments thereto and any other existing or future corresponding provisions of law, shall be enforced by the Town. 
Chapter 30, SANITARY DRAINAGE, is hereby deleted in its entirety, and the 2015 State of Delaware Plumbing Code, as adopted by the State of Delaware in Title 16 of the Delaware Administrative Code, section 4455 ("Delaware Regulations Governing a Detailed Plumbing Code"), including any future amendments thereto and any other existing or future corresponding provisions of law, shall be enforced by the Town. 
Chapter 31, VENTS, is hereby deleted in its entirety, and the 2015 State of Delaware Plumbing Code, as adopted by the State of Delaware in Title 16 of the Delaware Administrative Code, section 4455 ("Delaware Regulations Governing a Detailed Plumbing Code"), including any future amendments thereto and any other existing or future corresponding provisions of law, shall be enforced by the Town. 
Chapter 32, TRAPS, is hereby deleted in its entirety, and the 2015 State of Delaware Plumbing Code, as adopted by the State of Delaware in Title 16 of the Delaware Administrative Code, section 4455 ("Delaware Regulations Governing a Detailed Plumbing Code"), including any future amendments thereto and any other existing or future corresponding provisions of law, shall be enforced by the Town. 
Chapter 33, STORM DRAINAGE, is hereby deleted in its entirety, and the 2015 State of Delaware Plumbing Code, as adopted by the State of Delaware in Title 16 of the Delaware Administrative Code, section 4455 ("Delaware Regulations Governing a Detailed Plumbing Code"), including any future amendments thereto and any other existing or future corresponding provisions of law, shall be enforced by the Town. 
Chapter 34, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS, is hereby deleted in its entirety, and all those regulations, including electrical codes, adopted by the State of Delaware in Title 1 of the Delaware Administrative Code, section 700 ("Delaware State Fire Prevention Regulations"), including any future amendments thereto and any other existing or future corresponding provisions of law, shall be enforced by the Town. 
Chapter 35, ELECTRICAL DEFINITIONS, is hereby deleted in its entirety, and all those regulations, including electrical codes, adopted by the State of Delaware in Title 1 of the Delaware Administrative Code, section 700 ("Delaware State Fire Prevention Regulations"), including any future amendments thereto and any other existing or future corresponding provisions of law, shall be enforced by the Town. 
Chapter 36, SERVICES, is hereby deleted in its entirety, and all those regulations, including electrical codes, adopted by the State of Delaware in Title 1 of the Delaware Administrative Code, section 700 ("Delaware State Fire Prevention Regulations"), including any future amendments thereto and any other existing or future corresponding provisions of law, shall be enforced by the Town. 
Chapter 37, BRANCH CIRCUITS AND FEEDER REQUIREMENTS, is hereby deleted in its entirety, and all those regulations, including electrical codes, adopted by the State of Delaware in Title 1 of the Delaware Administrative Code, section 700 ("Delaware State Fire Prevention Regulations"), including any future amendments thereto and any other existing or future corresponding provisions of law, shall be enforced by the Town. 
Chapter 38, WIRING METHODS, is hereby deleted in its entirety, and all those regulations, including electrical codes, adopted by the State of Delaware in Title 1 of the Delaware Administrative Code, section 700 ("Delaware State Fire Prevention Regulations"), including any future amendments thereto and any other existing or future corresponding provisions of law, shall be enforced by the Town. 
Chapter 39, POWER AND LIGHT DISTRIBUTION, is hereby deleted in its entirety, and all those regulations, including electrical codes, adopted by the State of Delaware in Title 1 of the Delaware Administrative Code, section 700 ("Delaware State Fire Prevention Regulations"), including any future amendments thereto and any other existing or future corresponding provisions of law, shall be enforced by the Town. 
Chapter 40, LIGHT FIXTURES, is hereby deleted in its entirety, and all those regulations, including electrical codes, adopted by the State of Delaware in Title 1 of the Delaware Administrative Code, section 700 ("Delaware State Fire Prevention Regulations"), including any future amendments thereto and any other existing or future corresponding provisions of law, shall be enforced by the Town. 
Chapter 41, APPLIANCE INSTALLATION, is hereby deleted in its entirety, and all those regulations, including electrical codes, adopted by the State of Delaware in Title 1 of the Delaware Administrative Code, section 700 ("Delaware State Fire Prevention Regulations"), including any future amendments thereto and any other existing or future corresponding provisions of law, shall be enforced by the Town. 
Chapter 42, SWIMMING POOLS, is hereby deleted in its entirety, and all those regulations, including electrical codes, adopted by the State of Delaware in Title 1 of the Delaware Administrative Code, section 700 ("Delaware State Fire Prevention Regulations"), including any future amendments thereto and any other existing or future corresponding provisions of law, shall be enforced by the Town. 
Chapter 43, CLASS 2 REMOTE-CONTROL SIGNALING AND POWER-LIMITED CIRCUITS, is hereby deleted in its entirety, and all those regulations, including electrical codes, adopted by the State of Delaware in Title 1 of the Delaware Administrative Code, section 700 ("Delaware State Fire Prevention Regulations"), including any future amendments thereto and any other existing or future corresponding provisions of law, shall be enforced by the Town. 
Appendix G, SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS, AND HOT TUBS, is amended as follows: 
a.  Section AG102.1 General , Amend definition of "swimming pool" to the following: 
Swimming Pool, Any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that is capable of containing 24 inches (610 mm) deep or more water. This includes in-ground, above-ground and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs and spas. 
b.  Section AG105.2 Outdoor swimming pool, Add item number 11 directly after item number 10.2. 
11.  For split rail fences, 14 gauge wire with openings no greater than 2 inches (51 mm) wide and 4 inches (102 mm) high shall be permitted. The fence must be 48 inches (1219 mm) high with the top edge securely fastened to the top rail. The wire must be applied on the side away from the pool (outside). 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 24, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 005-10, § 2, 3-1-10; Ord. No. 004-17, § 11, 5-15-17) 
Sec. 18-903. - Scope. 
(a)  The provisions of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures. 
(b)  Exception. Residential swimming pool shall comply with the International Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 24, 8-15-05) 
Secs. 18-904-18-1000. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - EXISTING BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 18-1001. - Adoption. 
    That certain document, at least one copy of which is on file in the office of the department of planning and inspections, being marked and designated the International Existing Building Code, 2012 Edition, including Appendix Chapter B and Resource A, as published by the International Code Council, be and hereby is adopted as the existing building code of the town for regulating and governing the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition and relocation of existing buildings, including historic buildings, as herein provided. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International Existing Building Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part of hereof as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in this article. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 25, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 006-10, § 1, 3-1-10; Ord. No. 004-17, § 12, 5-15-17) 
Sec. 18-1002. - Additions, insertions, deletions and changes. 
    The town hereby adopts specific amendments to the International Existing Building Code, 2012 Edition, as follows: 
Chapter 1, ADMINISTRATION, is amended by deleting the chapter in its entirety. Refer to Article I of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 25, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 006-10, § 2, 3-1-10; Ord. No. 004-17, § 12, 5-15-17) 
Sec. 18-1003. - Scope. 
(a)  The provisions of the International Existing Building Code shall apply to the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition, and relocation of existing buildings. 
(b)  Exception. A building or portion of a building that has not been previously issued a certificate of occupancy or used for its intended purpose shall comply with the provisions of the International Building Code for new construction. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 25, 8-15-05) 
Secs. 18-1004-18-1100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - FIRE AND LIFE SAFETY CODE 

Sec. 18-1101. - Adoption (reserved). 
Sec. 18-1102. - Additions, insertions, deletions and changes (reserved). 
Sec. 18-1103. - Scope. 
    The provisions of the Delaware Fire and Life Safety Code shall apply to all construction within the town and will be administered by the office of state fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 26, 8-15-05) 
Secs. 18-1104-18-1200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - MECHANICAL CODE 

Sec. 18-1201. - Adoption (reserved). 
Sec. 18-1202. - Additions, insertions, deletions and changes (reserved). 
Sec. 18-1203. - Scope (reserved). 
Secs. 18-1204-18-1300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - GAS CODE 

Sec. 18-1301. - Adoption (reserved). 
Sec. 18-1302. - Additions, insertions, deletions and changes (reserved). 
Sec. 18-1303. - Scope (reserved). 
Secs. 18-1304-18-1400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE 

Sec. 18-1401. - Adoption (reserved). 
Sec. 18-1402. - Additions, insertions, deletions and changes (reserved). 
Sec. 18-1403. - Scope (reserved). 
Secs. 18-1404-18-1500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIX. - LICENSING 
DIVISION 1. - LICENSE REQUIRED FOR BUILDING CONTRACTORS 

Sec. 18-1501. - License required. 
    All building contractors (see definition under article I) working within the limits of the town shall be licensed with the town. Both the contractor(s) in charge and any subcontractor(s) working under the directions of the contractor in charge shall be licensed. A building contractor, including a subcontractor, shall not be permitted to work under the license of another building contractor. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 30, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 18-1502. - Liability insurance. 
    All building contractors (including the contractor(s) in charge and the subcontractor(s)), shall maintain insurance coverage for bodily injury and property damage liability as follows: 
(1)  Bodily injury liability with a minimum limit of $250,000.00 for all damages arising out of personal injury to or death of one person in any one occurrence, and, subject to that limit for each person, an aggregate limit of $500,000.00 for all damages arising out of personal injury to or death of two or more persons in any one occurrence; and 
(2)  Property damage liability with a minimum limit of $250,000.00 for all damages arising out of injury to, destruction of, or loss of use or property in any one occurrence. 
The building contractor must submit proof of said insurance to the town prior to the issuance of the license. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 30, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 18-1503. - New home warranty program. 
    A building contractor who engages in the general construction of new residential dwellings to be sold to the public, including condominiums, must present proof that he or she is a member of a new home warranty program which equals or exceeds the protections afforded by the New Castle County new home warranty guidelines. Such warranty guidelines are on file with the office of the code official for New Castle County. The building contractor shall submit to the town written confirmation that the dwelling is enrolled in a warranty program and must provide the warranty for the dwelling to the new home buyer within 30 days after the certificate of occupancy is issued. The town's role is limited to remedying code violations and will not include remediation of any violations of the new home minimum warranty standards. 
    If sale occurs within ten years after the certificate of occupancy is issued, the owner shall obtain a warranty adhering to the minimum warranty standards for the remaining time period under which a building contractor would have had to supply the minimum warranty requirements or obtain a signed affidavit from the subsequent buyer acknowledging that the residential dwelling is not warranted in accordance with the aforesaid minimum warranty standards. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 30, 8-15-05) 
Secs. 18-1504-18-1550. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF THE LICENSE OF BUILDING CONTRACTORS 

Sec. 18-1551. - Suspension of license of building contractor for failure to correct defects in work. 
    If the code official determines that a building contractor or any person or entity working under the building contractor's license has failed to correct any defect, error or deficiency, or has established a pattern of deviating from the drawings or plans approved by the town, the code official shall notify, in writing, the building contractor that if the noncompliance is not corrected to the reasonable satisfaction of the code official within ten business days after the date of written notification thereof, the town council may suspend the license of the building contractor for a period not to exceed 15 calendar days after notice and a hearing in accordance with this article. 
    For the purpose of this section: 
    Defect, error or deficiency means any construction, alteration, installation, repair or razing of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, which is being done or has been done in violation of any town code or any other applicable construction code. 
    Pattern means five or more uncorrected deviations from any permit at one or more construction sites within any six-month period. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 30, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 18-1552. - Suspension or revocation of license of building contractor based upon a pattern of code violations. 
    If the code official determines that a building contractor or any person or entity working under the building contractor's license is engaging in or has engaged in a pattern of code violations, the town council may suspend the license of the building contractor for a period not to exceed 180 calendar days or, if the circumstances merit, as determined by the town council, revoke the license for a period not to exceed one year after notice and a hearing in accordance with this article. 
    For the purpose of this section, the phrase "pattern of code violations" means five or more violations of any town code or any other applicable construction code within a six-month period at one or more construction sites. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 30, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 18-1553. - Revocation of license of building contractor based upon a pattern of suspensions and/or revocations. 
    If three or more suspensions and/or revocations, or any combination thereof, occur within a three-year period, the town council may revoke the license of a building contractor for a period not to exceed three years after notice and a hearing in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 30, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 18-1554. - Hearing for suspension or revocation of license. 
    Before any license of a building contractor is suspended or revoked, the license holder shall be given ten days' written notice, in advance, by personal delivery or by certified mail with return receipt requested, by the town manager, directed to the license holder at the address shown on the license, of the reason(s) for the intended suspension or revocation and order the license holder to show cause why the license should not be suspended or revoked at a hearing before the town council, said hearing to be held at a specified date and time not less than ten and no more than 20 calendar days subsequent to the date of such notice. 
    In the event that a majority of the town council determines by a preponderance of the evidence, at such hearing, that the license holder has failed to show just cause why the license should not be suspended or revoked, the town council shall notify the license holder, in writing, of such determination and the reasons therefore and shall suspend or revoke the license in accordance with this article. 
    Hearsay evidence shall not be prohibited at the hearing and the town council shall be entitled to hear and consider any probative evidence which, in a majority of the town council's opinion, is relevant and of sufficient credibility to be entitled to consideration. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 30, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 18-1555. - New application for license upon suspension or revocation. 
    Upon the suspension or revocation of license under this article, no person or entity shall be granted another license under the same or different name until after the suspension or revocation has expired. 
(Ord. No. 016-05, § 30, 8-15-05) 
ARTICLE XX. - ANNUAL REGISTRATION OF VACANT BUILDINGS AND REGISTRATION FEES 

Sec. 18-1556. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to assist the town government, particularly the department of building and inspections in protecting the public health, safety and welfare, to monitor the number of vacant buildings in the town, to assess the effects of the condition of those buildings on nearby businesses and the neighborhoods in which they are located, particularly in light of fire safety hazards and unlawful, temporary occupancy by transients, including illicit drug users and traffickers, and to require of the owners of such vacant buildings their registration and the payment of related fees, and to promote substantial efforts to rehabilitate such vacant buildings. The provisions of this section are applicable to the owners of such vacant buildings as set forth herein and are in addition to and not in lieu of any and all other applicable provisions of this chapter, the health and sanitation code, and any other applicable provisions of the Town of Smyrna Code. 
(Ord. No. 001-07, § 1, 4-16-07; Ord. No. 010-17, § 1, 12-18-17) 
Sec. 18-1557. - Definitions and applicability; registration statement and fees. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them as follows: 
(1)  Boarded: A building or structure subject to the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be "boarded" if in place of one or more exterior doors, other than a storm door, or of one or more windows, there is plywood or similar material covering the space for such door or window. 
(2)  Exterior maintenance and major systems: The phrase "exterior maintenance and major systems" shall mean the safe and lawful maintenance of the facade, windows, doors, roof, and other parts of the exterior of the building and the maintenance of its major systems consisting of the roof, the electrical and plumbing systems, the water supply system, the sewer system, and the sidewalk, drive-way, if any, area of the lot, as applicable and as enforced by the department of building and inspections 
(3)  Occupied: Any building or structure shall be deemed to be occupied if one or more persons actually conducts a lawful business or resides in all or any part of the building as the licensed business-occupant, or as the legal or equitable owner/occupant(s) or tenant(s) on a permanent, non-transient basis, or any combination of the same. For purposes of this section, evidence offered to prove that a building is so occupied may include, but shall not be limited to, the regular receipt of delivery of regular mail through the U.S. Postal Service; proof of continual telephone, electric, gas, heating, water and/or sewer services; or the most recent, federal, state, or city income tax statements indicating that the subject property is the official business or residence address of the person or business claiming occupancy; or proof of pre-rental inspection. 
(4)  Open: A building or structure subject to the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be "open" if any one or more exterior doors other than a storm door is broken, open and, or closed but, without a properly functioning lock to secure it, or if one or more windows is broken or not capable of being locked and secured from intrusion, or any combination of the same. 
(5)  Owner: An owner of the freehold of the premises or any lesser estate therein, a mortgagee, a vendee-in-possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, agent or any other person, firm or corporation that is directly or indirectly in control of a building subject to the provisions of this section, and as set forth below. 
(6)  Vacant: A building or structure shall be deemed to be vacant if no person or persons actually, currently conducts a lawfully licensed business, or lawfully resides or lives in any part of the building as the legal or equitable owner(s) or tenant-occupant(s), or owner-occupants, or tenant(s) on a permanent, non-transient basis. 
(7)  Vacant building, habitually: Any building, whether residential or non-residential, that has been vacant for more than 90 consecutive days. 
(8)  Vacant, for sale or lease: A vacant building or structure shall be deemed for sale or for lease if it is being actively marketed by a licensed real estate broker or owner who is regularly advertising the property in newspapers circulated in the Town of Smyrna, is offered at a price that is not more than 25 percent above the market value, and is in reasonable condition for sale or lease as determined by the town building official. 
(b)  Applicability. Registration and the payment of a registration fee shall be required for all habitually vacant buildings, whether vacant and secure, vacant and open or vacant and boarded. The property owner of a habitually vacant building, as determined by the town's assessment records, shall have 30 days from the date the building qualifies as a habitually vacant building to file a notarized registration statement, which shall include the street address and parcel number of each such vacant building, the names and addresses of all owners, and any other information deemed necessary by the department of building and inspections. If the town identifies a habitually vacant building where the property owner has not filed a registration statement within the required 30 days, the town shall notify the property owner of the requirement to register the habitually vacant building and pay an annual registration fee. Annually thereafter, the property owner shall be required to provide the town with an updated registration statement by December 31. In no instance shall the registration of a habitually vacant building and the payment of registration fees be construed to exonerate the owner, agent or responsible party from responsibility for compliance with any other building code or housing code requirement. One registration statement may be filed to include all habitually vacant buildings of the owner so registering. The registration fee(s) as required by subsection (c) of this section shall be billed by the town and shall be paid by December 31 of each year. 
(c)  Registration statement and fees; local agent. If none of the persons listed, as above, is shown at an address within the state, the registration statement also shall provide the name and address of a person who resides within the state and who is authorized to accept service of process on behalf of the owners and who shall be designated as a responsible, local party or agent, both for purposes of notification in the event of an emergency affecting the public health, safety or welfare and for purposes of service of any and all notices or registration statements as herein authorized and in connection herewith. 
In addition to the filing of an annual registration statement, the owner of a habitually vacant building shall be required to pay a non-refundable, annual vacant building registration fee. Said fee shall be billed by the town by November 30 of each year in which a building was habitually vacant, with the fee being due by December 31. The deadline for sending out vacant building registration fee bills may be extended by the town as long as property owners are given at least 30 days to pay the fee. Vacant building registration fees shall be based on the duration of the vacancy as determined by the following scale: 
(1)  $500.00 for habitually vacant buildings that are vacant for less than one year, with the partial year consisting of the date the registration statement was filed by the property owner or the date the town mailed notice to the property owner of the need to file a registration statement, whichever occurred first, through the end of the calendar year. This fee shall be waived for all property owners who filed their initial registration fee within 30 days of a building qualifying as a habitually vacant building, but it shall not be waived if the town mails notice to the property owner of the need to file the registration statement; 
(2)  $500.00 for each of the next two calendar years thereafter that a habitually vacant building remains vacant (years one and two); 
(3)  $1,000.00 for each of the next three calendar years thereafter that a habitually vacant building remains vacant (years three through five) ; 
(4)  $2,000.00 for each of the next five calendar years thereafter that a habitually vacant building remains vacant (years six through ten), plus an additional $500.00 for each year in excess of ten years. 
A registration fee shall not be required for a habitually vacant building in any year in which the property owner has provided the Town with satisfactory proof of occupancy prior to November 1. The starting point for counting a building as being vacant shall begin on the effective date of this article. 
(d)  Appeal rights. The owner shall have the right to appeal the imposition of the registration fees to the housing/building code board of appeals, upon filing an application in writing with the applicable non-refundable filing fee (in the amount specified in the town's fee schedule) to the department of building and inspections no later than 15 calendar days after the date of the billing statement. On appeal, the owner shall bear the burden of providing satisfactory objective proof of occupancy, as defined herein. 
(e)  One-year waiver of registration fee. Upon application by the owner, a one-year waiver of the registration fee may be granted one time by the town manager or his/her designee if the owner: 
(1)  Demonstrates with satisfactory proof that he/she is in the process of demolition, rehabilitation, or other substantial repair of the habitually vacant building; and 
(2)  Objectively demonstrates the anticipated length of time for the demolition, rehabilitation, or other substantial repair of the habitually vacant building; or 
(3)  Provides satisfactory proof that he/she was actively attempting to sell or lease the property during the vacancy period. 
(f)  Two-year waiver. Upon application by the owner, a two-year waiver of the registration fee may be granted one time by the town manager or his/her designee if the owner meets the criteria for non-profit organizations as defined by Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. The two-year waiver is in lieu of, and may not be combined with, the one-year waiver authorized in subsection (e). 
(g)  Delinquent registration fees as a lien. After the owner is given notice of the amount of the registration fee due, except for those owners that have properly perfected an appeal pursuant to subsection (d) above, and the owner fails to pay the amount due, said amount shall constitute a debt due and owing to the town, and the town may commence a civil action to collect such the unpaid debt. 
(h)  Duty to amend registration statement. If the status of the registration information changes during the course of any calendar year, it is the responsibility of the owner, former owner, responsible party or agent for the same to contact the department of building and inspections within 30 days of the occurrence of such change and advise the department in writing of those changes. 
(i)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to any building owned by the United States, the state, the town, nor to any of their respective agencies or political subdivisions. 
(j)  Violations; penalties. The failure or refusal for any reason of any owner, or agent of an owner acting on behalf of the owner, to register a habitually vacant building or to pay any fees required to be paid pursuant to the provisions of this section, within 30 days after they become due, shall constitute a violation punishable upon conviction thereof by a fine in the amount of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 for each failure or refusal to register, or for each failure or refusal to pay a required vacant building fee, as applicable. In such cases, whenever the minimum fine of $100.00 is imposed, it shall not be subject to suspension or reduction for any reason. 
(k)  Denial of demolition permit. No demolition permit shall be issued for the demolition of any building which is subject to the provisions of the building code requiring the annual registration of such building and the payment of vacant building registration fees if, as determined by the code official, the building has not been so registered or such registration fees have not been paid; provided, however, the building official may issue a demolition permit if in his judgment the immediate demolition of the building is required for the safety of nearby residents, or in an emergency, or if the code official determines that rehabilitation of such building is not financially feasible. Upon proper registration of such building and payment of vacant building registration fees, the building official may issue a demolition permit. 
(l)  Monitoring, inspection and condition standards. The building official shall inspect any building in the town for purposes of this section, but the building official shall not access the interior of the building without first obtaining permission from the property owner or a lawfully issued warrant. The habitually vacant building shall be secured at all times. The habitually vacant building shall be kept in reasonable condition, all utilities shall be functional, there shall be no trash or debris inside or outside the building, and the building shall not be used as storage or in any other manner that is unrelated to its former use. 
(m)  Interpretation. The town manager shall have the authority to make determinations regarding the ownership and/or responsible party for any building determined to be vacant pursuant to this section. All notices and bills shall be sent to the property owner's address as indicated on the registration statement. If a registration statement has not been filed with the town, all notices and bills shall be sent to the property owner's address as identified in the town's property assessment records. 
(n)  All vacant building registration fees paid to the town pursuant to subsection (c) of this article and all penalties paid to the town pursuant to subsection (j) of this article shall be held in an account separate and apart from the general revenues of the town for use by the town to bring properties into the compliance with the Town Code whenever a property owner fails to perform the required remedial actions after having been duly notified by the town. The town shall make reasonable efforts to exhaust all available legal remedies to recover from the property owner any expenditure of funds made from this account. All funds recovered from such actions shall be deposited back into the special account until the amount exceeds $50,000.00. Any amounts in excess of $50,000.00 in the account may be transferred to the general fund by majority vote of the town council. 
(Ord. No. 001-07, § 1, 4-16-07; Ord. No. 009-12, § 1, 8-20-12; Ord. No. 010-17, § 2, 12-18-17) 
Secs. 18-1556-18-1599. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXI. - ACCESSIBLE AND USABLE BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES 

Sec. 18-1600. - Adoption. 
    That certain document, at least one copy of which is on file in the office of the department of planning and inspections, being marked and designated as the ICC A117.1-2009 Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities, excluding all appendix chapters, as published by the International Code Council, be and hereby is adopted by the town for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of accessible and usable buildings and facilities. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said ICC A117.1-2009 Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part of hereof as if fully set out in this article with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in this article. 
(Ord. No. 004-17, § 13, 5-15-17) 
Sec. 18-1601. - Reserved. 
Sec. 18-1602. - Scope. 
(a)  The provisions of this article, including the ICC A117.1-2009 Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities, shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal, and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(b)  Exception. Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories high with separate means of egress and their accessory structures shall comply with the International Residential Code. 
(Ord. No. 004-17, § 13, 5-15-17) 
Chapter 19 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 

Sec. 19-1. - Purpose and principles. 
    It is declared as a matter of public policy that safeguarding the heritage of the town, and preserving and protecting structures and areas having historic, architectural, cultural, or aesthetic value, are in the best interests of the citizens of the town. 
    In furtherance of this policy, the purposes of this chapter are to: 
(1)  Identify areas of the town which should be located within the historic preservation overlay district under the town zoning code, and preserve and enhance structures that are important to the history, character, architecture, culture, tradition and economic values of the town. 
(2)  Ensure that alterations of existing structures in the historic preservation overlay district are compatible with the structure being altered and with the character of the surrounding area and the historic preservation overlay district. 
(3)  Ensure that new construction in the historic preservation overlay district is compatible with the character of the surrounding area and the historic preservation overlay district. 
(4)  Encourage the restoration and rehabilitation of structures that contributes to the character of the historic preservation overlay district. 
(5)  Enhance the attractiveness of the historic preservation overlay district, thereby supporting and promoting business and commerce, and contributing to the economic health of the town. 
(6)  Discourage the neglect and demolition of structures in the historic preservation overlay district in order to minimize the loss of the historic fabric and context of the town's development and heritage. 
(7)  Encourage orderly and efficient development, and the provision of essential public services and facilities, that recognizes the special value of the historic, architectural, cultural and aesthetic resources of the town. 
(8)  Maintain and improve property values, and spur new investment and reinvestment in the historic preservation overlay district. 
(9)  Foster community pride, understanding and participation in preserving and enhancing the town's heritage in order to create an environment that is attractive to residents and visitors as a place to live, work, and recreate. 
(10)  Create a public body to advise and assist the planning and zoning board and the town government in assessing and understanding the effects of proposed activities in the historic preservation overlay district. 
(Ord. No. 014-03, § 1, 7-21-03; Ord. No. 007-05, §§ 1-11, 3-21-05) 
Sec. 19-2. - Definitions. 
    Unless otherwise specifically defined herein all terms shall have the meaning as set forth in section 18-52 of the Town Code and section 19 of the town zoning ordinance. Where terms are not defined, such terms shall have their ordinary accepted meaning such as the context implies. 
    Building and inspections office means the building and inspections office of the town. 
    Board means the historic preservation overlay district review board established by this chapter. 
    Demolition by neglect means the improper maintenance or extended lack of maintenance of a structure which results in substantial damage such that it presents a threat to public health, safety or welfare. 
    Demolition permit means an approval as required pursuant to section 18-82 of the Town Code. 
    Historic preservation overlay district means an area of land officially designated by the town council under the town zoning code with its boundaries being depicted on the town zoning map. 
    Historic review certificate means the written official record of review and consideration of an application to conduct specified activities in the historic preservation overlay district as provided for in this chapter. 
    Major project means those actions that require a building permit, demolition permit, or zoning variance for the activities listed herein. 
    Minor project means projects involving changes to a structure that do not require a town building permit, demolition permit, or zoning variance. 
    Ordinary maintenance and repair means work performed to prevent or correct wear or damage to a structure, or any part thereof, including: deterioration of exterior walls or siding materials, columns, posts or other vertical supports; roofs, cornices, soffits or fascia; exterior chimneys; exterior plaster, mortar, or ornamental trim; doors, windows, shutters, porches, railings or any other exterior features; or exterior paint due to extended lack of maintenance and upkeep. 
    Substantial damage means the condition of a structure meeting the definition of a dangerous building as defined in chapter 18 of the Town Code. 
    Town council means the town council of the Town of Smyrna. 
(Ord. No. 014-03, § 1, 7-21-03; Ord. No. 007-05, §§ 12-16, 3-21-05) 
Sec. 19-3. - Historic preservation overlay district review board created. 
(a)  There is hereby created a historic preservation overlay district review board, herein called the board. 
(b)  The board shall have five members who shall be residents of the town. The mayor, with the approval of the town council, shall appoint the members. Each member shall have training or knowledge of, and a demonstrated interest in, historic preservation, architecture, landscape architecture, planning, building construction or renovation, or local history. Ideally, at least one member should be a resident in the historic preservation overlay district, and at least one member should be the owner or operator of a business in the historic preservation overlay district. At the option of the mayor and council, one member may be a non-resident property owner or business owner in the historic preservation overlay district. 
(c)  No member may be an elected official or employee of the town. 
(d)  Each member shall be appointed for a term of three years; provided however, that upon the initial appointments, two members shall be appointed for a term of one year, two members for a term of two years, and one member for a term of three years. Members may be re-appointed for more than one term and shall serve until replaced upon the expiration of their term. 
(e)  A vacancy occurring other than by an expiration of a term shall be filled for the remainder of the term in the same manner as an original appointment. 
(f)  A member may be removed for cause by action of the town council. 
(g)  The mayor, with the approval of the town council, shall designate one member to serve as the chair of the board. 
(h)  Members shall not be compensated for their service. 
(i)  Three members shall constitute a quorum for purposes of transacting business. The vote of a majority of the members present at a meeting and voting shall be necessary to approve a historic review certificate or the conduct of other business. 
(j)  No member may vote in any matter in which he or she or an immediate family member has a direct financial interest. 
(k)  The board shall adopt such rules or procedures consistent with this section/chapter and those binding upon other [committee]s and boards of town government to efficiently discharge its responsibilities. 
(l)  The board shall not have its own staff, but may request through the town manager assistance from the town staff in carrying out its duties, including inspection of properties, keeping of records, posting and notice, correspondence, taking of minutes of the board's meetings, and other necessary clerical support. 
(m)  The board shall meet monthly at a regularly scheduled time and place to be established upon formation. Notice of such meeting shall be posted by the town clerk as required by the Town Code and state law. Meetings may be cancelled with proper notice if there are no applications or other business before the board or in the event of storm or weather related conditions. Special meetings may be called if required. 
(n)  The board may develop and adopt design guidelines to assist applicants in designing new structures or undertaking alteration to existing structures which will be compatible with the surrounding area and the historic preservation overlay district in which they are located. Such guidelines may identify actions that will be deemed to be compatible with the historic preservation overlay district and that can be considered a major or minor project pursuant to this chapter. The design guidelines must be approved by the town council before the guidelines shall be considered binding. 
(o)  The board may establish such guidelines to assist and advise applicants, to facilitate the board's review, and for public education purposes. The approval of the town council shall be required before such design guidelines shall be considered binding. 
(Ord. No. 014-03, § 1, 7-21-03; Ord. No. 007-05, §§ 17-25, 3-21-05) 
Sec. 19-4. - Expansion and extension of a historic district. 
(1)  Any person may request the designation or expansion of a historic district by submitting a written request to the Smyrna Historic District Review Board. If the applicant is not the owner of the property, a statement of no objection from the owner of record must accompany the application. 
(2)  The board may, on its own motion, also initiate an application to designate or expand a district. In such case, the board shall notify, by certified mail, the owners of record of the proposed action. 
(3)  Any expansion or extension of an existing district shall be contiguous to the boundary of such district. Any newly-designated district shall include all contiguous properties within the proposed district boundary. 
(4)  Upon receipt of an application, the board shall review the application on its merits pursuant to the purposes of this chapter. The board shall submit the application and its comments, findings and recommendations to the town council which shall refer to the planning and zoning commission for consideration and recommendation to the town council. The town council shall have the authority to act on the request. Approval by the town council shall have the effect of modifying the historic preservation overlay district set forth in the Town of Smyrna Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 001-09, § 2, 6-1-09) 
Sec. 19-5. - Historic review and certificate required in the historic preservation overlay district. 
(a)  Actions requiring review. 
(1)  A historic review and certificate shall be required prior to any building, structure, premise, parcel, sign or other facility located wholly or partially in the historic preservation overlay district being in any manner erected, constructed, built, converted, created, reconstructed, modified, moved, altered, added to, converted, or demolished; 
(2)  A historic review and certificate shall be required for any change in the exterior architectural appearance of any structure within the historic preservation overlay district by addition, alteration or replacement; or 
(3)  A historic review and certificate shall be required for any action which otherwise requires a building permit, demolition permit, zoning certificate of compliance, or zoning variance within the historic preservation overlay district to the extent such permit, certificate or variance is required by the town. 
(b)  Exemptions. The following actions are exempt from these provisions: 
(1)  Major immediate emergency repair to preserve the continued structural integrity, habitability of the structure, or the health and safety of its occupants or others; provided, however that emergency repairs shall otherwise conform to the code requirements of the town and shall only be that work necessary to preserve structural integrity or minimize risk to public health and safety. No other work shall be performed until a historic review certificate is obtained. 
(2)  Changes to the interior of any structure, or its internal mechanical systems, provided that no changes are made to the exterior of the structure. 
(3)  Changes to that portion of any structure that falls entirely outside the boundary of the historic preservation overlay district. 
(4)  Any situation where the building inspector orders or directs the immediate removal of a structure for the purpose of remedying conditions determined to be imminently dangerous pursuant to chapter 18 of the Town Code. 
(c)  Application process for minor projects. Minor projects are those changes to a structure that do not require a town building permit, demolition permit, or zoning variance. Such actions include, but are not limited to: adding, replacing or removing siding; adding, replacing or removing shutters; changing or replacing doors, windows, porch floors and ornamental trim; replacing roofing materials; or other similar actions, provided no building permit, demolition permit, or zoning variance is needed. Any property owner or other person responsible for a property within the historic preservation overlay district shall consult with the building and inspections office to ascertain whether such activity requires a building permit, demolition permit, zoning certificate of compliance or zoning variance. The application for a minor project shall be processed and a historic review certificate shall be issued upon approval by the board. The historic review certificate shall be issued after a public hearing by the board as provided herein. 
Such minor project application shall be for the purposes of providing advice, information, and guidelines for carrying out such activities in a manner consistent with the goals for preserving and enhancing the historic preservation overlay district. Such advice, information, and guidelines shall be non-binding. The property owner or representative shall sign the application acknowledging receipt of guidelines. 
(d)  Application process for major projects. Major projects are those actions that require a building permit, demolition permit, zoning certificate of compliance or zoning variance for the activities listed herein. Applications for a major project shall be made to the building and inspections office, which shall promptly notify and forward the application to the board. Applications shall state that the property is partly or wholly within the historic preservation overlay district, show the location of the structure and its relationship to adjacent structures, and describe the construction, alteration, repair, relocation or demolition being contemplated. Architectural renderings or drawings, and photographs shall be required for all work except demolition. Demolition applications must clearly describe the final condition of the property after work is completed. 
The building and inspections office shall not grant any building permit or demolition permit nor submit the request for a zoning variance action until such time as an application has been reviewed by the board at a public hearing, as provided herein. 
(e)  Review by the board. The board shall review and make recommendations to the planning and zoning board and/or the building inspector regarding all plans involving structures wholly or partly within the boundaries of the historic preservation overlay district. The historic review certificate shall be issued after a public hearing by the board as provided herein. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the board to review and comment on such plans before a building permit, demolition permit, or zoning variance is issued by the town. 
(2)  The board shall only review the plans relating to the exterior features of the structure and shall have no authority to consider interior arrangements or intended uses. all uses shall be in conformance with the town zoning ordinance. 
(3)  In reviewing plans, the board shall give consideration to the historic and architectural significance of the structure and the surrounding area, and the general appropriateness of the proposed exterior design, colors, textures, materials, and scale in accordance with guidelines duly established by the board. 
(4)  In making a recommendation on an application, the board shall be aware of the importance of finding a way to meet the applicant's needs and the importance of making recommendation that will be reasonable for the applicant to carry out. 
(f)  Considerations and review factors. In reviewing an application for a historic review certificate, the board shall give consideration to the purposes of this chapter, the comprehensive plan adopted by the town council, and the U.S. Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation. 
(1)  Considerations for new construction, alterations, additions or replacements. In regard to applications for new construction, alterations, additions or replacements of structures the following factors shall be considered: 
a.  The impact of the proposed action on the historic and architectural character of the historic preservation overlay district. 
b.  The height of the proposed improvement and its compatibility with adjacent structures. 
c.  The proportion of the structure's front and, where relevant, side facade to ensure that the relationship of the width of the improvement to the height of its front elevation shall be compatible with structures to which it is visually related. 
d.  The proportionality of the openings within the facade and the relationship of solids and voids on the facade to those of adjacent buildings. 
e.  The relationship of the structure to the open spaces between it and adjoining buildings. 
f.  The relationship of entrances and porch projections to the street and their compatibility with the area to which the structure is visually related. 
g.  The scale of the structure in terms of its size, its mass, the nature of window and door openings, the directional compatibility of the facade, and the appropriateness of other architectural features. 
h.  The shape of the roof and its compatibility to adjacent buildings and the area to which it is visually related. 
(2)  Design guidelines. Upon approval by the town council and adoption by the board for the purpose of assisting and advising applicants, design guidelines may be part of the board's considerations, to include: 
a.  The compatibility of materials, textures and colors to the predominant materials used in buildings to which the proposed improvement is visually related. 
b.  The appropriateness of modern materials, if to be used, to the historic and architectural character of the historic preservation overlay district. 
c.  The compatibility of the structure's exterior features, such as lighting, fences, signs, sidewalks, steps, doorways and surrounds, or driveways with the features of those structures to which it is visually related, and the appropriateness of those features to the historic period or predominate architectural style of the improvement. 
d.  The compatibility of the structure's architectural design to that of the historic preservation overlay district and the area to which the structure is visually related, however a dissimilar architectural style may be acceptable if it appropriately furthers the evolution of the district or promotes the compatible adaptive reuse or a historic structure. 
e.  The extent to which the proposed action removes or reduces prior inappropriate modifications to a structure such that its future appearance will be more compatible with the character of the historic preservation overlay district. 
f.  The reversibility or permanence of the changes relative to the preservation of the original historic materials and architectural features. 
(3)  Considerations for demolition and relocation/moving. In regard to applications for demolition of a structure in the historic preservation overlay district, or the relocation/moving of a structure into or out of the district, the board shall consider the following factors: 
a.  Its historic or architectural significance, especially its listing on or eligibility for listing on the National Register of Historic Places, whether as an individual listing or as a contributing element in a historic preservation overlay district. 
b.  The structural condition of the improvement and the consideration of economic feasibility of alternatives, including specifically the retention of the facade as part of any new structure. 
c.  The importance to the community and the extent to which its retention would promote the general welfare by increasing property values, generating business, encouraging tourism, attracting new residents, and making the community an attractive place in which to live. 
d.  The extent to which the structure is of such old, unusual or uncommon design, craftsmanship, texture or materials that it could be reproduced only with great difficulty or expense. 
e.  The historic loss to the site and to the historic preservation overlay district as a whole. 
f.  The compatibility, nature and character of site prior to and after relocation. 
g.  The reasons the structure can not be retained at its present site. 
(g)  Public hearing and form of board action. The board, upon receipt of an application for a historic review certificate, shall schedule its consideration at a regular meeting of the board in accordance with the rules and procedures set forth by the board. At the meeting the applicant shall be permitted to present information regarding the proposed action. The board may seek the advice of the building inspector, other town staff, technical experts, or others, as it deems appropriate in its deliberations. Interested members of the public shall be afforded an opportunity to comment during the meeting as well. 
The board's deliberations shall be public, conducted in accordance with section 14 of the town zoning ordinance, and shall be recorded in minutes filed with the town clerk. The board's recommendation shall take the form of a motion, approved by a voting majority as set forth herein, and shall be transmitted in writing to the town manager for referral to the planning and zoning board or the building inspector as appropriate. 
(h)  Time for action. The board shall have no longer than 45 days from receipt of the application to render its recommendation, unless the applicant has agreed to a longer period of time for the board's action. If the board does not act within the stated time its concurrence shall be presumed. 
(i)  Board approval, approval with conditions, acceptance. The board shall consider the application as set forth herein and may approve such application, or approve the application with conditions that minimize potential adverse or inconsistent components of the proposed action in the historic preservation overlay district. 
The applicant may accept the board's approval or approval with conditions by signing the official report and certificate. The applicant's signature shall be a good faith expression of his/her intention to fully comply with the plans and design criteria as approved by the board. 
(j)  Denials. The board may decline to issue a historic review certificate if, in its opinion, the proposed action adversely impacts on a structure in the historic preservation overlay district or will produce a result which will be detrimental to the integrity and character of the historic preservation overlay district as determined in accordance with the review criteria set forth herein. In recommending denial of a building or demolition permit or zoning variance, the board shall recommend changes to the proposed project which will reduce or eliminate the adverse impact, or other guidance to assist the applicant, the building inspector and/or the planning and zoning board in their considerations. 
(k)  Request for reconsideration. Upon receipt of a recommendation on a historic review certificate application, an applicant may request that the board reconsider its findings if, in the opinion of the applicant, the board did not have adequate information on which to base the recommendations, if the board did not fully understand the action proposed, if new information regarding the structure's condition or the actions proposed has become available, or if the conditions are considered to be a hardship. Such request shall be in writing and submitted within ten days of the board's action. The board shall, in a timely manner, reconsider its findings and may, at its option, meet with the applicant to address the concerns raised before advising the building inspector or the planning and zoning board of its reconsideration recommendations. 
(l)  Appeals, review and consideration by the town council. An applicant may request that the proposed action be referred to the town council for review and consideration if the applicant disagrees with the board's action. Such request shall be in writing and submitted within ten days of the board's action to the town manager who will schedule its consideration at a regularly scheduled meeting of the town council, consistent with rules and procedures for notice and council actions. The town council's review shall consider the reasonableness of the board's recommendations given the information available to it, the purposes and intent of this section, the potential impact on the district of the applicant's proposal, the extent to which the requirements result in an undue economic hardship, and the potential that significant historic and architectural resources will be lost if no action is undertaken. 
The town council shall have the final action on the application. 
(m)  Unexpected and unforeseen conditions. It is recognized and expected that unexpected and unforeseen conditions will arise in the construction, renovation or demolition process requiring a change from the reviewed plan. Unless such actions require a formal permit or variance amendment or a new approval, such actions shall not ordinarily require subsequent review by the board, except when, in the opinion of the building inspector, the necessary changes will result in a significantly different structure than was previously reviewed. 
If the building inspector determines that the changes needed to correct the unexpected or unforeseen situation will cause a significant change in the project or will require a new or revised permit or zoning variance, the applicant must resubmit the project for formal review by the board as set forth herein. 
(n)  Expiration. A historic review certificate for a minor or major project shall expire after 12 months from the date it was issued or upon completion of the work as determined by final approval by the building inspector, if required, whichever shall occur first. 
(Ord. No. 014-03, § 1, 7-21-03; Ord. No. 007-05, §§ 27-68, 3-21-05; Ord. No. 001-09, § 1, 6-1-09) 
Sec. 19-6. - Ordinary maintenance and repair required, demolition by neglect. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance and repair of any property in the historic preservation overlay district, including such activities as painting or repainting, replacement of roofing, replacement of broken glass, replacement of architectural features or similar actions, except as provided herein. 
    No owner of real property in the historic preservation overlay district shall permit such structure to fall into a state of disrepair so as to produce a detrimental effect on the character of the district or the structure. 
(Ord. No. 014-03, § 1, 7-21-03; Ord. No. 007-05, §§ 69-71, 3-21-05; Ord. No. 001-09, § 1, 6-1-09) 
Sec. 19-7. - Consistency with other codes and ordinances. 
    All other provisions of the Town Code and the town zoning ordinance relating to properties or actions within the historic preservation overlay district shall remain in force and effect, the provisions of this section being supplemental thereto. In the event of a conflict between these provisions and the Code of the town, the provisions of this section shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 014-03, § 1, 7-21-03; Ord. No. 007-05, § 72, 3-21-05; Ord. No. 001-09, § 1, 6-1-09) 
Sec. 19-8. - Other provisions. 
(a)  Violations and enforcement. The code enforcement officer of the town shall monitor the condition of properties within the historic preservation overlay district to determine if a violation of these provisions is taking place. The board or any individual may also bring a suspected violation to the attention of the code enforcement officer, by submitting a written notice, in the manner prescribed by the town, identifying the location and suspected violation. 
In the event that the code enforcement officer determines that a violation of this section may have occurred, he shall notify the board in writing and request their review. The board shall consider the information provided, determine the extent of the violation, identify remedies that the owner shall undertake to address the violation, and recommend to the building inspector the actions and schedules for compliance. 
Failure to secure a historic review certificate when required or failure to conform to the terms and conditions of any certificate shall be a violation of this section and shall be subject to the sanctions and penalties for violation of building permit, demolition permit, or zoning requirements as set forth in sections 17 of the town zoning ordinance and 18-76 of the Town Code. 
(b)  Natural events and involuntary demolition. Damage to or the involuntary demolition of a structure as a result of fire, explosion, storm, act of war or terrorism, or other cause not under the direct control of the property owner shall not be considered a violation of this chapter. However, no actions to restore the structure may be undertaken except as provided for herein. 
(c)  Fees. There shall be no additional fees for review of a minor or major project application under this section beyond those that would otherwise apply. There will be a $100.00 fee for an appeal to the town council. 
(d)  Severability. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or other provision of this section or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be unconstitutional or invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or other provisions or the applications of this section which shall be given effect without the invalid section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or provision or application, and to that end the sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and provisions of this section are declared to be severable. 
(e)  Effective date. The provisions of this section shall become effective upon their approval by the town council, except that the provisions relating to minor projects shall not become effective until the town council adopts design guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 014-03, § 1, 7-21-03; Ord. No. 007-05, § 73, 3-21-05; Ord. No. 001-09, § 1, 6-1-09) 
Chapter 22 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- General penalty for Code violations, § 1-11; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; law enforcement, ch. 34; offenses against public peace, § 42-106 et seq.; offenses against public safety, § 42-146 et seq.; curfew for minors, § 42-176 et seq.; weapons, § 42-196 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; traffic and vehicles, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 70. 
State Law reference- Local organizations for civil defense required to be established by each political subdivision, 20 Del. C. § 3108. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1-22-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CIVIL DISORDER 

Sec. 22-26. - Mayor's authority to declare article in effect and implement provisions. 
    During the period of time when a situation of public disorder exists which constitutes a public emergency and which could result in serious bodily injury to persons within the limits of the town and could result in serious damage to property within the limits of the town, the mayor of the town shall have the full power and authority to declare this article in effect and to implement the provisions of this article. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 52, § 1) 
Sec. 22-27. - Duration, term of state of emergency. 
    The duration and term of the state of emergency shall continue during such period of time that the mayor shall deem proper and the provisions of this article shall remain in effect during the state of emergency. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 52, § 2) 
Sec. 22-28. - Public assemblages during emergency. 
    For and during the term of such emergency as declared by the mayor, it shall be unlawful for groups of persons numbering ten or more to assemble or gather on the public streets, parks or other open areas except for recreational purposes or with the express permission of the mayor and town council. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 52, § 3) 
Sec. 22-29. - Sale of gasoline and other combustible, explosive liquids during emergency. 
    For and during the term of any emergency, the selling, transferring, transporting or using of gasoline or other combustible or explosive liquid is prohibited, with the exception that any person who shall have such combustible or explosive liquids in his possession for ordinary and recognized uses in or about his own premises shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 52, § 4) 
Sec. 22-30. - Explosive devices. 
    The manufacture, transfer, use, possession or transportation of Molotov cocktails or any other device, instrument or objection designed to explode and every person so manufacturing, transferring, using, possessing or transporting any such objection shall be considered in violation of the provisions of this article. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 52, § 5) 
Sec. 22-31. - Possession of firearms. 
    For and during the period of an emergency the possession of firearms or any other deadly weapon by any person at any place within the limits of the town other than the person's own place of residence or business shall be unlawful except with the express permission of the police department of the town, such provision to exclude any law enforcement officer or person acting under orders of any such law enforcement officer. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 52, § 6) 
Sec. 22-32. - Curfew. 
    During the period of any emergency it shall be unlawful for any person to be on the public street or in any other public place within the limits of the town beyond the period of the curfew which shall be set by the mayor and council, except that such curfew shall not apply to those persons who are caused by reason of their employment or by private emergency to be upon the public streets of the town. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 52, § 7) 
ARTICLE III. - EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN 

Sec. 22-33. - Purpose. 
(a)  The Town of Smyrna, Delaware, Emergency Operations Plan (CEOP), with its annexes and other attachments, provides a basis for coordinated emergency operations throughout the Town of Smyrna prior to, during and after a disaster, caused or natural. 
(b)  This plan further provides planning guidance on civil defense emergency operations for the departments and agencies of the city as required by the Basic Civil Defense Law outlined in 20 Del. C. Pt. II, Ch. 31. 
(c)  The adoption of this ordinance by the Mayor and Council of the Town of Smyrna does hereby adopt and thereby allow for the implementation of the Town of Smyrna Emergency Operations Plan. This article shall be included in the Town of Smyrna Emergency Operations Plan as Appendix VI. 
(Ord. No. 007-09, 10-19-09) 
Sec. 22-34. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Catastrophic disaster. Although there is no commonly accepted definition of a catastrophic disaster, the term implies an event or incident, which produces severe and widespread damages of such a magnitude as to result in the requirement for significant resources from outside the affected area to provide the necessary response. For the purpose of this plan, a catastrophic disaster is defined as an event that results in large numbers of deaths and injuries; causes extensive damage or destruction of facilities that provide and sustain human needs; produces an overwhelming demand on state and local response resources and mechanisms; causes a severe long-term effect on general economic activity; and severely affects state, local, and private sector capabilities to begin and sustain response activities. 
    Curfew is hereby defined as a prohibition against any person or persons walking, running, loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the Town of Smyrna excepting persons officially designated to duty with reference to said civil authority. 
    Disaster means a catastrophic condition caused by a manmade event (including, but not limited to, industrial, nuclear or transportation accident, explosion, conflagration, power failure, act of domestic terrorism, natural resource shortage or other condition resulting from manmade causes, such as hazardous materials spills and other injurious environmental contamination), natural event (including, but not limited to, any hurricane, tornado, storm, flood, high water, wind-driven water, tidal wave, earthquake, landslide, mud slide, snowstorm, drought, fire or explosion) or war-caused event (following an attack upon the United States caused by use of bombs, missiles, shellfire or nuclear, radiological, chemical or biological means, or other weapons, or overt paramilitary actions, or other conditions such as sabotage) which results in substantial damage to property or the environment, and/or hardship, suffering, injury or possible loss of life. (20 Del. C. Ch. 31). 
    At the federal level, an emergency is defined by Title V of P.L. 93-288, Section 102(1), as any occasion or instance for which, in the determination of the President, federal assistance is needed to supplement state and local efforts and capabilities to save lives and to protect property and public health and safety. Title V includes authority for the President to direct federal agencies to provide emergency assistance to save lives and protect property and public health and safety for emergencies other than natural disasters. Under Title V, the President may direct the provision of emergency assistance either at the request of a Governor (Section 501(a)) or upon determination by the President that an emergency exists for which the primary responsibility for response rests with the United States (501(b)). 
    Emergency means any situation which requires efforts and capabilities to save lives or to protect property, public health and safety, or to lessen or avert the threat of a disaster in Delaware. (20 Del. C. Ch. 31) 
    Emergency management means the mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery functions necessary to save lives and to protect property, public health and safety or to lessen or avert the threat of a disaster in any part of the state, other than functions for which military forces or other federal agencies are primarily responsible. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, radiological response, chemical response or other technological response, evacuation of persons from hazardous areas, emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, protection, temporary restoration of public utility services, national security, and other functions related to infrastructure, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. In so defining emergency management, full recognition shall be given to Public Law 93-288, as amended, "The Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act" [42 U.S.C. § 5121 et seq.|; Public Law 100-408, as amended, "The Price Anderson Act" >42 U.S.C. § 2210]; § 4 Public Law 875 - 81st Congress, as amended. 
    Mitigation means any action before or after a response event taken to reduce or eliminate the long-term risk to human life and/or property from natural hazards or any cost-effective measure which is intended to reduce the potential for damage to a facility from a disaster event. (20 Del. C. Ch. 31) 
    Proclamation of emergency. The proclamation by the senior elected official that the town or any part thereof is in imminent danger of suffering civil disturbance, disorder, riot or other occurrence which will generally, seriously and substantially endanger the lives, safety, health or property of the public, and that the available members of the police department are unable to control the situation without possible injury to persons in the town or such part thereof, or where the services of the town are significantly impaired or compromised. 
    Qualified medical personnel means medical personnel who voluntarily provide their services without compensation through participation in a state-recognized group of providers organized for the sole purpose of assisting in emergency or disaster relief operations and activities in connection with any emergency or disaster pursuant to this chapter, such as, but not limited to, a Medical Reserve Corps. (20 Del. C. Ch. 31) 
    Response means any action taken to reduce or eliminate the immediate or short-term risk to human life and/or property from any hazard. (20 Del. C. Ch. 31) 
    Senior elected official. The mayor, vice mayor, and any other member of town council by seniority of election to the council, in that order who is present in the town. 
    State of emergency. State definition means an emergency proclaimed pursuant to an emergency order by the Governor. All emergency orders issued under this chapter shall indicate the nature of the emergency or disaster, the area or areas threatened, and the conditions which have brought it about and may limit the order to a geographic area or specific resources. Such an emergency order may be issued in writing subsequent to its effect so long as a written log recording the dates and times of such order is maintained by DEMA. Emergency orders shall be filed with the Secretary of State. 
(Ord. No. 007-09, 10-19-09) 
Sec. 22-35. - Imposition of curfew by senior elected official. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of the Town Code, after proclamation of a certification of emergency by the senior elected official he/she may order a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the town or to the town as a whole as he/she deems advisable and applicable during such hours of the day or night as he/she deems necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 007-09, 10-19-09) 
Sec. 22-36. - Additional authority of senior elected official. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of the Town Code, after proclamation of a certification of emergency, the senior elected official, may also in the interest of public safety and welfare make any or all of the following orders: 
(a)  Prohibit or limit to ten or more the number of persons who may assemble or gather in a group on public streets, parks, or other open areas, either public or private, except for recreational purposes at a usual or customary place. 
(b)  Prohibit the sale, transfer, possession or use of gasoline, kerosene, or combustible inflammable or explosive liquid or materials in containers of any kind 
(c)  Establish a curfew, and to prohibit any person from being on public streets, public parks or any other public places designated during the hours declared by the senior elected official to be a period of curfew, except for those persons who are caused to be in public places by reason of their employment or a private emergency involving health, safety or protection of property. 
(d)  Halt or restrict access or egress, on foot or by vehicle, upon public highways to or from the city or any part thereof, and to halt or restrict the movement of trains, automobiles, buses, trucks or other vehicles into, within or from the town. 
(e)  Require the closing of taprooms and bars, and prohibit the sale or service of alcoholic beverages in any taproom, bar, hotel, restaurant, club or other establishment. 
(f)  Prohibit the possession of firearms or any other deadly weapon by a person in a place other than that person's place of residence or business. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to members of the armed forces of the United States of America, the Delaware National Guard of any law enforcement officer. 
(g)  Order the temporary closing of any and all streets, alleys and other public ways in the Town of Smyrna. 
(h)  Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection of life and property. 
(Ord. No. 007-09, 10-19-09) 
Sec. 22-37. - Public notice of proclamation. 
    Should the senior elected official deem it necessary to invoke any or all of the provisions of sections 22-35 to 22-36 inclusive, of this article, he shall give notice of same by means of a written proclamation, publicly posted in Town Hall and issued to the news media for immediate dissemination to the public. 
(Ord. No. 007-09, 10-19-09) 
Sec. 22-38. - Amendment of emergency operations plan. 
    The town council may from time to time revise all or any of the current "Town of Smyrna Emergency Operations Plan" or its annexes or other attachments by simple resolution. 
(Ord. No. 007-09, 10-19-09) 
Sec. 22-39. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this article or an executive order issued pursuant thereto shall be guilty of an offense against the Town of Smyrna and shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00 and/or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 007-09, 10-19-09) 
Chapter 26 - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Town elections, § 3(b). 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; law enforcement, ch. 34. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Election districts. 
    The town is divided into three election voting districts and the boundaries of those three districts are as described below and as depicted on the map attached as exhibit A to the ordinance from which this section is derived, entitled Town of Smyrna Election Districts: 
(1)  Election district one shall comprise all that portion of land within the town limits bounded by a line beginning at the northernmost limits of the town, and including: all those properties located within the corporate limits of the town as of January 20, 2004 lying east of Duck Creek Road from US 13 to Duck Creek; All those properties lying east of North Main Street from Duck Creek to Glenwood Avenue; All those properties lying east of S. Main Street from Glenwood Avenue to Chestnut Street; All those properties lying north of Chestnut Street from S. Main Street to US 13; All those properties lying east of US 13 from Chestnut Street to the southern most corporate limits of the Town of Smyrna; Those properties lying on the south side of Glenwood Avenue from Main Street to Walnut Street; Those properties lying east of Walnut Street from Glenwood Avenue to Mustard Lane; Those properties lying in the 100 and 200 block of N. Delaware Street between Glenwood Avenue and W. Mount Vernon Street; Those properties lying on the north and south sides of W. North Street between Walnut Street and N. Main Street; and Those properties on the west side of N. Main Street between Glenwood Avenue and North Street. 
(2)  Election district two shall comprise all that portion of land within the town limits bounded by a line beginning at the southern limits of the town, and including: All those properties located within the corporate limits of the town as of January 20, 2004 lying west of Route 13 from the southern limits of the town to Chestnut Street; All those properties lying south of Chestnut Street from US 13 to S. Main Street; All those properties lying west of S. Main Street from Chestnut Street to South Street; All those properties lying south of W. South Street from S. Main Street to Carter Road; All those properties lying east of Carter Road from W. South Street to Mill Creek; and All those properties lying south of Mill Creek within the corporate limits of the town. 
(3)  Election district three shall comprise all that portion of land within the town limits bounded by a line beginning at the northernmost limits of the town, and including: All those properties located within the corporate limits of the town as of January 20, 2004 lying west of Duck Creek Road and US 13 from the north interchange with Route 1; All those properties located within the corporate limits of the town as of January 20, 2004 lying west of N. Main Street from Duck Creek to Commerce Street and lying west of S. Main Street from Commerce Street to South Street; All those properties lying north of W. South Street from S. Main Street to Carter Road; All those properties lying west of Carter Road from W. South Street to Mill Creek; All those properties lying north of Mill Creek within the corporate limits of the town; and excluding those properties previous included in District #1. 
(Ord. No. 001-04, § 2, 2-17-04) 
Sec. 26-2. - District voting. 
    Pursuant to section 5.1.2 of the Town Charter, at any town election all qualified and properly registered voters shall be entitled to vote for one candidate for each "at large" office to be filled at such election, and for the office of mayor in those years when that office is to be filled at such election; but only those qualified and properly registered voters who, for at least 30 days prior to the date of the election have been continuously domiciled in the representative district for which a seat is up for election, shall be entitled to vote for a district representative candidate for that representative district seat to be filled at such election. 
(Ord. No. 003-04, § 1, 3-15-04) 
Sec. 26-3. - Electioneering near polling places; persons permitted in voting room. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Electioneering means political discussion of issues, candidates or partisan topics, the wearing of any button, banner or other object referring to issues, candidates or partisan topics, the display, distribution or other handling of literature or any writing or drawing referring to issues, candidates or partisan politics, the deliberate projection of sound referring to issues, candidates or partisan topics from loudspeakers or otherwise into the polling place or the area within 50 feet of the entrance to the building in which the voting room is located. 
(b)  Purpose. It is the purpose and intent of this section that persons coming to the polling place to cast their vote in the annual town election should not be interfered with, influenced or subjected to any subtle pressure by any candidate, or any person working for the election of that candidate, or by any member of that candidate's family as he enters the polling place. In order to promote this stated purpose, the town council has determined that only those persons necessary for the conduct of the election should be permitted in the polling place during the conduct of the election and, further, that the practice of electioneering should not be permitted within 50 feet of the polling place. 
(c)  Persons permitted in voting room. No person other than the members of the election board duly appointed by the town council, persons actually voting, and, if authorized prior to the opening of the polls, one challenger representing any candidate on the ballot, shall be permitted within the voting room or within 50 feet of the entrance of the voting room; provided, however, that other persons necessary to the conduct of the election may be admitted within the voting room or within 50 feet of the entrance thereof upon first obtaining the unanimous consent of the election board. 
(d)  Electioneering. No person within the polling place or within 50 feet of the entrance to the building in which the voting room is located shall electioneer during the conduct of an election. No political headquarters or gathering shall be permitted within the building in which the polling place is located during the conduct of the election. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 65, §§ 1-3; Ord. No. 001-04, § 1, 2-17-04) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 001-04, § 1, adopted Feb. 17, 2004, renumbered former section 26-1 as new section 26-3. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 15 Del. C. § 4942. 
Secs. 26-4-26-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VOTER REGISTRATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to adopt ordinances regarding registration of voters, § 3(b)(5). 

Sec. 26-26. - Registration required to vote in municipal election. 
(a)  All persons shall be required to register as a registered voter of the town in order to vote in any municipal election. The act of registering shall be in compliance with the terms and conditions set forth in this article. Any person who shall become a registered voter of the town for purposes of voting at the municipal elections shall not be required to register again unless he/she shall cease to be a resident of the town, unless his/her name is stricken from the general registration or unless he/she has failed to vote at seven consecutive municipal elections held by the town. 
(b)  Anything in this article to the contrary notwithstanding, as an alternative method of registering to vote in town elections, any voter meeting the requirements of section 5.5.1 of the Town Charter shall be deemed properly registered to vote in any special or regular town election if, not less than 4:30 p.m. 14 days before the day of the election, that person is properly registered to vote in any state-wide election in accordance with title 15 of the Delaware Code. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 60, § 2; Ord. of 7-3-00(1), § 1; Ord. No. 004-04, § 1, 3-15-04) 
Sec. 26-27. - Information required. 
    Voters desiring to register with the town shall present themselves at the town office at 27 S. Market Street Plaza or other location within the corporate limits of the town as designated by the town manager where they may apply to register by filling out a form giving full name, citizenship, age at date of registration, birthdate, present residence within the town, including street address and box number if applicable, and date when the individual commenced his residence within the town. Registration is not complete until the application has been approved by the election board as provided in section 26-28. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 60, § 3; Ord. No. 003-03, § 1, 1-6-03; Ord. No. 004-04, § 2, 3-15-04) 
Sec. 26-28. - Registration officials; duties. 
    The election board appointed by the council pursuant to section 5.5.4(f) of the town Charter shall serve as registration officials, and shall, at the place selected by the mayor and council, ascertain the persons who are qualified to be voters of the town according to the requirements of section 5.5.1 of the town Charter. Upon reasonable cause, the election board may, at any time before or at the time of the election, require any voter to provide further proof of age, citizenship, residency, street address, and/or the date upon which such residency commenced. Any person who is determined not qualified to vote will be notified within three days after that determination and such person may then request an appearance before the election board for an explanation concerning the determination. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 60, § 4; Ord. No. 004-04, § 3, 3-15-04) 
Sec. 26-29. - Voter registration list; registration dates and times; close of registration. 
(a)  A list of all qualified and registered voters for each election will be compiled by the town manager's office from: 
(1)  A list, provided by the state department of elections, of persons properly registered to vote in state-wide elections; and 
(2)  The list of persons who have registered to vote with the town and who have previously voted in at least one of the last seven town elections. 
Pursuant to section 5.1.2 of the Town Charter, the list shall designate the town election district in which each voter is qualified to vote. That list will be made available for inspection by March 15th of each year. Any person not on the list may register in person at the town hall, or with any entity authorized to register voters for state-wide elections in accordance with title 15 of the Delaware Code, before voter registration closes at 4:30 p.m. 14 days before the day of the election. No person not identified as a registered voter on either the town's list of registered voters or the list obtained from the state department of elections, by the close of registration at 4:30 p.m. 14 days before the day of the election, shall be permitted to vote in that election. 
(b)  The town office will be open for the purpose of registering persons who are qualified to be voters of the town Monday through Friday except holidays. Registration hours shall be workdays, 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.; in addition, at least two Saturdays will be provided during the last 30 days before registration closes; one Saturday, 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon; and one Saturday 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m. The town manager shall also designate at least two, but not more than four, off-site opportunities for registration of voters to occur on weekdays between the hours of 6:00 and 8:00 p.m.; such off-site registration to be provided during the last 60 days before registration closes. The mayor and council shall cause to be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation within the town the dates, places and times of registration at least ten days before such registration dates and shall cause notices containing that information to be posted in at least ten public places throughout the town. 
(c)  Registration will be closed as of 4:00 p.m., 14 days before election. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 60, § 5; Ord. of 2-22-94, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 7-3-00(1), § 2; Ord. of 7-3-00(2), § 1; Ord. No. 003-03, § 2, 1-6-03; Ord. No. 004-04, § 4, 3-15-04) 
Sec. 26-30. - Registration by mail. 
    Any person who is unable to register in person at the town office because of physical impairment or because of duties in any public or military service of the state or of the United States shall be permitted to register by mail. To register by mail, a person shall request, in writing directed to the town clerk and specifying the reasons he is unable to register in person, that registration forms to be sent to him at an address stated therein. Within three business days of receiving the request, the town clerk shall send the registration form and instructions to the person so requesting at the address given. Registration forms shall provide spaces for obtaining the information required by section 26-27. The completed registration form must be received by the town clerk not later than 14 days before any election in which the person desires to vote. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 60, § 6; Ord. of 7-3-00(2), § 2) 
Sec. 26-31. - Books and forms to be supplied. 
    The mayor and town council shall provide the town clerk with all necessary books and forms for use in the conduct of registration. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 60, § 7) 
Sec. 26-32. - Registration book requirements. 
    The town's books of registered voters shall be of the same general type as those used by the county board of elections in the conduct of the registration of voters and shall be of a type which shall require the signature of the voter at the time of the registration of the voter. Provision shall be made for the filing of registration forms of persons who register by mail. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 60, § 8; Ord. No. 004-04, § 5, 3-15-04) 
Sec. 26-33. - Town clerk to keep records. 
    The town clerk shall be the custodian of the permanent voter registration records. The removal of registration records from the town hall shall be done only with the express consent of the town clerk. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 60, § 9) 
Sec. 26-34. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 002-09, § 1, adopted April 20, 2009, repealed § 26-34, which pertained to discharging registrants from books and derived from Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 60, § 10; Ord. No. 004-04, § 6, 3-15-04. 
Secs. 26-35-26-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ABSENTEE VOTING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Absentee voting, 15 Del. C. § 5501 et seq. 

Sec. 26-56. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to enable any qualified voter of the town who, because of duties in any public or military service of the state or of the United States, or because of business, occupation or other legitimate reason, is absent from the town on the day of any municipal election, or any person who, because of personal illness or physical incapacity, is unable to appear at the polling place on the day of any municipal election, to vote in that election by absentee ballot filed in compliance with this article. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 58, § 1) 
Sec. 26-57. - Persons eligible to vote by absentee ballot. 
    Any qualified voter who shall be unable to appear to cast his ballot at any election at the regular polling place of the election, whether because of being in the public or military service of the state of the United States, or because he will be unavoidably absent from the town on the day of the election, or because of his sickness or physical disability, may cast a ballot at such election to be counted in the total for such election. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 58, § 2) 
Sec. 26-58. - Request for ballot. 
(a)  Any voter who is qualified under section 26-57 to vote by absentee ballot and who desires to do so shall, not more than 14 nor less than three days prior to any such election, request from the town manager an official ballot to be voted at such election. Such request shall be in writing, signed by the person making the request, and shall state the reason that such voter is unable to go to the polling place at the forthcoming election, an address and telephone number where that voter may be reached for purpose of challenge on election day. 
(b)  Such request, subject to the provisions of section 26-57, may be made by anyone on behalf of any such voter and such request shall be made to the town manager and the town manager shall act upon such request. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 58, § 3; Ord. of 7-3-00(3), § 1; Ord. No. 015-05, § 1, 3-21-05; Ord. No. 020-05, § 2, 12-19-05) 
Sec. 26-59. - Distribution of ballots, envelopes and instructions. 
    Upon receipt of a request from a voter, the town manager, not more than 14 nor less than three days prior to an election, shall mail to the voter, postage prepaid, an official ballot enclosed in an official envelope along with a voucher envelope marked "Voucher Envelope," a copy of the instructions to absentee voters and a carrier envelope marked "Carrier Envelope." Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the issuance of an absentee ballot to those lawfully entitled thereto prior to 12:00 noon of the day of any election when the request is made less than ten days prior to the election for valid cause shown. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 58, § 4; Ord. of 7-3-00(3), §§ 2, 3; Ord. No. 015-05, § 2, 3-21-05; Ord. No. 020-05, § 2, 12-19-05) 
Sec. 26-60. - Affidavit of eligibility on voucher envelope form. 
    There shall be printed on the face of each voucher envelope an affidavit in substantially the following form: 
"I do solemnly swear (affirm) that: 
    "I will be at least 18 years of age on the day of the election at which this ballot is to be voted, having been born on ________. 
    "I am a resident of the Town of Smyrna and will have continuously resided within the town limits at least 30 days preceding the day of the election at which this ballot is to be voted. 
    "My voting address is _______ in or near _______. 
    "That I will be absent from the Town of Smyrna, or will be unable to appear at the polling place, on the day of said election because of: 
"( ) being in the Military Service of Delaware or of the United States. 
"( ) nature of my business or occupation. 
"( ) other legitimate reason (specify). 
    "For the reason indicated, I cannot appear at the polling place in which I am a qualified voter. I further swear (affirm) that I marked my ballot in secret. 
    "I, ___________, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I have not received or accepted, or offered to receive or accept, paid or transferred or delivered, or offered or promised to pay, transfer or deliver, or contributed or offered or promised to contribute to another to be paid or used any money or other valuable thing as compensation, inducement or reward for the registering or abstaining from registering of any one qualified to register, or for the giving or withholding a vote at this election. 
(Signed) _____
Write name here _____
Print name here  
    "Subscribed and sworn (affirmed) before me this _______ day of _______, A.D., 19___; and I hereby certify that the affiant did in such manner that I could not see his ballot, mark such ballot and that the affiant was not solicited or advised by me to vote for or against any candidate. 
(Signed) _____
Write name here _____
Notary Public; or other qualified person; state title  
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 58, § 5; Ord. No. 017-04, §§ 1-3, 10-18-04; Ord. No. 020-05, § 1, 12-19-05) 
Sec. 26-61. - Envelope specifications. 
(a)  The voucher envelope shall be of the type known as a security mailing envelope and shall be such as to securely protect the contents thereof from tampering, removal or substitution without detection. Such envelopes shall be successively numbered beginning with number 1 printed in red ink in the upper righthand corner thereof. 
(b)  The carrier envelope shall be large enough to carry the voucher envelope. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 58, § 6) 
Sec. 26-62. - Instructions to absentee voter. 
    The town manager shall prepare a list of instructions to assist an absentee voter in properly marking and returning his ballot under the provisions of this article which shall be known as "instructions to absentee voter." 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 58, § 7) 
Sec. 26-63. - Voting procedure; execution of affidavit; return of ballot. 
    The absentee voter shall make and subscribe to the affidavit printed on the voucher envelope, before an officer authorized by law to administer oaths, and such voter shall thereupon in the presence of such officer, and of no other person, mark the ballot but in such a manner that the officer cannot know how the ballot is marked and the ballot shall then in the presence of the officer be deposited by the voter in the official envelope. The official envelope containing the ballot shall then be deposited in the voucher envelope and the voucher envelope containing the marked ballot shall be enclosed in the carrier envelope received by the voter from the town manager and after the voter has enclosed the voucher envelope containing the marked ballot in the carrier envelope, he shall securely seal the carrier envelope and mail it, postage prepaid, to the election board issuing the ballot, or if more convenient, it may be delivered to the election board in person, to be received in either case by the election board before the polls close on the day of the election. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 58, § 8; Ord. No. 017-04, §§ 4, 5, 10-18-04; Ord. No. 015-05, § 3, 3-21-05; Ord. No. 020-05, §§ 1, 2, 12-19-05) 
Sec. 26-64. - Time limit for return of ballot; late ballots. 
    The absentee voter shall return his marked ballot enclosed in the voucher envelope to the election board before the closing of the polls on the day of the election; and any absentee ballot received by the election board after the closing of the polls on the day of the election shall not be counted, but the election board shall endorse on the voucher envelope containing such ballot the time such was received and shall retain all such envelopes unopened and so endorsed until the April 30 next after the election, and longer if desired to do so by proper authority. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 58, § 9) 
Sec. 26-65. - Procedure on receipt of absentee ballot by election board. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the carrier envelope from the absentee voter, the election board shall open only the carrier envelope and take therefrom the voucher envelope containing the ballot of the absentee voter. The name of the absentee shall then be announced for the purpose of challenges and upon the determination that such person is a properly qualified voter and that such voter has not voted in person at the election, a record shall be made in the voting rolls that such voter has cast his vote by absentee ballot. Thereupon, the election board shall open the voucher envelope in such a manner as not to deface or destroy the number thereof, or the affidavit thereon, and take therefrom the official envelope containing the marked ballot, and without opening or permitting the official envelope to be opened or the contents examined, the election board members shall endorse thereon their names. All voucher envelopes from which ballots have been taken and voted, and all voucher envelopes containing ballots which have been rejected and enforced as provided in sections 26-64 or 26-66, shall be preserved by the election board and at the close of the count shall be placed in the ballot box as provided by the election laws. 
(b)  The official envelopes shall be deposited into the ballot box by the election board until the election is closed, whereupon the official envelopes shall be removed, opened and counted in accordance with law. 
(c)  The vote of any absentee voter may be challenged for the same causes and in the same manner as provided by the election laws and, further, the vote of any absentee voter may be challenged on the ground that the affidavit filed by the voter in accordance with section 26-60 is false, and in the case of a voter who was allegedly absent from the town because of his business, occupation or other legitimate reason on the ground that he was not absent from the town for the entire day of the election. Upon challenge, proceedings thereon shall be as provided by the election laws. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 58, § 10; Ord. No. 017-04, §§ 6, 7, 10-18-04; Ord. No. 020-05, § 1, 12-19-05) 
Sec. 26-66. - Rejected ballots. 
(a)  In case the affidavit of the absentee voter is found to be insufficient or the absentee voter is not a qualified voter in the town, or the voucher envelope is open, or has been opened and resealed, or it is evident that the voucher envelope has been tampered with or altered, such vote shall not be accepted or counted. If the voucher envelope has not been opened at the time the election officials decide that the ballot contained therein should be rejected for any of the foregoing reasons, it shall not be opened by the election officials, but they shall endorse thereon "rejected," giving reason therefor, and if the voucher envelope has been opened and the ballot is rejected, the official envelope from which it was taken and the election officers shall endorse on the voucher envelope "rejected," giving reason therefor. 
(b)  Whenever it is made to appear by due proof of the election officials that any absentee voter who has marked and forwarded his ballot has died, the voucher envelope containing the ballot shall not be opened but shall be marked "rejected dead," and shall be preserved and disposed of as other rejected ballots. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 58, § 11; Ord. No. 017-04, § 8, 10-18-04; Ord. No. 020-05, § 1, 12-19-05) 
Sec. 26-67. - Persons before whom affidavits may be taken. 
(a)  Any affidavit required under the provisions of this article may be taken before any person with authority to administer oaths and affirmations in the place where such person shall be conclusively presumed. 
(b)  Any affidavit required under the provisions of this article, when made by a voter in the Armed Forces or Merchant Marines of the United States or by persons serving with the American Red Cross, the Society of Friends, the Women Air Force Service Pilots, and the United States organizations who are attached to and serving with the Armed Forces of the United States, may be taken before any commissioned or noncommissioned officer not below the rank of sergeant, or petty officer, in the Armed Forces of the United States properly designated for such purpose, or any other person authorized to administer and attest oaths or affirmations, and whenever taken outside the state the authority of such person shall be conclusively presumed. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 58, § 12; Ord. No. 020-05, § 2, 12-19-05) 
Sec. 26-68. - Procedure for recount of ballots. 
    The election board shall recount the absentee ballots to insure mathematical accuracy if the difference between the top two candidates is three percent or less of the total votes cast for the office. Where electors vote for more than one candidate for an office, the election board shall recount absentee ballots if the difference between the last candidate elected and the next closest candidate is three percent or less than the total votes cast for the office. 
(Ord. No. 010-06, § 1, 4-3-06) 
Chapter 30 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to provide for fire department, establish fire limits, and provide for prevention and extinguishment of fires, § 2(b)(23). 
Cross reference- Amusements, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; civil emergencies, ch. 22; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 38; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; traffic and vehicles, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 70; zoning regulations, app. A; subdivision regulations, app. B. 

Sec. 30-1. - Bonfires and rubbish fires. 
    No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or rubbish fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained on any property, whether it is public or private property, within the limits of the town without a permit issued by the fire chief or his designee and the appropriate state agency. Application for the permit shall be secured from the town manager for referral to the fire chief. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 36, § 1) 
Sec. 30-2. - Aboveground storage of flammable liquids. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to store in bulk in excess of 275 gallons of gasoline, kerosene or other inflammable liquids in storage tanks or other containers above the level of the ground, unless the person so storing the same shall erect around the tanks or other containers a sufficient barrier, constructed of high fire-resisting or nonflammable material, having an inside containing capacity in excess of 25 percent of the total capacity of the tanks wherein such liquids are kept, and which barrier or container shall be constructed so as to prevent the escape of any of the contents of the tanks beyond the limits of such barrier. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, upon conviction before any court of competent jurisdiction, shall be guilty of a violation and shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-11 of this Code for each day that such liquids shall be stored or kept in such containers contrary to the provisions of this section. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 19, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 30-3. - Secured key systems, requirements. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
(1)  Fire department. shall mean and include the citizens' hose company of Smyrna, the Clayton volunteer fire department, and the town police department. 
(2)  Secured key system shall mean a small burglar proof metal container designed for mounting on the exterior wall of a building, accessible only by key, keypad, or magnetic card, for the storage of keys commonly referred to as "knox-box." An acceptable security key system shall include any such box manufactured by the Knox Manufacturing Company, or a box of equal grade and specifications. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  New construction. A secured key system shall be required for any new commercial building (i.e. a building other than one designed, constructed and intended to be used for residential occupancy); or for each individual commercial unit therein, where a central station service fire alarm or sprinkler is being installed. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of each such unit or commercial building to install the security key system as a condition of obtaining a certificate of occupancy. For purposes of this section, a "commercial unit" shall mean any interconnected areas of enclosed space (e.g. room, hallway, stairwell, foyer, storage bay) designed, occupied, or used as a single commercial unit under separate ownership and/or possession, separate from any other commercial unit within the same structure or building. 
(2)  Existing buildings. By May 15th, 2002, a secured key system shall be required for any existing commercial building (i.e, a building other than one designed, constructed, and intended to be used for residential occupancy), or for each individual commercial unit therein, where a central station service fire alarm or sprinkler has been previously installed. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of each such unit or commercial building to order and install the security key system. For purposes of this section, a "commercial unit" shall mean any interconnected areas of enclosed space (e.g. room, hallway, stairwell, foyer, storage bay) designed, occupied, or used as a single commercial unit under separate ownership and/or separate from any other commercial unit within the same structure or building. 
(c)  Location; accessibility. The secured key system shall be located to the left side of the main entrance, front door, and shall be located between five feet and six feet above the threshold to such door, and within 36 inches of such entrance way. Should the building design not allow for the location of a secured key system box by the main entrance as specified herein, the fire chief shall, upon reasonable request, authorize an alternate location. 
A secured key system, once installed, shall not be obstructed from view or obstructed by any means that would delay access to the box by the fire department. 
(d)  Duty of owner or occupant. 
(1)  Labeled keys to all doors required to be kept in secured key system box. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant to keep a set of labeled keys in the secured key box that are current to all points of ingress and egress, whether located on the exterior of the building or within the interior of the building; keys to all locked mechanical rooms, elevators, fire alarm and sprinkler controls, and any areas protected by automatic fire detection, and/or automatic sprinklers. 
Exception: 24 Del.C 2533 (b) requires that "only a pharmacist is authorized to unlock and lock the prescription department of a pharmacy". Therefore, keys may be available in the knox boxes for the pharmacy building but key availability to the pharmacy department itself, inside of the building, is prohibited. 
(2)  List of contacts. Additionally, the owner or occupant shall provide the town building inspector's office and the citizens' hose company of Smyrna with the names, addresses, telephone numbers, fax numbers, and email addresses (all as available) of three persons residing within one mile of the town who are authorized by the owner or occupant to represent the owner or occupant in the event of any emergency involving the town volunteer fire department. 
(e)  Requirement of secured key system as condition of certificate of occupancy or sprinkler or fire alarm acceptance test. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the town and no acceptance test for any sprinkler or central station fire alarm system shall be conducted by the state fire marshall until the proper installation of a secured key system as required by this section. 
(f)  Annual contact. The citizens' hose company shall contact each property owner or occupant subject to this section at least once each calendar year to obtain confirmation that the keys contained within the secured key system are current and labeled and that the list of persons to contact contains current information; provided, however, anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, the failure of citizens' hose company, through inadvertence, error, or impossibility to make such annual contact shall not impose any liability upon the citizens' hose company, nor relieve any property owner or occupant from complying with the terms of this section. 
(g)  Penalties. If the fire department responds to any call to any building covered by this section and is unable to gain access through the use of any secured key system required to be in place by this section because the terms of this section have not been complied with, the owner/occupant shall be subject to penalties as provided in section 30-4 hereafter. 
(Ord. of 8-20-01, § 1; Ord. of 4-1-02, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 010-08, § 1, 2-17-09) 
Sec. 30-4. - Penalty section for secured keys systems. 
    Any person violating any provisions of section 30-3 shall, upon conviction before any court of competent jurisdiction, be guilty of a violation and shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. Each day of a continuing violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 8-20-01, § 2) 
Chapter 32 - IMPACT FEES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- An Ord. of 10-18-99 added a new chapter 64 pertaining to impact fees. In order to preserve the alphabetical sequence of chapters in this Code, the provisions of said ordinance have been included herein as chapter 32 at the discretion of the editor and with the permission of the town manager. 

Sec. 32-1. - Applicability. 
    This chapter shall apply to all properties with new construction seeking connection to any of the town's public utilities. For purposes of this chapter, properties with new construction include (a) all properties with proposed construction that will require a building permit from the town and (b) all properties seeking to connect to the town's public utilities within six (6) months of a certificate of occupancy having been issued. 
(Ord. of 10-18-99; Ord. No. 020-04, § 1, 10-18-04; Ord. No. 017-14, § 1, 1-5-15; Ord. No. 001-15, § 1, 2-2-15) 
Sec. 32-2. - Obligation to pay. 
    All property owners shall pay impact fees in such amounts and at such times as provided herein. Such impact fees shall represent that property owner's proportionate share of the town's reasonably-anticipated capital costs of supplying municipal and/or public services to the owner's property, either by using up existing capacity (such impact fees thus being collected to replace that used-up capacity in the future) or by presently expanding existing capacity in order to provide such services to the owner's property. For purposes hereof, "municipal and/or public services" includes but is not limited to all capital expenditures and improvements by the town (other than those directly recovered from the property owner as reimbursement for extension of town facilities, front foot assessments, installation charges, connection fees or the like) reasonably necessary or appropriate to provide electricity, water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer and drainage, street lighting and signage, traffic control devices, streets, curbs, sidewalks, gutters, and police, fire, code enforcement, emergency protection, and general administrative services to the residents and properties of the town or served by the town's electric distribution system, sanitary sewage collection facilities and/or water treatment and distribution system. 
(Ord. of 10-18-99; Ord. No. 020-04, § 2, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 32-3. - Waiver of impact fees for qualifying projects. 
    Subject to sections 32-5, 32-6, and 32-7 hereafter, for a "qualifying project", the impact fees shall be fully waived (which would otherwise apply pursuant to this chapter); provided that the rehabilitation, renovation, reconstruction, restoration or replacement of the existing building or structure is (1) similar in kind, use or intensity; and (2) does not cause a significant increase in "municipal and/or public services" as defined in section 32-2, as reasonably determined by the town manager. 
(Ord. No. 032-03, § 2, 11-17-03) 
Sec. 32-4. - "Qualifying project" defined. 
    A "qualifying project" is the rehabilitation, renovation, reconstruction, or restoration of a building or structure located in a commercially-zoned within the town's incorporated municipal limits (i.e. local commercial, central commercial, and highway commercial) or located in the historic preservation overlay district which, as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived (12/03/03): 
(1)  Is currently vacant; 
(2)  Is determined by the building inspector to have been vacant for at least the immediately-previous 24 months; and 
(3)  Is reasonably anticipated to contribute to the revitalization of that area and/or community in general, as reasonably determined by the town manager. 
A "qualifying project" shall also include the replacement of a former building or structure on its site, which, in addition to the aforementioned criteria of this section, the replacement is the substantially same size, scale, footprint, appearance, and configuration as the previously-existing building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 032-03, § 3, 11-17-03; Ord. No. 020-04, § 3, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 32-5. - Projects not qualifying for full waiver. 
    The waiver of impact fees provided for under section 32-3 shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Any improvement which extends a building or structure beyond its existing "footprint" or which results in a net increase in the total floor area of an existing building by the addition of floors, porches, or decks; or the replacement of any building or structure which is not substantially the same size, scale, footprint, appearance, and configuration as the previously existing building or structure. The impact of any such improvements and/or replacements shall subject the complete project to the impact fees provided for under this chapter. 
(2)  Any improvement and/or replacement which causes a significant increase in "municipal and/or public services" by either using up existing capacity or by causing the need to expand existing capacity, as reasonably determined by the Town manager and supported by analysis. "Municipal and/or public services" includes, but is not limited to, electricity, water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer and drainage, street lighting and signage, traffic control devices, streets, curbs, sidewalks, gutters, and police, fire, code enforcement, emergency protection, and general administrative services to the residents and properties of the town or served by the town's electric distribution system, sanitary sewage collection facilities and/or water treatment and distribution system. The additional impact upon the "municipal and/or public services" only shall be subject to the impact fees provided for under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 032-03, § 4, 11-17-03; Ord. No. 020-04, § 4, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 32-6. - Limitation on waiver. 
    No qualifying project shall be entitled to the waiver of impact fees provided for under section 32-3 more than once in any consecutive ten-year period. 
(Ord. No. 032-03, § 5, 11-17-03) 
Sec. 32-7. - Qualified projects within the historic zoning overlay district. 
    No qualified project located within the town's historic zoning overlay district shall be entitled to the waiver of impact fees provided for under section 32-3 unless the improvements made to rehabilitate, renovate, reconstruct, restore, and/or replace the building or structure are undertaken and completed in strict compliance with all design and construction requirements recommended by the town's historic preservation review board. 
(Ord. No. 032-03, § 6, 11-17-03) 
Sec. 32-8. - Time of payment. 
    Payment of impact fees shall be a condition precedent for new construction to obtain a building permit or connect to the town's public utilities. Where adequate utilities to serve the properties in a subdivision are already in place, the town council may, in the exercise of its reasonable discretion, allow impact fees to be paid at any time prior to the issuance of a building permit; however, when adequate utilities are not in place to serve properties within a subdivision, impact fees shall be due and payable as a condition of final subdivision approval. 
(Ord. of 10-18-99; Ord. No. 032-03, § 1, 11-17-03; Ord. No. 020-04, § 5, 10-18-04; Ord. No. 017-14, § 2, 1-5-15; Ord. No. 001-15, § 2, 2-2-15) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 032-03, § 1, adopted Nov. 17, 2003, renumbered sections 32-3-32-8 as new sections 32-8-32-13. 
Sec. 32-9. - Amount of impact fees. 
(a)  Residential properties. $3,784.39 per approved dwelling unit. This includes additions to existing structures which create additional dwelling units and dividing existing structures which creates additional dwelling units. 
(b)  Manufacturing, industrial/office/research park properties. For all buildings and additions in any manufacturing or industrial/office/research park zoning district, $0.41 per square foot of the buildings or additions as documented on the approved permit application. 
(c)  Commercial and all other properties. For all buildings and additions in any commercial or other zoning districts $1.38 per square foot of any buildings and/or additions as documented on the approved building permit application. 
(d)  Money in lieu of parkland. Where a cash contribution in lieu of land dedication is required by the town under section 5.07(a)(2) of the town's subdivision regulations, $419.61 per "approved dwelling unit." 
(e)  Electric system impact fee: $1,251.71 for each equivalent dwelling unit (EDU). An EDU for residential properties is an approved dwelling unit as set forth in section 32-9(a). For commercial and industrial properties the EDU is computed using the following formula. The town will determine the size of the transformer for any commercial or industrial customer based upon the anticipated load of the customer. The kva rating of the transformer will be divided by 50. The result is rounded to the nearest whole number. This number is the EDU value for that commercial or industrial customer. In any event the minimum EDU's for any commercial or industrial customer will not be less than two EDU's. The number of EDU's is multiplied by the rate per EDU, which yields the amount payable as an impact fee. Below is a chart demonstrating several typical transformer ratings and the resulting EDUs. 
Class of Service Transformer Rating (KVA) EDU's Residential - 1 Commercial 100 2 Industrial 100 2 Industrial 200 4 Industrial 300 6 Industrial 500 10 Industrial 750 15 Industrial 1000 20  
Note: The minimum for new commercial or industrial customers is two EDU's. 
(f)  Fire protection. An impact fee of three-eighths of one percent of the construction value of the building permit of new residential dwellings (including single-family homes, townhouses, apartment units and mobile homes) and new non-residential structures of all types (including tenant fit-outs of existing structures) shall be assessed at the time the building permit is issued; provided that the impact fee for any single nonresidential building permit shall not exceed $5,000.00. The proceeds of the impact fee shall be transferred by the town to the Citizens Hose Company No. 1 of Smyrna at the end of each quarter of each year to be used for capital equipment and facilities to enhance fire protection services to the residents and properties of the town. 
Building permits for decks, sheds, residential additions, pools, fences, sidewalks, moving and demolition, signs and renovations or repairs to existing structures are exempt from this impact fee. 
(g)  Ambulance service. An impact fee of three-eights of one percent of the construction value of the building permit of new residential dwellings (including single-family homes, townhouses, apartment units and mobile homes) and new non-residential structures of all types (including tenant fit-outs of existing structures) shall be assessed at the time the building permit is issued; provided that the impact fee for any single building permit shall not exceed $3,750.00. The proceeds of the impact fee shall be transferred by the town to the David C. Harrison Post 14 American Legion Ambulance Service of Smyrna at the end of each quarter of each year to be used for capital equipment and facilities to enhance emergency medical protection services to the residents of the town. 
Building permits for decks, sheds, residential additions, pools, fences, sidewalks, moving and demolition, signs and renovations or repairs to existing structures are exempt from this impact fee. 
(h)  School construction impact fee. An impact fee of one and one-quarter percent of the construction value of the building permit of new residential dwellings (including single-family homes, townhouses, apartment units and mobile homes) and new non-residential structures of all types (including tenant fit-outs of existing structures) shall be assessed at the time the building permit is issued. The proceeds of the impact fee shall be collected on a continuous basis and transferred by the town to the town school district at the end of each quarter. Such funds are to be used by the town school district for capital construction to enhance the provision of educational facilities to the residents of the town. 
Building permits for decks, sheds, residential additions, pools, fences, sidewalks, moving and demolition, signs and renovations or repairs to existing structures are exempt from this impact fee. 
(i)  Water and sewer impact fee. In recognition of the additional cost associated with future upgrades, additions, and improvements to the town's water and sewer utility services, an impact fee of $879.50 shall be paid for each equivalent dwelling unit (EDU) located north of Duck Creek. For purposes of this subsection, an EDU shall be assigned for every 300 gallons per day (gpd) of water estimated to be consumed by a particular use based on the table located in section 70-65 herein. For any uses not specifically enumerated in the table, the Town shall calculate the EDUs based on the use or uses in the table that are individually or collectively the most comparable to the proposed use. 
(Ord. of 10-18-99; Ord. of 8-19-02(1), § 1; Ord. No. 004-03, § 1, 1-6-03; Ord. No. 005-03, §§ 1-6, 2-18-03; Ord. No. 032-03, § 1, 11-17-03; Ord. No. 033-03, §§ 1, 2, 12-1-03; Ord. No. 020-04, § 6, 10-18-04; Ord. No. 004-05, §§ 1, 2, 1-3-05; Ord. No. 018-06, §§ 1, 2, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 024-06, §§ 1, 2, 1-16-07; Ord. No. 006-07, § 2, 8-6-07; Ord. No. 017-14, §§ 3, 4, 1-5-15; Ord. No. 001-15, § 3, 4, 2-2-15) 
Editor's note- See Editor's note following section 32-8. 
Sec. 32-10. - In-kind contributions in lieu of cash payment of impact fees. 
    Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding where the property involved is subject to the procedures of the town's subdivision regulations, the town council may, in its absolute discretion, and pursuant to a written agreement signed by the developer (with appropriate security) allow any developer to make payment of some or all amounts of any impact fees assessed as herein above provided by means of "in-kind" contributions (e.g. capital improvements, land) in lieu of cash payments, provided that such in-kind contributions shall not be credited towards any other dedications required under section 5.07 ("public open spaces") of the town's subdivision regulations. 
(Ord. of 10-18-99; Ord. No. 032-03, § 1, 11-17-03; Ord. No. 020-04, § 7, 10-18-04) 
Editor's note- See Editor's note following section 32-8. 
Sec. 32-11. - Amount of impact fees subject to increase. 
    Subject to the following limitation for new construction, the town reserves the right to increase the amount of the impact fee assessed for each newly constructed unit to reflect one or more intervening increases in impact fees made pursuant to section 32-12 hereafter until a certificate of occupancy has been issued for that newly constructed unit or addition; whenever a building permit has been lawfully issued for the construction of any unit, then unless and until that building permit shall have expired, been revoked, or been superseded by the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the amount of the impact fee for that unit shall remain fixed at the amount in effect as of the date that the building permit for that unit was issued. 
(Ord. of 10-18-99; Ord. No. 032-03, § 1, 11-17-03; Ord. No. 020-04, § 8, 10-18-04) 
Editor's note- See Editor's note following section 32-8. 
Sec. 32-12. - Impact fee subject to adjustment for inflation. 
    Annually, beginning January 1, 2015, the amount of the impact fees set out above shall automatically be increased to reflect inflation based upon changes in the consumer price index as established by the U.S. Department of Labor for the Philadelphia-Wilmington-Atlantic City (Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Delaware, Maryland) region for the preceding 12 months; provided however, that the town council may act, by resolution adopted on or before December 31st of each year, to waive or to increase the adjustment more than the posted change in the CPI for the following year. 
(Ord. of 10-18-99; Ord. No. 032-03, § 1, 11-17-03; Ord. No. 024-06, § 3, 1-16-07; Ord. No. 001-15, § 5, 2-2-15) 
Editor's note- See Editor's note following section 32-8. 
Sec. 32-13. - Allocation of impact fees. 
    The distribution of impact fees among the different accounts shall be set by resolution of mayor and council. This distribution can be changed by resolution of mayor and council for newly collected fees. Notwithstanding the foregoing, all water and sewer impact fees collected, $685.59 of each residential impact fee, $0.07 per square foot of each manufacturing, industrial/office/research park properties impact fee, and $0.12 per square foot of each commercial and other properties impact fee shall be specifically designated to pay for the costs of upgrading, adding to, and improving water and sewer infrastructure, provided that the town council shall determine the time and manner in which these impact fees are applied towards the water and sewer infrastructure costs. 
(Ord. of 10-18-99; Ord. No. 032-03, § 1, 11-17-03; Ord. No. 017-14, § 4, 1-5-15; Ord. No. 001-15, § 6, 2-2-15) 
Editor's note- See Editor's note following section 32-8. 
Sec. 32-14. - Severability. 
    If any provision, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or clause of this Chapter 32 ("Impact Fees") shall be held to be unconstitutional, invalid, or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not be deemed to invalidate the remaining provisions, sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences or clauses of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 017-14, § 5, 1-5-15; Ord. No. 001-15, § 6, 2-2-15) 
Chapter 35 - LIBRARY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted November 3, 1997 added a new chapter 47 pertaining to Town of Smyrna Library. However, in order to maintain alphabetical order of chapters, such ordinance was redesignated as chapter 35, at the discretion of the editor. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 35-1-35-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TOWN OF SMYRNA LIBRARY 
DIVISION 1. - LIBRARY DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 35-26. - General policies and objectives. 
    The Town of Smyrna Library was established for the purpose of providing the residents of the Smyrna School District and Kent County with access to free books and other resources and services for education, information and for recreation. The library department will strive to aid and encourage the young in their pursuit of knowledge and provide adults with resources to meet their need for information in their capacity as individuals, as business or professional people or as responsible citizens. 
    Special programs and activities will be held on a regular basis for children and adults in keeping with these general policies and objectives. 
A.  Book and other material selection. 
1.  The library director will execute critical judgment in anticipating the adult demands of the community and select the best materials with which to satisfy them keeping within the budget and space limitations. The young people's books and other materials will be selected with the aim of helping adolescents find self-realization, live useful and well adjusted lives in the community and know and understand the world at large. The material will be selected to widen their thinking, enrich their lives and help them fulfill their recreational and emotional needs. The children's collection and other resources will be selected for all ages and abilities with emphasis on materials which will stimulate imagination, mental growth and the development of taste for good literature. The responsibility of selecting reading materials for minors rests with their parent(s) or legal guardian. 
The library director does not endorse every idea or presentation contained in the books or other materials made available. It would conflict with the public interest to establish her/his own political, moral or aesthetic view as the sole standard for determining what books and materials should be available in the library. It is the intent to make available the widest diversity of views and expressions, including those which possibly can be construed as unorthodox or unpopular. Suggestions for purchases from the public are welcome. 
2.  The entire collection will be weeded on a regular basis. 
B.  Censorship. 
1.  The library director will be further guided by the Library Bill of Rights and the Freedom to Read statement as adopted by the American Library Association. 
2.  A library patron who objects to any book or material, visual or written, in the library collection or whose request for the addition of any book is denied by the director may appeal to the advisory board by means of completion of a form available from the director. The advisory board's decision will be final. 
C.  Gifts. 
1.  The library is grateful for gifts of books and other materials that will enhance our collection. However, the library reserves the privilege of deciding whether all or any part of any gift will be added to our collection because any item, though of value in itself, may be a duplicate of an item of which the library has sufficient number, outdated information, or in poor physical condition. 
The director will make an effort to dispose of all gift materials which are not added to the collection by offering it to other libraries or institutions as gifts or exchanges. Items not disposed of will be sold at book sales or recycled. 
2.  If the donor wishes to have the material returned, they may leave their name, telephone, and address so that they may be notified to pick it up. 
3.  When the library receives a cash gift for the purchase of memorial or tribute memorials, the selection will be made by the director with input from the donor as to the general interest of the deceased or donor and the needs of the library. A bound record of all such donations will be kept and each item will be marked with an appropriate book plate. 
4.  All bequests and cash donations over $1,000.00 shall have the donors name and date of gift engraved on a brass plate and attached to a memorial plaque. All gifts in the amount of $300.00 or more shall have said name and date of gift engraved on a brass plate and attached to a memorial or other plaque. 
(Ord. of 11-3-97(1), § 47-1) 
Sec. 35-27. - Services of the library. 
(a)  Hours of operation. 
(1)  The hours of operation of the library will be set by resolution adopted by mayor and council. 
(2)  The inclement weather policy was established to follow the Smyrna School District closings except the second day is at the discretion of the director. Such closings are announced on the local radio stations and notification is given to the Smyrna Police Department. 
(Ord. of 11-3-97(1), § 47-2) 
Sec. 35-28. - Borrowing privileges. 
(a)  Library cards will be issued free of charge to all citizens residing in or owning property in the Smyrna School District and all areas of Kent County regardless of sex, age, creed, race or economic situation. 
(b)  Citizens residing outside of the service area are required to pay an annual fee for family membership. Fees shall be set by resolution adopted by mayor and council. All applicants for a card shall present suitable identification such as a driver's license. Cards are issued for three years. 
(c)  Additional materials may be borrowed through the KentNet as needed and will be delivered to Smyrna via the Kent County delivery courier. 
(d)  All patrons are responsible for library materials they check out. Items lost or damaged must be paid for. 
(Ord. of 11-3-97(1), § 47-3) 
Sec. 35-29. - Circulation rules and regulations. 
(a)  Loan periods. 
(1)  Books, video tapes, audio tapes and periodicals are loaned for fourteen days. No renewal of items on reserve is allowed. Circulating reference materials are loaned for one day. 
(b)  Overdue fines. Fines for overdue materials shall be set by resolution adopted by mayor and council. Phone calls and/or notices will be sent to card holder on a timely basis to remind them of delinquency. 
(Ord. of 11-3-97(1), § 47-4; Ord. of 10-2-00(2), § 1) 
Sec. 35-30. - Displays and exhibits. 
(a)  The library will provide, free of charge, attractive educational, civic, and cultural exhibits and events as often as possible. 
(1)  Conditions for display or exhibit. 
a.  No materials shall be exhibited without permission of the director. 
b.  No organization or individual shall be permitted to display any materials which advocate the election or defeat of a candidate for public office or which advocate an affirmative or negative vote for or against any proposition, whether political or otherwise. 
c.  No organization or individual shall be permitted to place in the library, any receptacle which solicits donations, nor shall any poster or display be permitted which advocates or solicits consideration of any product or item sold by any commercial or charitable enterprise; however, posters announcing programs sponsored by any local educational, religious or fraternal organization may be displayed provided there is room for such displays. Such displays shall be on a "first come, first served" basis. 
Whenever possible, displays or exhibits utilizing front windows shall incorporate books or materials from the library's collection which have a relationship to the subject of the display. The library assumes no responsibility for the preservation, protection or possible damage or theft of any item displayed. All items are placed at the owner's risk and must be removed at the agreed termination date. 
(Ord. of 11-3-97(1), § 47-5) 
Sec. 35-31. - Meeting room policy. 
(a)  The library meeting room is available free of charge on a "first come, first served" basis for public gatherings of a civic, educational or cultural character. It is not available for meetings for social, political, partisan, or religious purposes, for the purpose or benefit to private individuals or commercial concerns, for presentation of one side only of controversial matters or when, in the judgment of the director, any disorder may occur. The fact that a group is permitted to meet in the library in no way constitutes an endorsement of the groups policies or beliefs. The meeting room is available during regular business hours only. Children's groups may use library rooms provided they are supervised by one or more adult sponsors. 
(b)  The organization using the library assumes responsibility for any damages to rooms or contents and all rooms used must be left in a neat and orderly condition. 
(c)  Groups and organizations may reserve the facility at the discretion of the director. They may not charge a fee. 
(d)  Alcoholic beverages and smoking are strictly prohibited. 
(Ord. of 11-3-97(1), § 47-6) 
Sec. 35-32. - Miscellaneous patron policies. 
(a)  Confidentiality of information and patron records. Information shall not be made available to any individual, agency of the state, federal or local governments except pursuant to federal, state or local law relating to civil, criminal or administrative discovery procedures or legislative investigatory power and until a proper showing of good cause has been made in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  Patrons may not: 
(1)  Use inappropriate language or profanity 
(2)  Disrupt activities 
(3)  Leave personal items unattended 
(4)  Ride skateboards or inline skates inside 
(5)  Bring food or beverages into library 
(6)  Bring live animals except as needed by a handicapped person 
(7)  Harass other patrons or staff members 
The privilege of using the library may be denied to any patron exhibiting any of the listed behaviors. Parents will be notified in the case of minors abusing library rules. 
(c)  Upon entering the building, minors without adult supervision are required to sign in at the circulation desk so that staff may be aware of their presence in case of emergency. 
(d)  No child under the age of seven is allowed without adult supervision. 
(e)  Anyone having special needs (translator, signer, etc.) must notify the library 72 hours prior to an event so that arrangements can be made. 
(Ord. of 11-3-97(1), § 47-7) 
Sec. 35-33. - Internet acceptable use policy. 
(a)  Statement of purpose. The public libraries of the county participate in a reciprocal borrowing consortium and belong to the KentNet automation system. The internet is a vast universe of computers located throughout the world. To access the internet, libraries have turned to the world wide web which provides a framework by which the resources of the internet can be made available to the general public. The following internet acceptable use policy is subscribed to the Smyrna Public Library. 
(b)  Acceptable use policy. 
(1)  Smyrna Public Library does not monitor and has no control over the information accessed through the Internet and cannot be held responsible for its content. The internet is a world-wide community with a highly diverse user population and it is the user's responsibility to use this resource wisely. Smyrna Public Library cannot be held responsible for the quality or accuracy of any information found on the Internet. Library staff will provide guidance to assist library users in finding web resources selected by librarians for their accuracy and usefulness. 
(2)  Internet resources accessible through the libraries are provided equally to all library users. Libraries may establish time limits for using Internet workstations based on demand. 
(3)  Parents or guardians, not library staff, are responsible for the internet information selected and/or accessed by their children. Parents are reminded that only they can judge what material is suitable for their children to access. There is a great deal of material available on the internet that many or most parents would find objectionable. Parents should discuss limits to viewing internet materials with their children. Library staff can provide information to parents to assist them in talking with their children about the internet such as librarian's guide to cyberspace from A.L.A. Parents do have the right to block all internet privileges for their children under age 18. Parents who wish to exercise this right must ask their librarian for a form and return the signed form to their librarian. 
(4)  Internet use at Smyrna Public Library is restricted to holders of a valid KentNet borrowing card. Users must enter their 14-digit bar code number and their personal identification number (PIN) to access the internet. Patrons who have been denied internet access because of a violation of this policy or of the internet acceptable use policy of the state division of libraries will not be able to use this bar code to access the Internet from the library's workstations. 
(5)  Internet workstations must be used in a responsible manner, respecting the rights of others, and taking care with use of the equipment. Computer and internet settings may not be changed. 
(6)  The workstations cannot be used for any fraudulent or unlawful purpose including any activities prohibited by any applicable federal, state, or local laws. 
(7)  Please be aware that material on the internet and the world wide web is copyrighted. It is your responsibility to be aware of the display of any notices concerning the copyright of information on the web and to respect the copyright laws of the United States. 
(8)  While the library will respect user privacy, when using the internet it should be remembered that Internet workstations are in public areas and can be viewed by the entire community. Users are asked not to display images which will be offensive to other members of the community. 
(9)  To protect computer workstations from viruses, patrons may not use their own software on workstations nor may they use their own diskettes with the workstations. Libraries may offer diskettes for sale to library users at a nominal cost. Patrons may download programs to diskettes purchased from the library at the time they are using the workstations. They may not use diskettes purchased prior to that time or download to the hard drives of the PCs. The library is not responsible for any virus transported from a workstation diskette to any personal computer. 
(10)  Internet access may not be available due to technical problems beyond the library's control. The library will not be responsible for any material lost due to equipment problems. 
(11)  Smyrna Public Library will provide unfiltered access to the internet at the public workstations within the library. In the future, Smyrna Public Library may choose to offer filtered access to the internet at certain workstations available to younger users. 
(12)  Internet access will be denied to anyone breaching this acceptable use policy. 
(Ord. of 11-16-98(1), § 1) 
Chapter 38 - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAILERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to provide for health and safety, § 2(b)(7); authority to regulate construction, § 2(b)(20). 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; parks and recreation, ch. 46; solid waste, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; traffic and vehicles, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 70; zoning regulations, app. A; subdivision regulations, app. B. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1-38-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAILERS, PORTABLE STRUCTURES 

Sec. 38-26. - Violations; penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a violation and upon conviction thereof before any court of competent jurisdiction shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-11 of this Code for each violation. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 23, § 5) 
Sec. 38-27. - Occupancy declared nuisance. 
    Occupancy by human beings of trailers or portable structures as dwellings or places of business within the limits of the town is hereby declared to be a nuisance detrimental to the sanitation of the town and dangerous to the health and safety of the citizens thereof. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 23, § 1) 
Sec. 38-28. - Permit prerequisite to placement in town. 
    No person being the owner of, tenant of or in possession of any trailer, bus, motor vehicle or portable structure of any kind designed or adapted for occupancy either as a dwelling or as a place of business and with or without wheels shall park, place, set or install the same upon any land within the limits of the town without first obtaining a permit in writing, upon written application describing such structure and stating where and when it is to be located in the town from the town council. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 23, § 2) 
Sec. 38-29. - Issuance of permit. 
    The town manager may issue a permit in writing to any person to park or keep a trailer or other portable structure within the town for a period of time not exceeding 30 days only for purposes of loading and unloading or of constructing, renovating or repairing such trailer or portable structure. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 23, § 3) 
Sec. 38-30. - Exemption for preexisting structures. 
    Any trailer, bus, motor vehicle or portable structure of any kind designed or adapted for occupancy either as a dwelling or as a place of business and with or without wheels parked, placed, set or installed within the limits of the town as of December 20, 1961, may remain where it was then located for so long as it is owned by its present owner. Upon change of ownership it shall become subject to the terms of and provisions of this article. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 23, § 4) 
Chapter 42 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to provide for order, protection and preservation of persons and property, § 2(b)(32). 
Cross reference- General penalty for Code violations, § 1-11; law enforcement, ch. 34; traffic and vehicles, ch. 66. 
State Law reference- Home rule power of municipalities does not include power to define or punish felonies, 22 Del. C. § 802. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Interference with radio and television reception. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an instrument, device, sign or machine within the town limits which causes any interference with radio and/or television reception. 
(b)  The operation of such instrument, device, sign or machine that affects radio and/or television reception will be deemed a nuisance, and failure to abate the nuisance after five days notice to do so, such notice to be in writing and signed by the town manager, shall upon conviction before any court of competent jurisdiction be punishable by fine as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 15, § 2) 
Secs. 42-2-42-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to provide for public health and welfare, § 2(b)(7). 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 14. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-26. - Causing or allowing to exist. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or to allow to exist any obstruction, nuisance, hazard or unsanitary condition within the limits of the town. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 18, § 1) 
Sec. 42-27. - Notice. 
    Prior to taking any other action to enforce compliance with this article, the town shall attempt to give written notice (delivered in person or by regular mail, properly addressed and with sufficient postage) to the person causing or allowing such condition to exist, which notice shall: 
(1)  Specify the nature and location of the violation. 
(2)  Provide notice of the need to remove or correct such condition within ten days from the effective date of such notice. 
(3)  Set forth the penalties for violations. 
Such notice shall be presumed delivered upon personal delivery or upon the date such notice was deposited in the U.S. mail. The fact that such notice is not actually received by the alleged violator shall not be a defense to the town's subsequent enforcement of this article. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 18, § 2) 
Sec. 42-28. - Penalty. 
    If the condition causing the violation of this article has not been corrected or removed within ten calendar days from the date that notice under section 42-27 was hand delivered or deposited in the U.S. mail, such person shall be guilty of a criminal violation and upon conviction before any court of competent jurisdiction, shall forfeit and pay a criminal fine of $25.00, plus court costs and victim's compensation fund assessment if applicable. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 18, § 3; Ord. of 8-5-02(1), § 9) 
Sec. 42-29. - Equitable relief. 
    In lieu of or in addition to enforcement under section 42-28, the town may file an action for injunctive relief in any court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin the violation of this article. The town shall be entitled to recover its court costs, including expert witness fees, and reasonable attorneys fees incurred by it as the successful party in any such suit. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 18, § 4) 
Secs. 42-30-42-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ABANDONED, WRECKED, JUNKED OR DISMANTLED VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted August 21, 1995 deleted §§ 42-41-42-51 in their entirety and inserted in lieu thereof new §§ 42-41-42-52. Formerly, such sections pertained to similar provisions and derived from General Ordinances, Article I, Tit. 29, §§ 3-11. 

Sec. 42-41. - Short title. 
    This division shall be known and may be cited as the "Abandoned, Wrecked, Dismantled or Nonoperable Vehicle Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 8-21-95, § 1) 
Sec. 42-42. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this division, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    Abandoned vehicle is any vehicle which is left unattended on public property for a period in excess of five days under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned. 
    Person is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
    Private property is any real property within the town which is privately-owned and which is not defined as public property herein. 
    Public property is any real property in the town which is owned by a governmental body and includes buildings, parking lots, parks, streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, easements and other similar property. 
    Town is the Town of Smyrna. 
    Vehicle shall mean a machine propelled by power other than human power designated to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall include, without limitation, automobile, truck, trailer, motor cycle, tractor, buggy and wagon. 
    Wrecked, junked, dismantled, or nonoperable vehicle is any vehicle the condition of which is wrecked, junked, dismantled, partially dismantled, is in such a state of disrepair to be incapable of being operated in the manner for which it was designed, or from which the wheels, engine, transmission, or any substantial part thereof have been removed, regardless of whether said vehicle bears a current registration. 
(Ord. of 8-21-95, § 2) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-43. - Wrecked, dismantled, or nonoperable Vehicles on public property prohibited; declared a nuisance. 
    No person shall abandon or leave any wrecked, dismantled or nonoperable vehicle, whether attended or not, upon any public property within the town for a period of time in excess of five days. The presence of such vehicles, or parts thereof, on public property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance which may be abated in accordance with the provisions of this division. The temporary or intermittent movement or removal of such vehicle shall not be deemed to interrupt the running of the five day period. This section does not apply to vehicles parked or stored on public property by the town. 
(Ord. of 8-21-95, § 3) 
Sec. 42-44. - Abandonment of vehicles on public property prohibited; declared a nuisance. 
(a)  No person shall abandon or leave unattended any vehicle (not otherwise prohibited as a wrecked, dismantled or nonoperable vehicle, even if bearing a current registration), upon any public property within the town for a period of time in excess of five days under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned. The presence of such vehicles under such circumstances is hereby declared to be a public nuisance which may be abated in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. This section does not apply to vehicles parked or stored on public property owned by the town. 
(b)  Any person may notify the town police, in writing, of the fact that they will be absent from the town or otherwise unable to move their vehicle for an extended period of time (as specified therein) and, in such event, that person's vehicle shall not be deemed to be in violation of this section of this division until the expiration of two weeks from the time specified by the written notice to the town's police department. Provided, however, that nothing in this paragraph shall excuse such persons from compliance with other town ordinances regulating the parking and/or storage of vehicles on public property in the town. 
(Ord. of 8-21-95, § 3A) 
Sec. 42-45. - Wrecked, dismantled or nonoperable vehicles on private property prohibited; declared a nuisance; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any wrecked, dismantled or nonoperable vehicle of any kind, whether attended or not, upon any private property within the town in excess of five days. The temporary or intermittent movement or removal of such vehicle shall not be deemed to interrupt the running of the five-day period. The presence of such vehicles, or parts thereof, on private property is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be abated in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any vehicle enclosed within a building or fence on private property in such a manner that it is not visible from without such enclosure. Covering the vehicle with a tarp or similar device shall not satisfy the requirements of this section. 
(2)  Any vehicle held in connection with a business enterprise lawfully licensed by the appropriate governmental agency for the servicing and repair of such vehicles and property operated in an appropriate business zone ordinances of the town. 
(Ord. of 8-21-95, § 4; Ord. of 3-16-98(3), § 1) 
Sec. 42-46. - Order for removal. 
(a)  On public property. Whenever it comes to the attention of the town police department that any nuisance as defined in section 42-44 of this division appears to exist on public property, it shall cause a written order to be affixed to the vehicle, declaring the existence of the nuisance and ordering whoever has an interest in the vehicle to comply with this division by removing said vehicle within 72 hours of the notice. 
(b)  On private property. Whenever it comes to the attention of the town police department that any nuisance as defined in section 42-45 appears to exist on private property, it shall, in addition to affixing an order to the vehicle itself as provided in subsection (a) above, deliver a copy of such notice to the owner and occupant, a copy of the order shall be left at the property with a duplicate copy sent to the owner and occupant by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(c)  Form of order. Any orders required under subsection (a) or (b) above shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A description of such vehicle, including the make, year, model, color and registration number if known; 
(2)  The location of such vehicle; 
(3)  The date and time that the order was affixed to the vehicle; 
(4)  An order for removal within 72 hours from the time the order was affixed to the vehicle; 
(5)  That upon failure to comply with the order for removal, the town police department shall remove or cause to be removed such vehicle at the expense of the owner of the vehicle and/or the owner or occupant of the property. 
(Ord. of 8-21-95, § 5) 
Sec. 42-47. - Removal of vehicles. 
    If the violation is not remedied within the time set forth in the order as outlined herein, the town police department is hereby authorized to remove or have removed such vehicle from the premises. Except for the town police department and employees of the town working in concert with the town police department, such vehicles shall be removed only by wreckers or towing services duly licensed by the state. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder or refuse to allow the town police department and/or any person acting in concert with or at the direction of the town police department to enter upon private property for the purpose of removing a vehicle under the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. of 8-21-95, § 6) 
Sec. 42-48. - Notice of removal. 
    Within five days of the removal of such vehicle, the town police department shall give written notice (by certified mail, return receipt requested) to the registered owner of the vehicle, if known, and also to the owner or occupant of the private property from which the vehicle was removed, that said vehicle has been impounded and stored for violation of this ordinance. The notice shall give the location of where the vehicle is stored. 
(Ord. of 8-21-95, § 7) 
Sec. 42-49. - Disposition of motor vehicles. 
    Any person who tows, removes, stores, or keeps a vehicle at the direction of the town police department acting under the provisions of this division shall, from the time of taking possession thereof, be entitled to all rights, remedies and authority as provided under the Delaware "garageman's lien" statute, 25 Del. C. Chapter 39 as it may be amended from time to time hereafter or any future corresponding provision of law. In exercising such rights, remedies, and authority, such persons shall be governed, in all respects, by the terms of that statute. 
(Ord. of 8-21-95, § 8) 
Sec. 42-50. - Liability for towing and storage expenses. 
    In the event that the town should be or become liable for all or any portion of the expenses incurred in the removal and storage of such vehicle, the town may: 
(1)  Recover same from the owner of the vehicle and/or the owner of the private property from which it was removed in an action for debt; or 
(2)  Add that amount from the tax bill of the person owning the private property from which the vehicle was removed, or both; provided, however, that wherever the private property from which such vehicle has been removed is occupied by a person other than the owner of that property, the occupant shall be primarily responsible and the town shall not seek to recover from the owner of the property (either in an action at law or by tax collection proceedings) before it exhausts reasonable efforts to recover from the occupant, but this shall not prohibit the town from joining both the property owner and occupant in one action for debt. 
(Ord. of 8-21-95, § 9) 
Sec. 42-51. - Penalty. 
    Any person knowingly causing or permitting a nuisance to exist in violation of this ordinance shall be guilty of a criminal violation and, upon conviction, shall forfeit and pay a fine of $50.00 plus costs of prosecution. Each day constitutes a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 8-21-95, § 10; Ord. of 8-5-02(1), § 10) 
Secs. 42-52-42-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DISCHARGE OF HARMFUL MOTOR VEHICLE FLUIDS 

Sec. 42-61. - Findings; statement of purpose. 
    The town council hereby finds and determines that the discharge or escape of many motor vehicle fluids, including motor oil, gasoline, antifreeze and transmission fluid, upon the public streets, alleys, sidewalks and other rights-of-way within the town constitutes a public nuisance and a potential safety hazard as well as causing deterioration and damage to town road surfaces. It is therefore the purpose of this division to prohibit the intentional discharge or the continued escape of such fluids from motor vehicles within the town on such public streets, alleys, sidewalks and public rights-of-way. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 68, § 1) 
Sec. 42-62. - Penalty. 
    Any person found guilty of violating this division shall be guilty of a criminal violation and, upon conviction, shall be fined $25.00 for the first offense, $50.00 for the second offense and $100.00 for the third and each subsequent offense, plus the costs of prosecution. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 68, § 3; Ord. of 9-17-01, § 1; Ord. of 8-5-02(1), § 11) 
Sec. 42-63. - Discharge or escape of certain motor vehicle fluids prohibited. 
    The intentional discharge or continued escape of motor oil, gasoline, antifreeze, transmission fluid or other motor vehicle fluid derived from petroleum products onto the public streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public rights-of-way within the town is hereby prohibited. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 68, § 2) 
Sec. 42-64. - Intentional discharge. 
    Any person who consciously, intentionally or deliberately discharges any of the prohibited fluids from a motor vehicle onto the public streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public rights-of-way of the town shall be guilty of violating this division. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 68, § 2.1) 
Sec. 42-65. - Escape of fluids; warning, presumption of intent. 
    Where the continued escape (leaking, dripping, etc.) of any prohibited fluids from a motor vehicle upon the town streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public rights-of-way is evident either from direct observation of such escape from the motor vehicle or from the residue of such fluids upon the public streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public rights-of-way, written notice thereof shall be posted upon the motor vehicle and/or mailed to the registered owner of such vehicle by certified mail, return receipt requested. Such notice shall indicate: 
(1)  A description of the vehicle, including license number. 
(2)  The date, time and place such fluids were observed having escaped from such vehicle. 
(3)  That the continued escape of such fluids constitutes a violation of this division. 
(4)  The maximum penalty for violation of this division. 
(5)  That, if such fluids are again observed escaping from such vehicle in violation of this division at any time following the expiration of 72 hours from the posting of such vehicle or from the receipt of the written notice, if mailed, that the owner and/or operator of such vehicle shall be presumed to have intentionally allowed the escape of such fluids in violation of this division and shall be prosecuted accordingly. 
In any such prosecution, the defendant shall have the burden of showing, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the continued escape of such fluids occurring after posting of the motor vehicle or receipt of written notice was not the result of the defendant's intentional disregard of such notice and warning. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 68, § 2.2) 
Sec. 42-66. - Occasional drops not a violation. 
    Inasmuch as the purpose of this division is to prohibit the discharge or escape of such fluids as would constitute a public nuisance, safety hazard and/or cause damage or deterioration to street surfaces, the escape of occasional droplets of such fluids from motor vehicles in such small quantities as would not form a puddle or stain upon the surface below it exceeding two inches in diameter shall not be deemed a violation of this division. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 68, § 2.3) 
Sec. 42-67. - Expiration of warning notice; change in ownership. 
    Any warning notice posted or mailed under section 42-65 shall be effective only for a period of six months from the date of such posting or receipt. Upon the expiration of such six-month period, or in the event of a good faith arms-length change of ownership of such motor vehicle, such warning notice shall cease to have any force or effect, and a new notice shall be posted or mailed prior to further enforcement under section 42-65. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 68, § 4) 
Secs. 42-68-42-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - NOISE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Noise control and abatement, 7 Del. C. § 7101 et seq.; equivalent or more stringent ordinances authorized, 7 Del. C. § 7124. 

Sec. 42-81. - Penalties. 
    Any person or any group of individuals acting singly or in concert violating this division shall be guilty of a criminal violation and, upon conviction, forfeit and pay a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $25.00 and costs of prosecution, for the first offense, and for the second offense thereof shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $100.00 and costs of prosecution. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 59, § 3; Ord. of 8-5-02(1), § 12) 
Sec. 42-82. - Prohibited noises generally. 
    Subject to the provisions of this division: 
(1)  The making, creation or permitting of any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise within the corporate limits of the town is hereby prohibited. 
(2)  The making, creating or permitting of any noise of such character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the life, health or welfare of an individual, or which either disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, peace or safety of any individual is hereby prohibited. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 59, § 1) 
Sec. 42-83. - Enumerated unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises. 
    The following acts, among others, are declared to be unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this division, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)  Blowing horns. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, except as a danger signal, so as to create any unreasonably loud or harsh sound, or the sounding of such device for any unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. 
(2)  Radios, phonographs, tape recorders, etc. The playing of any radio, phonograph, tape recorder or any musical instrument in such manner or with such volume, particularly during hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. as to annoy or disturb the peace and quiet of pedestrians on the public streets and sidewalks of the town. 
(3)  Pets. The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person in the vicinity. 
(4)  Use of vehicle. The use of any automobile, truck, motorcycle, motorbike, moped, motor scooter, dirt-bike, or other self-propelled vehicle, whether licensed and registered to operate on the public highways of this state or not, so designed, loaded, out of repair or operated in such manner as to create unreasonably loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
(5)  Blowing whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of danger. 
(6)  Loudspeakers or amplifiers. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers, whether stationary or mounted on a vehicle for advertising or other purposes; provided, that in the exercise of free speech, loudspeakers or amplifiers may be used for noncommercial purposes under the following conditions: 
a.  It shall be unlawful to speak into a loudspeaker or amplifier within the corporate limits of the town between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
b.  It shall be unlawful for any person to speak into a loudspeaker or amplifier within the corporate limits of the town, when such loudspeaker or amplifier is so adjusted that the voice of the speaker is amplified to the extent that it is audible at a distance in excess of 150 feet from the person speaking. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 59, § 2) 
Sec. 42-84. - Use of engine compression brakes prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall be defined as follows: 
    Brake means any device used for slowing, halting, or stopping the movement of any vehicle. 
    Engine compression brake means any motor vehicle brake that is operated by the compression of the engine of the motor vehicle or any unit or part thereof. 
    Motor vehicle means and includes automobiles, tractors, trucks, trailers, and transportation equipment of all kinds and sizes, or any combination of the foregoing. 
(b)  Engine compression brakes declared a nuisance. The use within the town of engine compression brakes disturbs and disrupts the public peace and quiet and disturbs the residents of the town in their rest and in the enjoyment of their property and by reason thereof the town council finds that the use of such brakes within the town is a public nuisance. 
(c)  Engine compression brakes prohibited. 
(1)  No person shall use engine compression brakes within the incorporated areas of the town. It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that said compression brakes were applied in an emergency and were necessary for the protection of persons or property. 
(2)  This section shall not apply to fire engines, ambulances, aid trucks, police vehicles, and other emergency vehicles. 
(3)  The town manager is authorized and directed to post appropriate signs consistent with the provisions of this section. 
(d)  Town nonliability. 
(1)  It is expressly the purpose of this section to provide for and promote the health, safety, and welfare of the general public, and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefitted by the terms of this section. 
(2)  It is the specific intent of this section that no provision or term used in this section is intended to impose any duty whatsoever upon the town, or any of its officers or employees, for whom the implementation or enforcement of this section shall be discretionary and not mandatory. 
(3)  Nothing contained in this section is intended to be nor shall be construed to create or form the basis for any liability on the part of the town, or its officers, employees, or agents, for any injury or damage resulting from the failure to comply with the provisions of this section, or by reason or consequence of any inspection, notice, order, certificate, permission, or approval authorized or issued or done in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this section, or by reason of any action or inaction on the part of the town, related in any manner to the enforcement of this section by its officers, employees, or agents. 
(e)  Violation; penalty. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section and any person, firm, or corporation who allows or permits any motor vehicle owned and/or operated by it in violation of any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction of any violation hereof shall pay a fine of $100.00 plus court costs and victims compensation fund assessment. 
(Ord. of 9-16-02, §§ 1-5) 
Sec. 42-85. - Construction noise. 
(a)  Purpose; construction. Construction activities are likely to produce loud and/or disturbing sounds which are likely to disrupt the peace and tranquility of persons on properties other than the property where the construction activity is taking place. It is the purpose of this section to define and regulate "construction noise" from the perspective of persons on those other properties. Violations are thus determined by the impact of construction noise on persons on those other properties rather than on the level of sound emanating at the source of the construction noise. 
(b)  Definitions. 
    Construction noise shall mean any plainly audible sound emanating from the operation of any equipment, machinery, construction tools or power equipment used: 
(1)  In the construction, repair, alteration, moving, or demolition of any building or structure; 
(2)  In excavating, filling, grading, or other earthmoving activities conducted on any parcel of land or public way; 
(3)  In the construction, removal, re-surfacing, or installation of any street, alley, sidewalk, curb, gutter, storm water drain, water or sewer line, which has not been dedicated to and accepted by the town or the state, or any of the appurtenances thereto; 
(4)  In the loading, unloading, preparation, or mixing of any concrete, cement, bituminous concrete, stone, gravel, soil, or dirt in or upon any parcel of land or public way; 
(5)  In the loading or off-loading of any equipment, machinery, supplies, or materials to be used in construction; and 
(6)  In the mowing, seeding, thatching, tree trimminq or other landscaping or horticultural activities on any parcel of land or public way or place. 
    Plainly audible shall mean any sound which a person with normal, unimpaired hearing acuity would readily detect, unaided, above other ambient or background sounds. 
    Power equipment shall mean all construction machinery, tools, and equipment powered by steam, electricity, compressed air, or combustion or diesel engine, including by way of example and not in limitation, power saws, drills, sanders, nailers, hammers, grinders, shovels, trenchers, jack-hammers, pile-drivers, and garden equipment. 
    Property line shall mean the property line of the parcel of land upon which the construction activity(s) is/are being conducted. 
(c)  Certain construction noise prohibited at all hours. Except as hereinafter-provided, at no time shall construction noise be allowed to emanate: 
(1)  In violation of any regulations of the United States Environmental Protection Agency; or 
(2)  From any equipment, machinery, construction tools or power equipment from which any sound control devices required by any federal or state law or regulation have been removed or tamper with. 
(d)  Construction noise prohibited during certain hours. Except as hereinafter-provided, all construction noise which is plainly audible beyond the property line of the parcel upon which the construction activity is taking place is hereby prohibited as follows: 
No construction noise shall be permitted where plainly audible at any point in or on any property lying outside the property boundaries of the parcel upon which the construction activities are taking place during the following hours: 
(1)  Monday through Friday: Before 7:00 a.m. and after 7:00 p.m. 
(2)  Saturdays and legal holidays: Before 8:00 a.m. and after 6:00 p.m. 
(3)  Sundays: All day (i.e. from 12:01 a.m. to 12:00 midnight) 
(Ord. No. 013-03, 5-5-03) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 013-03, adopted May 5, 2003, amended the Code with the addition of new sections 42-84 and 42-85. In order to avoid duplication of section numbers, the provisions of said ordinance have been included herein as sections 42-85 and 42-86 at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 42-86. - Exceptions, emergencies, exemptions, and special waivers. 
(a)  Exceptions. The following activities shall be excepted from the provisions of this division: 
(1)  Safety signals. Noise of safety signals and warning devices. 
(2)  Authorized emergency vehicles. Noises resulting from any authorized vehicle, when responding Lo an emergency. 
(3)  Municipal services. Noises resulting from the provision of municipal services. 
(4)  Temporary activities. Any noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration permitted by law for which a waiver has been granted by the town manager or town code enforcement official under paragraph (c) hereafter. 
(5)  Certain unamplified human voices. The unamplified human voice and unamplified crowd noises resulting from activities such as those supervised or sponsored by day care centers, schools, government bodies, community groups, athletic leagues, and the like. 
(6)  Parades. Parades and public gatherings for which a permit has been issued by the town. 
(7)  Religious chimes, bells, carillons. Bells, chimes, and carillons being used for religious purposes or in conjunction with religious services or for national celebrations or public holidays. 
(8)  Sanctioned events. Noise resulting from town-sanctioned events in public parks or public spaces, and activities of federal, state, and local government agencies. 
(9)  Lawn maintenance equipment. Noise resulting from the operation of lawn maintenance equipment after 7:00 a.m. and before 9:00 p.m., so long as such equipment is functioning within manufacturers' specifications and with all mufflers and noise-reducing equipment in use and in proper operating condition. 
(10)  Amplified announcements. Electronically amplified announcements at athletic events, parades, and public gatherings for which a permit has been issued by the town. 
(11)  Small power tools operated by owner(s)/occupant(s) on small residential projects. The operation of small power tools (e.g. electrically-powered saws, drills, sanders, nailers) by the owner(s) or occupant(s) of residential properties for repairs, alterations, or additions to those properties, so long as: 
a.  Not more than two persons are involved in the project; 
b.  Such tools are not operated before 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. Mondays through Saturdays, or before 10:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. on Sundays; and 
c.  The power tools are functioning within manufacturers' specifications and with all mufflers and noise-reducing equipment in use and in proper operating condition. 
(b)  Emergencies. The following emergency conditions shall be exempt from the provisions of division 4: 
(1)  In case of urgent necessity to make repairs or take corrective action, in the interest of public health and safety, to protect buildings, structures, and property (real or personal) from threat of imminent harm, and then only with a permit from the building inspector, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three days while the emergency continues and which permit may be renewed for periods of up to three (3) days while the emergency continues. 
(2)  Emergency repairs and service (as determined by the town manger or chief of police) to municipal utilities, public works and rights-of-way, or educational and health care facilities where the public health, safety or welfare may be otherwise impaired. 
(c)  Special waivers. A special waiver may be granted as follows: 
(1)  Authority. The building inspector shall have the authority, consistent with this subsection, to grant special waivers. 
(2)  Application. Any person seeking a special waiver pursuant to this subparagraph shall file a written application with the building inspector. The written application shall contain information demonstrating that bringing the sound for which the special waiver is sought into compliance with this Division would constitute an unreasonable hardship. 
(3)  Issuance or denial. In determining whether to grant or deny the application, the building inspector shall balance the hardships caused by not granting the special waiver against the impact of granting the special waiver on the public health, safety and welfare, and on the peace and tranquility of other persons who will be affected by the granting of the special waiver. 
(4)  Special waivers. Special waivers shall be granted in writing to the applicant and may include conditions deemed appropriate by the building inspector, including time limits on the permitted activity. A special waiver shall not become effective until all stated conditions have been agreed to in writing by the applicant. Noncompliance with any condition of the special waiver may result in revocation of the special permit by the building inspector and/or the imposition of penalties for violations of this division. 
(5)  Appeals. The building inspector's decision to issue, deny, or revoke a special waiver may be appealed to the town manager by any person aggrieved. 
(6)  Guidelines. The town manager or town council may issue guidelines further defining the procedures to be followed in applying for, or appealing the grant or denial of special waivers, and/or the criteria to be considered in deciding whether to grant special waivers. 
(d)  Exemption for time to comply. Upon good cause shown by the owner or party responsible for any noise source, the town manager shall have the power to grant an exemption from the requirements of this division in order to allow sufficient time for installation of necessary sound control equipment, facilities or modifications to achieve compliance, not to exceed five days, provided such exemption may be renewed as necessary, but only if satisfactory progress toward compliance is shown. A request for exemption shall be filed in writing with the town manager on forms provided by the town. 
(Ord. No. 013-03, § 2, 5-5-03) 
Editor's note- See Editor's note following section 42-85. 
Secs. 42-87-42-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Civil emergencies, ch. 22. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-106. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Place of business means the lands and premises of the owner of any property within the town limits or the lessees of any property within the town limits, which lands and premises are used by the owner or lessees as a place of business for which general invitation to the public is granted either express or implied. 
    Public place means parks, playgrounds, school yards, governmental building yards, vacant lots, municipal parking lots, and parking lots open to the public, such as parking lots of supermarkets, restaurants, movie theaters and other places of public accommodation. 
    Public streets, highways, and alleys includes all streets, sidewalks and private ways open to public use. 
(b)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person, in or upon the public streets, highways, alleys or any other public place, or in or upon a place of business, to: 
(1)  Cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl, quarrel, tumultuous or threatening behavior. 
(2)  Use abusive, obscene, threatening or profane language in a loud tone of voice, directly tending to cause a breach of the peace by provoking the person addressed to acts of violence, or making an unreasonable noise or offensively coarse utterance, gesture or display, or addressing abusive language to any person present. 
(3)  Be intoxicated so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another or cause a public disturbance. 
(4)  Drink or tender to another person to drink any beer, wine or other intoxicating liquors, except as permitted by law on any premises licensed by the state alcoholic beverage control commission for on-premises consumption. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of the criminal violation "disorderly conduct and creating a nuisance" and, upon conviction, be subject to criminal penalties as provided under section 1-11 of this Code." 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 44, §§ 1-3; Ord. of 8-5-02(1), § 13) 
Sec. 42-107. - Disorderly dwelling units. 
(a)  Findings. The town council has determined that: 
(1)  At various times, the occupants or users of some dwelling units in the town use those dwelling units for the purpose of engaging in disorderly and disruptive conduct, loud and disturbing noises, public intoxication and other violent and tumultuous behavior. The town council has also determined that a number of persons in legal possession of dwelling units in the town are engaging in the practice of allowing such dwelling units, designed for occupancy by essentially single families, to be occupied or used by groups of persons, frequently, but not necessarily, comprised of minors with insufficient adult supervision. The town council has further determined that these practices encourage incidents of disorderly conduct, loud and disturbing noises, public intoxication, violent and tumultuous behavior, disturbing the peace and other similar acts which are detrimental to the public health, safety, peace and welfare of the town. 
(2)  The persons entitled to lawful possession of such premises who fail to take appropriate measures to prevent recurrences of such incidents after due notice of previous disturbances by persons occupying or using the premises must be held responsible for allowing such conduct to occur on those premises. 
(b)  Purpose. It is, therefore, declared to be the purpose and intent of this section to prohibit the use of dwelling units in the town for disorderly and other disruptive conduct by imposing civil penalties not only upon the occupants and/or users of such premises but also by imposing civil penalties on those persons in possession of any premises in the town who, after notice of a previous conviction for conduct proscribed by this section, fail to take appropriate actions to prevent a subsequent violation. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dwelling unit shall include not only the structure itself but also the lands and ways, if any, under control of the person in lawful possession. 
    Dwelling unit used for disorderly or other disruptive conduct means any dwelling unit, attached or detached, or any apartment or commercial lodging room located within the town, the occupants, users or persons in lawful possession of which engage in any of the conduct proscribed by subsection (d) of this section. 
    Occupant and/or user means any person occupying or present on a premises. 
    Person in lawful possession means any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation, or any combination thereof, having legal possession of any premises in the town. The term shall mean the owner in fee or of a life estate if the property is not under lease, or the ultimate lessee or sublessee if the property is under lease. 
    Premises means a dwelling unit, apartment or commercial lodging room, together with the lands and ways, if any, under the control of the person in possession. 
(d)  Unlawful acts by occupants and/or users. Any person occupying or present on a premises who by himself or in concert with other occupants and/or users causes public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm to any other person or persons or who creates an unreasonable risk thereof by engaging in or causing any of the following conduct shall be violating this section: 
(1)  Engaging in fighting or in violent, tumultuous or threatening behavior. 
(2)  Making, creating or permitting any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise or making, creating or permitting any noise of such character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the life, health and welfare of any person or which disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, peace or safety of any individual. By way of example and not in limitation, the following shall be deemed to be unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises: 
a.  Playing any radio, phonograph, tapedeck or musical instrument in such a manner or at such a volume, particularly between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person in any other dwelling unit, apartment or commercial lodging room. 
b.  The blowing of any horn, whistle or signal device, except as a danger signal, for an unreasonable and unnecessary period of time. 
c.  Yelling, shouting or singing at such volume as to be plainly and disturbingly audible to the human ear outside the premises. 
(3)  Making any offensive, coarse, obscene or profane utterance, gesture or display to another person or persons in such a manner as is likely to provoke a violent or disorderly response. 
(4)  Obstructing or hindering the free and convenient passage of persons walking, riding or driving over, along or across any public way, sidewalk, pavement, street or alley, including the boardwalk. 
(5)  Engaging in any act of indecent exposure or public display of an obscene act or gesture. 
(6)  Urinating in public view. 
(e)  Unlawful acts by persons entitled to lawful possession. Any person entitled to lawful possession who, after notice as herein provided, allows, permits or fails to take affirmative action to prevent repeated violations of this section shall be deemed to be promoting the use of a dwelling unit for disorderly or other disruptive conduct in violation of this section. A person in lawful possession shall be presumed to have allowed, permitted or failed to take affirmative action to prevent repeated violations of this section where a violation of subsection (d) of this section occurs after such person entitled to lawful possession has, within the past three months, previously been provided actual notice by the police department of a previous conviction for conduct proscribed by such subsection (d). Actual notice, as used in this subsection, shall mean verbal or written notice to one or more of the persons entitled to legal possession. If written notice is attempted, it shall be deemed effective by mailing a written notice thereof to the person entitled to lawful possession at his last known mailing address by certified mail, return receipt requested, with proper postage affixed. If such notice comes back undelivered (except refused), the town shall exercise reasonable efforts to provide actual notice by some other means. 
(f)  Penalties. Any occupant and/or user found guilty of violating subsection (d) of this section or any person entitled to lawful possession found guilty of violating subsection (e) of this section shall be guilty of criminal violation and shall be subject to criminal penalties as provided under Section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 8-5-02(1), § 14) 
Sec. 42-108. - Night prowling. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Night means between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:30 a.m. 
    Prowl means to move about stealthily, furtively or secretly. 
(b)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to prowl at night in the alleys, or on the rooftops of buildings, and such person shall be guilty of night prowling. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a criminal violation and, upon conviction, be subject to criminal penalties as provided under section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 42, §§ 1-3; Ord. of 8-5-02(1), § 15) 
Sec. 42-109. - Resisting arrest. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to resist arrest. 
(b)  A person is guilty of resisting arrest when he intentionally prevents or attempts to prevent a peace officer from effecting an arrest or detention of himself or another person or intentionally flees from a peace officer who is effecting an arrest. 
(c)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a criminal violation and, upon conviction, be subject to criminal penalties as provided under section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 62, § 1; Ord. of 8-5-02(1), § 16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 Del. C. § 1257. 
Secs. 42-110-42-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LOITERING[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Loitering, 11 Del. C. § 1321. 

Sec. 42-121. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this division shall be guilty of a criminal violation and, upon conviction, be subject to criminal penalties as provided under section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 12, § 3; Ord. of 8-5-02(1), § 17) 
Sec. 42-122. - Offense defined. 
    A person is guilty of loitering, which is hereby prohibited, when: 
(1)  He stands, sits idling or loiters upon any pavement, sidewalk or crosswalk, or stands or sits in a group, or congregates with others on any pavement, sidewalk, crosswalk, or doorstep, in any street or way open to the public in this town so as to obstruct or hinder the free and convenient passage of persons walking, riding, or driving over or along such pavement, walks, street, or way, and shall fail to make way, remove or pass, after reasonable request from any person. 
(2)  He loiters or remains in a school building, on the grounds of a school building or upon any pavement or sidewalk contiguous to the grounds of a school building, not having reason or relationship involving custody or responsibility for a pupil, employment in the school building, business with school personnel, or other authorized use of school facilities, unless he has written permission from the principal. 
(3)  He loiters, remains or wanders about in a public place under circumstances manifesting the purpose of begging. 
(4)  He loiters or remains in a public place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of engaging or soliciting another person to engage in sexual intercourse or deviate sexual intercourse. 
(5)  He loiters or prowls in a place, at a time, or in a manner not usual for law abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such alarm is warranted is the fact that the actor takes flight upon the appearance of a peace officer, refuses to identify himself or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the accused or other circumstances make it impracticable, a peace officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this subsection, afford the accused an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be warranted or to justify his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this division if the peace officer did not comply with the preceding sentence, or if a court of competent jurisdiction is convinced by a preponderance of the evidence that the explanation given by the accused was true and, if believed by the police officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm or justified his presence and conduct. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 12, §§ 1, 2) 
DIVISION 3. - SEX OFFENDER RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 42-123. - Sexual offenders; prohibitions from restricted zones. 
(a)  Any person who is a sexual offender and who: 
(1)  Resides within 1,000 feet of the property line of any school shall be in violation of the Town Code; 
(2)  Loiters on or within 1,000 feet of the property line of any school shall be in violation of the Town Code; 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  "1,000 feet" means a straight line from the outer property line of the residence of lodging of the sex offender to the nearest outer property line of the school. 
(2)  "Loiter" means: 
a.  Standing, sitting idly, whether or not the person is in a vehicle, or remaining in or around a school while not having reason or relationship involving custody of or responsibility for a pupil, minor child, or attendee or any other specific legitimate reason for being there; or 
b.  Standing, sitting idly, whether or not the person is in a vehicle, or remaining in or around a school for the purpose of engaging or soliciting another person to engage in sexual intercourse, sexual penetration, sexual contact, sexual harassment, sexual extortion, or indecent exposure. 
(3)  "Reside" means to dwell permanently or continuously or to occupy a dwelling or home as one's permanent or temporary place of abode. 
(4)  "School" means any preschool, kindergarten, elementary school, secondary school, vocational technical school or any other institution which has as its primary purpose the education or instruction of children less than 16 years of age. 
(5)  "Sexual offender" means any person who is a sex offender pursuant to 11 Del. C. § 1112(b)(4). 
(c)  The town shall notify any person who is in violation of this ordinance and the person shall have 60 days to comply with this ordinance. The person shall be deemed to have been notified of the violation when he or she has been personally delivered written notice by the Smyrna Police. If the person does not comply with this division within 60 days of notification, he or she will be in violation of this ordinance. Penalties for violation of this section shall be punishable by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days and or a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 for each offense. The town may elect to pursue civil remedies, including injunctive relief. 
(d)  It shall not be a defense to a prosecution for a violation of this section that the person was unaware that the prohibited conduct took place on or within the restricted zone. 
(e)  This division shall not apply to any sex offender who is registered with the state as a sex offender and who has established a residence and/or employment in a restricted area prior to the date of adoption of this division and shall not apply if a school is established subsequent to the establishment of the sex offender's residence and/or employment. 
(f)  The provisions of this division are severable. If any section, clause, sentence, part, or provision of this ordinance shall be determined to be illegal or invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not impair or affect the remaining terms, section, and clauses of this division. 
(Ord. No. 004-09, § 1, 8-3-09) 
Secs. 42-124-42-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Civil emergencies, ch. 22. 

Sec. 42-146. - Abandoned refrigerators. 
    No person shall endanger children by negligently abandoning or leaving unattended in any place accessible to children any refrigerator, icebox or similar airtight box or container which has a locking device inoperable from within, without first unhinging and removing the door or lid thereof or detaching the locking device from the door or lid. Nothing in this section prohibits the normal use of a refrigerator, icebox or freezer for the storage of food. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 31, § 1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 Del. C. § 1107. 
Secs. 42-147-42-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MINORS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 42-166-42-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CURFEW[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Civil emergencies, ch. 22. 

Secs. 42-176-42-195. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - WEAPONS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Civil emergencies, ch. 22. 

Sec. 42-196. - Firearms; discharge prohibited; defense; penalty. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Firearm means any weapon from which a shot, projectile or other object may be discharged by force of combustion, explosive, gas, compressed air, and/or mechanical means, whether operable or inoperable, loaded or unloaded. The term "firearm" includes a "BB gun." 
(b)  Discharge prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or to cause the discharge of any firearm within the town limits. 
(c)  Justification defenses. In any prosecution for a violation of this section, justification, as defined in 11 Del. C. §§ 462-471 (as those statutes may from time to time hereafter be amended, or any future corresponding statute, shall be available as a defense. 
(d)  Penalty. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a criminal violation and, upon conviction, be subject to criminal penalties as provided under section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 38, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 11-19-01, § 1; Ord. of 8-5-02(1), § 18) 
Sec. 42-197. - Possession of firearms, ammunition, components of firearms, or explosives in municipal buildings and police stations prohibited. 
(a)  Prohibition. Except as set forth in section (e) below, possession of firearms, ammunition, components of firearms, or explosives in municipal buildings and police stations is prohibited in all municipal buildings and police stations. 
(b)  Municipal building defined. For purposes of this section, "municipal buildings" are defined as any building where the town meets in its official capacity, or any building containing the offices of elected officials and of public employees actively engaged in performing governmental business, but excluding any parking facility. The definition of "municipal building" also includes any non-town owned or leased building where the town is meeting in or occupying such a building, but only during the time that the town is meeting in or occupying such a building. 
(c)  Required signs. In all municipal buildings and police stations, a conspicuous sign shall be posted at each entrance stating that the possession of firearms, ammunition, components of firearms, or explosives are prohibited. Such sign may but is not required to also state that persons in violation may be denied entrance to the building or be ordered to leave the building. 
(d)  Immediate departure. Any person who immediately foregoes entry or immediately exits any municipal building or police station due to the possession of a firearm, ammunition, components of firearms, or explosives shall not be guilty of violating this section. 
(e)  Exemptions. Nothing in this section 42-197 shall be deemed to prevent the following in municipal buildings or police stations: 
(1)  Possession of firearms, components of firearms, and ammunition or explosives by law enforcement officers; 
(2)  Law enforcement agencies receiving shipments or delivery of firearms, components of firearms, ammunition, or explosives; 
(3)  Law enforcement agencies conducting firearms safety and training programs; 
(4)  Law enforcement agencies conducting firearm or ammunition public safety programs, donation, amnesty, or any other similar programs in police stations or municipal buildings; 
(5)  Compliance by persons subject to protection from abuse court orders; 
(6)  Carrying firearms and ammunition by persons who hold a valid license pursuant to either § 1441 or § 1441A of Title 11 of the Delaware Code so long as the firearm remains concealed except for inadvertent display or for self defense or defense of others; 
(7)  Carrying firearms and ammunition by officers or employees of the United States duly authorized to carry a concealed firearm; or 
(8)  Carrying firearms and ammunition by agents, messengers and other employees of common carriers, banks, or business firms, whose duties require them to protect moneys, valuables and other property and are engaged in the lawful execution of such duties. 
(f)  Penalties. As necessary to protect public safety, any intentional violation of this section 42-197 by any person shall be subject to imprisonment for not more than 30 days for each offense or a fine of $100.00 for a first offense, $200.00 for a second offense, and $300.00 for a third or subsequent offense, or by both fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 018-15, § 1, 1-4-16) 
Chapter 46 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to acquire and hold recreational facilities, § 2(b)(3)(h). 
Cross reference- Amusements, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 38; solid waste, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; traffic and vehicles, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 70; zoning regulations, app. A; subdivision regulations, app. B. 
State Law reference- State parks, 7 Del. C. § 4701 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1-46-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - USE OF TOWN PARKS 

Sec. 46-26. - Softball fields. 
(a)  In order to reserve either or both softball fields, a permit must be obtained from the town and must be shown upon request. 
(b)  Any individual or group is entitled to use a softball field if that individual or group holds a valid permit from the town for the use of a designated softball field on the date and time specified in the permit. 
(c)  Persons or teams using softball fields without reservations must surrender same at once to anyone presenting an official permit. 
(d)  A reservation will not hold a softball field longer than 30 minutes past the time stated on the permit; at the end of the 30 minutes at least eight persons must be present and using the field under authority of the permit or the reservation will be void. 
(e)  Managers of teams using softball fields will be held responsible for the conduct of players. 
(f)  The permit is for use only by the persons, organizations or teams shown. Any violation of this permit will be just cause for revocation. 
(g)  Holders of permits for use of the softball fields shall be solely responsible for any damages to the premises caused by themselves or those people using the premises under authority of the permit or with the consent of the permit holder. The town will not be liable or responsible in any manner whatsoever for any damage to property or injury to persons upon the premises, and all persons using the premises under authority of the permit or with the consent of the permit holder assume the risk of any injuries to persons or property they may sustain while using the premises. The permittee will, by acceptance of the permit, accept the use of the premises in its condition as found and will agree to indemnify the town from any and all liability for injuries to persons or property arising out of the use of the premises by those authorized under the permit or those not authorized by the permit but nevertheless using the premises with the consent of the permit holder. 
(h)  By acceptance of this permit, it is understood and agreed by the permittee that it shall be solely responsible to clean up all debris left as a result of the permitted event and to use the provided dirt leveling dragging equipment to drag the field after each and every use. Failure to complete these items shall result in the charge of a park maintenance fee. The town manager is authorized to waive any charges for the use of lights if this section is complied with. The town manager or his designee shall be responsible to inspect and determine if such fee is assessable or if electric charges are to be waived. The permittee, organization and all participants shall be prohibited from obtaining future permits until such time as any assessed fees are paid-in-full. 
(i)  The town reserves the right to assess the permittee a charge for use of any equipment or lights associated with the use of the softball fields. These charges shall be determined by the town manager. 
(j)  An "application and permit form" as required by this section shall include these rules and shall be adopted by resolution of mayor and council. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 63, § 1; Ord. of 3-16-98(2), §§ 1-3) 
Sec. 46-27. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 014-18, § 1, adopted November 5, 2018, repealed § 46-27. Former § 46-27 pertained to tennis courts and derived from Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 63, § 2. 
Sec. 46-28. - Alcoholic beverages. 
    Beer or alcoholic beverages are not permitted on park premises. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 63, § 3(A)) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages generally, ch. 6. 
Sec. 46-29. - Motor vehicles. 
    No motor vehicles are allowed on park premises except in the designated parking lot area unless an exception to this rule is given by the town manager. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 63, § 3(B)) 
Sec. 46-30. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  George C. Wright Jr. Municipal Park's and Little Lass Park's normal hours are from 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. The town police department is responsible for locking the gate at closing time and unlocking at the scheduled opening time. 
(b)  Exception. Appropriate arrangements may be made through the town council for use of the facilities during times other than normal hours. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 63, § 4; Ord. No. 014-18, § 2, 11-5-18) 
Sec. 46-31. - Sanctions. 
    For violation of any of the rules set out in this article, the offending person may be barred from future use of the town's park facilities. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 63, § 5) 
Sec. 46-32. - Skateboard park rules and regulations. 
(a)  All persons desiring to enter in, upon, and/or use the town's skateboard park located at George C. Wright Jr. Municipal Park shall comply with the following rules and regulations: 
(1)  The skateboard park will be open from 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. No trespassing or skating shall be permitted when the skateboard park is closed. 
(2)  Only skateboards and inline skates shall be permitted in the skateboard park. Bicycles, scooters, coasters, and other wheeled equipment are prohibited. 
(3)  Use of the skateboard park and its facilities and equipment is unsupervised and is "at your own risk." 
(4)  Reserved. 
(5)  Reserved. 
(6)  Safety equipment. Skateboarders must wear a proper skateboarding helmet, kneepads, elbow pads, and shoes. Inline skaters must wear a proper helmet, knee pads, elbow pads, and wrist guards. 
(7)  Proper skater etiquette is required at all times. No pushing, rough housing, or jumping in line shall be permitted. 
(8)  No glass is permitted in the skateboard park. 
(9)  No alcohol or drugs are permitted on the skateboard park property. 
(10)  Tobacco products are not permitted in the skateboard park. 
(11)  All trash and refuse shall be deposited in trash receptacles provided for that purpose. 
(12)  No vandalism or defacing of skateboard park property or equipment shall be tolerated. Violators are subject to arrest. 
(13)  Personal property is the responsibility of the skater. 
(14)  No motorized skateboards or motorized inline skates shall be permitted in the skateboard park. 
(15)  No personal music devices shall be permitted in the skateboard park. 
(16)  Profanity, recklessness, fighting, and/or boisterous behavior are prohibited. 
(17)  Spectators are not permitted to enter into the park unless registered and wearing safety equipment. Spectators are welcome in the designated viewing area adjacent to the skateboard park. 
(18)  Any infraction of the foregoing rules and regulations may result in the suspension or loss of user privileges. 
(b)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Coaster shall have the same meaning as "scooter." 
(2)  Inline skates: A pair of shoes, or a device designed to be mounted upon or attached to a pair of shoes, with wheels affixed to the undersides, designed to be ridden by a person most often in an upright standing or crouching position. 
(3)  Legal guardians: Those individuals who have been given the legal authority to make decisions on behalf of a minor. Friends of the family, non-parent relatives, etc. who are in temporary custody of a minor may not claim legal guardianship. In the event a parent or legal guardian is unable to accompany the minor at the time of registration, the town will accept a notarized signature on the registration form. 
(4)  Roller skates shall have the same meaning as "inline skates." 
(5)  Scooter: A footboard of any material with wheels affixed to the underside controlled by an upright steering handle designed or intended to be ridden by a person who usually stands on the device while it is in motion. 
(6)  Skateboard: A footboard of any material with wheels affixed to the underside designed or intended to be ridden by a person who sometimes stands, sits, kneels, or lies on the device while it is in motion. 
(Ord. No. 022-03, §§ 1, 2, 7-21-03; Ord. No. 014-18, § 3, 11-5-18) 
Secs. 46-33-46-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LAKE COMO 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-56. - State laws in effect. 
    The state laws and regulations pertaining to inland waters shall be in effect and shall govern the use of Lake Como regarding swimming, boating and fishing. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 46, § 1) 
Sec. 46-57. - Swimming. 
(a)  Area limits. Use of Lake Como for swimming is confined to the beach area designated for that purpose and is located just west of the extreme south end of Main Street. It shall be unlawful for any person to go outside the designated, roped area for the purpose of swimming or bathing. 
(b)  Swimming "at your own risk" shall be permitted within the designated, roped area located adjacent to the public beach between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. seven days a week. The town shall install and maintain signs at the entrance to the public beach area and at least two other places at the public beach area which prominently announce "WARNING! SWIM AT YOUR OWN RISK - NO LIFEGUARD ON DUTY - Children Under the age of 14 must be accompanied by an adult". 
(c)  Any person observed by a town police officer or town employee to be creating a public nuisance or threatening the safety or peaceful enjoyment of other persons at the public beach area or the roped swimming area shall be in violation of this section and may be ordered to leave the roped swimming area and beach area and prohibited from re-entering those areas for up to ten days. Any person violating such an order may be taken into custody and, upon conviction, fined up to $100.00. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 46, § 2; Ord. No. 013-10, §§ 1, 2, 4, 6-7-10) 
Sec. 46-58. - Boating. 
(a)  Permit required. Before any person shall operate any boat upon Lake Como, he shall obtain a permit for each boat from the police department. Thereafter, the owner of the boat shall be responsible for the operation of the boat on Lake Como and shall be responsible for the compliance with any requirements whether or not the owner is the operator. Each permit shall be good for one calendar year-January 1 through December 31. 
(b)  Permit fee. For each permit issued pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, the town office shall collect the following: 
(1)  Resident ..... $ 4.00 
(2)  Nonresident ..... 10.00 
Note: This fee is nonrefundable. 
(c)  Outboard motors. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an outboard motor boat in excess of "no wake speed" which shall mean as slow as possible without losing steerageway and so as to make the least possible wake. This will almost always mean speeds of less than five miles per hour. 
(d)  Lifesaving equipment. As required by Title 23 of the Delaware Code Annotated. 
(e)  Age of operators. No person under 16 years of age will be permitted to operate a gasoline powered driven boat unless accompanied by a person at least 16 years of age. 
(f)  Water skiing. Water skiing is not permissible at any time. 
(g)  Hours of operation. Hours of operation for all boats shall be limited to daylight hours. 
(h)  Speed limit of boats. Power boats shall be operated on Lake Como at "no wake speed" which shall mean as slow as possible without losing steerageway and so as to make the least possible wake. This will almost always mean speeds of less than five miles per hour. 
(i)  Direction of boats. As required by Title 23 of the Delaware Code Annotated. 
(j)  Overtaking, passing or meeting another boat. As required by Title 23 of the Delaware Code Annotated. 
(k)  Operating distance from shore. Power boats shall not come any closer to the north shore than 50 feet unless entering or leaving the lake. 
(l)  Right-of-way of boats not mechanically propelled. Sailboats, rowboats, canoes and other boats not mechanically propelled shall have the right-of-way over those which are mechanically propelled and shall at all times be cleared by boats operating under power by a minimum of 50 feet. 
(m)  Operating boat in swimming areas. At no time shall any boat be operated within any designated swimming area. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 46, § 3; Ord. of 7-7-97, §§ 1-5) 
Sec. 46-59. - Copy of article's restrictions to be furnished to boat permit applicant. 
    A copy of the restrictions of this article shall be provided at the time of the issuance of a boating permit. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 46, § 6) 
Sec. 46-60. - Responsibility and liability. 
    All boat owners will be responsible for any damage or injury caused through the operation of their boat. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 46, § 4) 
Sec. 46-61. - Pets and other animals. 
    Between April 15 and October 15 of each year, it shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly take, lead, permit or allow any pet or animal in their possession or under their ownership or control, in, on or upon the Lake Como public bathing beach or swimming area. In addition to any other enforcement provisions provided by this article, it shall be lawful for the town police, town lifeguards or any other person duly authorized by the town to impound any such animal found in, on or upon the Lake Como bathing beach and swimming area in violation of this section. The town shall notify the owner of any such impounded animal, if known, and post notice of such impounding at the police station, within 24 hours of such impoundment. If not reclaimed within six days of the posting of such notice of impoundment, the animal may be destroyed. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 46, § 5) 
Cross reference- Animals generally, ch. 14. 
Sec. 46-62. - Exemptions. 
    The town council may, by resolution, exempt Citizens Hose Company No. 1, Incorporated, from any or all of the provisions of this division and subject to such terms and conditions as may be expressed in the resolution, where that corporation desires to make use of Lake Como for training exercises for rescue operations, dragging operations and similar activities. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 46, § 8) 
Secs. 46-63-46-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LOWERING OF WATERS 

Sec. 46-76. - Schedule. 
    The town shall open the floodgates of the Lake Como dam to lower the waters of Lake Como to allow inspection, maintenance, construction, cleanup and other similar work by owners of property on Lake Como not more than once every five years commencing November 1, 1995. Absent written requests for a longer period of time, duly approved by resolution of the town council, the duration of such lowering shall be for 30 consecutive days. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 69, § 1) 
Sec. 46-77. - Notice. 
    The town shall give advance notice of the lowering of Lake Como's waters as follows: 
(1)  Posting. Notice of the proposed lowering shall be posted at the town hall and at the entrance to the public bathing beach at least 90 days in advance. 
(2)  Publication. The town shall publish notice in the newspaper of general circulation in the town at least once a month for two consecutive months prior to the lowering of the lake's waters. 
(3)  Mailing. Written notice shall be mailed to the last known address, according to the town's records, of each property owner in the town owning lands abutting the waters of Lake Como and/or Ransoms Cove. 
(4)  Failure to give notice. The foregoing provisions regarding the giving of advance notice of the lowering of Lake Como's water shall be deemed to be a gratuitous courtesy for the convenience of any interested persons and the town's compliance with or failure to comply with any or all of such notice provisions shall not create any rights in any such persons, nor a cause of action against the town, or otherwise compel the town to lower such waters or prevent the lowering of such waters in accordance with the information set forth in such notices. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 69, § 2) 
Sec. 46-78. - Interim lowering. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, the town council may, at any time and from time to time, with or without advance public notice, lower the waters of Lake Como for emergency reasons or for purposes of inspecting, maintaining, repairing, replacing, constructing, removing or cleaning the dam and/or spillway, the public bathing area, the lake bed or any structure or facility owned by the town, the county, the state or any public utility providing service in or near the town. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 69, § 3) 
Chapter 47 - OUTDOOR SMOKING REGULATIONS 

Sec. 47-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    "Smoking" means the burning of a lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe or any other matter or substance that contains tobacco. 
(Ord. No. 003-11, 7-5-11) 
Sec. 47-2. - Prohibited smoking locations. 
(a)  Playgrounds. Smoking is prohibited at, and within a 25-foot radius of the perimeter of, all children's playground areas and play equipment open to the public including, but not limited to, the playground areas at George C. Wright Jr. Municipal Park, Green Meadows Park, and Sunnyside Park. 
(b)  Public parks. Smoking is prohibited at, and within a 25-foot radius of the perimeter of, the skateboard park and the Veteran's Memorial and gazebo at George C. Wright Jr. Municipal Park. 
(c)  Lake Como. Smoking is prohibited at the Lake Como beach areas lying between the security fence and gate to a point 25 feet from the shore line abutting such areas. 
(d)  Public entrances at town-owned facilities. Smoking is prohibited within a 25-foot radius from the center point of any entrance to any town-owned facility including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Town Hall entrances located on Cummins Street and the Market Street Plaza; 
(2)  All entrances to the library; 
(3)  The police department entrance located on Glenwood Avenue; 
(4)  The public works department building entrance located on Artisan Drive; and 
(5)  The Boys and Girls Club main entrance located on East Commerce Street. 
(e)  Private entrances at town-owned facilities. Smoking is prohibited within a 20-foot radius from the center point of any entrance to a town-owned facility that is used exclusively for employees to enter the building or facility, including pedestrian, garage, storage, and service bay doors. 
(f)  Additional locations. The town council may periodically amend this chapter to prohibit smoking at additional public places as needed to further the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 003-11, 7-5-11; Ord. No. 014-18, § 4, 11-5-18) 
Sec. 47-3. - Signage required. 
    No person shall be prosecuted for violation of this chapter unless signs, readily visible to the public, are posted in appropriate places at the entrances to those areas where smoking is prohibited, which signs shall indicate that violations are subject to penalties. 
(Ord. No. 003-11, 7-5-11) 
Sec. 47-4. - Penalties. 
    Any person observed violating this chapter who has not been issued a written warning or citation hereunder within the preceding four months shall be issued a "written warning" by any town police officer or code official. Any person who has received a written warning within the previous four months and is observed violating this chapter shall be issued a citation for violating this offense. The penalty for a first citation shall be $25.00. Any person who has received a citation within the previous four months and is again observed violating this chapter shall be issued a citation for the subsequent violation of this chapter, which shall include a penalty of $50.00. 
(Ord. No. 003-11, 7-5-11) 
Chapter 49 - BUSINESS LICENSES 

Sec. 49-1. - Purpose. 
    The town council declares that it is necessary to issue business licenses and establish procedures governing the issuance of business licenses in order to identify owners/operators of businesses, track changes in ownership and/or business activity, define the nature of business activities, ensure an understanding of and compliance with town codes governing business operations, provide necessary approval, enforcement, and compliance procedures, and for other public purposes. 
(Ord. No. 019-15, § 1, 1-4-16) 
Sec. 49-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business means any person engaged in the sale of goods or services including, but not limited to, any retail, wholesale, service, rental, food service, professional or personal service or other general commercial activity. 
    Person means any individual, firm, corporation, company, partnership, or joint venture. 
(Ord. No. 019-15, § 1, 1-4-16) 
Sec. 49-3. - Business licenses required. 
(1)  Business licenses required. Commencing January 1, 2016, no person shall operate, maintain or otherwise be engaged in any business within the boundaries of the Town of Smyrna without having first received a business license issued by the town for the calendar year in which the business is operating. All businesses in existence within the boundaries of the town prior to January 1, 2016 shall obtain a business license prior to June 1, 2016, which license shall be valid for the year 2016. 
(2)  License period; renewals. Business licenses shall be issued for each calendar year and shall expire December 31 of the year for which the business license was issued, regardless of when during the calendar year the license was issued. Licenses shall be renewed on or before January 1 of each year. 
(3)  Display of business license. The business license shall be displayed in a public place within the establishment or, if applicable, worn or carried by the person providing the service in a manner that is visible at all times to the public. 
(4)  Good standing requirements. The town's good standing requirements and procedures outlined in Chapter 1 ("General Provisions"), section 1-14 ("Good Standing Requirements") shall pertain to the issuance and renewal of business licenses for businesses seeking to operate in the town. 
(5)  Multiple business locations. Each separate location or branch of the same business requires a separate business license as though it were a separate business. 
(6)  Transferability. A business license may not be transferred from one party to another or from one location to another location of the same business. If the nature of the licensee's business activities substantially changes after the issuance of a business license, a new business license shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 019-15, § 1, 1-4-16) 
Sec. 49-4. - Business license application. 
    Every application for a business license submitted to the town shall be in writing, verified by oath or affirmation and signed by the applicant(s), and shall include the following information: 
(1)  Company/business name; 
(2)  Phone number and street address of business (physical location, not post office box); 
(3)  The name, title, phone number(s) (home and cellphone), and ;p0;address(es) of the owner(s); 
(4)  Name, cell phone number, and email address of the authorized manager or representative; 
(5)  Federal Employer ID# or owner's Social Security number; 
(6)  The trade, business or occupation for which the license is being requested; 
(7)  Number of regular full time and part time or seasonal employees; 
(8)  A copy of any business licenses issued by the State of Delaware and/or any other approvals issued by the Division of Revenue or another governmental or quasi-governmental agency (i.e. ABCC, Administrative Services, Banking Commissioner, Insurance Commissioner, PSC, DNREC, EPA, IRS, etc.). Possession of any such license or approval shall not exempt a person from obtaining a Town of Smyrna business license; and 
(9)  A statement that the business has complied with and will continue to comply with all codes and ordinances of the town. 
    After reviewing the business license application, the town manager may request such other information as is necessary to answer any questions raised by the application regarding the operation of the business. The town manager shall prescribe the form of the license certificate and shall keep full and complete records of all licenses issued, the expiration dates, and the license fees collected. 
(Ord. No. 019-15, § 1, 1-4-16) 
Sec. 49-5. - Business license application review. 
    The town manager or his/her representative shall investigate and review all applications for a license to do business within the town to determine whether the applicant is aware of and demonstrates a willingness to comply with all codes and ordinances of the town that relate to the business's operation, and agrees to avoid all forbidden, improper or other practices or conditions which do or could adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 019-15, § 1, 1-4-16) 
Sec. 49-6. - Business license fees; delinquencies. 
    The fee for a business license shall be set by the town manager each year as part of the town fee schedule. The business license fee for any new business applying for a business license after July 1 shall be prorated. No refund shall be given for any business that ceases to operate during the licensing period. In the event that an existing business has not applied for and paid the business license fee on or before the first day of January, a penalty of ten percent (10%) shall be assessed for each month or portion thereof that the license fee remains unpaid. Once penalties have begun to be assessed under section 49-10, however, no additional penalties shall continue to be assessed under this section. 
(Ord. No. 019-15, § 1, 1-4-16) 
Sec. 49-7. - Code compliance; zoning certificate. 
    A business operating in the town shall at all times be in compliance with all town codes and ordinances. Any business not in existence in the town as of January 1, 2016 shall not be issued its initial business license and shall not initiate its business activities until it has obtained a certificate of zoning compliance ascertaining the permissibility of the proposed business use in the location where such activity is to take place. 
(Ord. No. 019-15, § 1, 1-4-16) 
Sec. 49-8. - Exemptions. 
    Anything in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, the following activities are exempt from the business licensing requirement outlined herein: 
(1)  Deliveries of goods or property to a licensed business for use or resale in that business. 
(2)  Utility companies otherwise authorized by the town to operate within the town limits. 
(3)  Charitable, religious, educational, or public service facility, social association or club, or governmental agency except to the extent that such operate a separate retail facility, provided that any third parties operating on behalf of any such entities shall not be exempted from obtaining a business license. 
(4)  Exhibitor in a museum, the Smyrna Library, the Smyrna Opera House, an educational facility, or other public building where such exhibition is part of a limited scheduled event or show. 
(5)  Yard or garage sales, book sales, and auctions where not part of a regularly recurring or continuous business activity. 
(6)  Sale of agricultural or nursery items grown on the premises of the property owner. 
(7)  Any activities permitted pursuant to a current peddler's license or otherwise exempt from obtaining a peddler's license as outlined in Chapter 50, Peddlers and Solicitors. 
(8)  Construction activities for which a license is required and has been secured in accordance with Chapter 18 ("Buildings and Building Regulations"), Article XIX ("Licensing"), Division 1 ("License Required for Building Contractors"). 
(9)  Business activities of insurance agents and companies specifically exempted from municipal business license fees under 18 Del. C. § 712. 
(10)  Rental activities for which a rental license has been obtained pursuant to Article XI ("Rental Properties"). 
(11)  Mobile food vendors obtaining a license pursuant to Chapter 51 ("Mobile Food Vendors"). 
(Ord. No. 019-15, § 1, 1-4-16; Ord. No. 006-16, § 3, 10-3-16) 
Sec. 49-9. - Inspection by town officials. 
    The town manager and/or his designee shall have the authority to make or have made all inspections and investigations reasonably necessary to enforce this chapter and to inspect those portions of the commercial premises that are open and visible to the public in order to ensure that the business is being conducted as specified by the license and is in compliance with all applicable building, safety, zoning, and other town codes. All persons authorized by this chapter to inspect businesses shall have the authority to enter the premises to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. No. 019-15, § 1, 1-4-16) 
Sec. 49-10. - Suspension of business license; penalties. 
(1)  Suspension of business license. The town manager may order a business to cease operations in the town and suspend its business license (if a business license has been obtained) for any of the following reasons: 
(a)  The business is found to be operating in violation of the terms of this chapter. 
(b)  The business is more than 60 days late in renewing its business license. 
(c)  The business is in violation of any regulations of the Smyrna Town Code or the laws of Delaware. 
(d)  The fire marshall or any public safety authority having jurisdiction has requested that the business activities cease until certain conditions have been remedied. 
The town shall provide the business with written notice of the violation(s), which notice shall state that the business shall be ordered to cease operations and its business license (if applicable) shall be suspended without further notice if within ten business days of the date of the notice the business fails to remedy the violations or file an appeal with the town council. The written notice shall be either personally delivered or sent via certified mail, return receipt requested, to the business. If the business does not remedy the violations or appeal the determination of the town manager within the prescribed time period, the business shall not be permitted to operate in the town until such violations have been remedied. Notwithstanding the foregoing, notice shall not be required to order a business to cease operations in any emergency situation that causes an immediate threat to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public. 
(2)  Penalties. Any business that does not remedy the violations within the prescribed time period shall be assessed a penalty of $100.00 as of the date the notice of violation was delivered to the business. Each day thereafter that the violation is not remedied shall be considered a new violation subject to a new penalty, provided that no additional notices of violation shall be required. Notwithstanding the forgoing, no penalties shall be assessed if (i) the business remedies the violation(s) within ten business days of the date the notice of violation was delivered to the business or (ii) the business files an appeal with the town council that is resolved in favor of the business. The amount of any unpaid penalty, including the unpaid business license fee, shall constitute a debt owed to the town, and the town may institute a civil suit or use any other lawful methods authorized by the Town Charter or the laws of Delaware to recover any unpaid fee. 
(Ord. No. 019-15, § 1, 1-4-16) 
Sec. 49-11. - Appeals procedures. 
    The town council shall provide any business appealing a determination of the town manager with 15 business days' written notice of the date, time, and place at which the town council shall sit to hear the business's appeal. Such written notice shall be sent via certified mail, return receipt requested, and the hearing may be held as part of a regularly scheduled town council meeting. The filing of an appeal shall stay any enforcement action by the town to compel the business to cease operations, and the business shall be permitted to continue to operate until a final decision is rendered by the town council. If the town council finds against the business, the business shall have five business days after the decision of the town council to remedy the violations before the town takes legal action to compel the business to cease operations. The accrual of daily violations and corresponding penalties shall not be stayed if an appeal is filed, but no penalties shall be assessed if the town council finds in favor of the business. If the town council finds against the business, the town council may waive a portion or all of the accrued penalties if (a) the violations are remedied within five business days following the decision of the town council and (b) the town council finds the appeal was filed by the business in good faith. 
(Ord. No. 019-15, § 1, 1-4-16) 
Chapter 50 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS 

Sec. 50-1. - Definition. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Peddler means any individual, whether a resident of this town or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automobile, truck, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, or in a generally fixed location on public property, for the sale of, as well as the selling, offering for sale or exchange for a donation, or taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, or personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed at that time or in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries, or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale, or whether or not he is collecting advance payments on such sale. An individual's classification as a peddler under this definition shall be unaffected by the fact that the individual also, for himself or herself, or for another person, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building, structure, tent, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop, office or any other place within this town for the purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. The term "peddler" shall include the terms "canvasser," "solicitor," "transient or itinerant merchant or vendor," and "transient or itinerant photographer." Peddler shall not include wholesale sales representatives dealing with retail businesses within the town, individuals delivering previously ordered goods, ice cream trucks, or mobile food vendors as defined in chapter 51. 
    Public property means any parcel of land or any street, sidewalk, alley, or right-of-way owned or controlled by the Town of Smyrna. 
    Roadway means any public street that has more than two main travel lanes or a speed limit of 25 miles per hour or greater. 
(Ord. No. 006-09, § 1, 2-1-10; Ord. No. 006-16, § 2, 10-3-16) 
Sec. 50-2. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Sheriffs, constables, bona fide assignees, receivers or trustees in bankruptcy or other public officers selling goods, wares and merchandise according to law; 
(2)  Individuals selling fruits or vegetables which were produced on land that is owned or controlled by the individual; 
(3)  An attempt to enlist support for or against a particular religion, political party, candidate, cause or issue; 
(4)  Solicitations, sales, or distributions made by a charitable organization recognized as tax exempt under the Internal Revenue Code, a religious organization recognized as such under the laws of the State of Delaware, or an organization authorized by any school within the Smyrna School District; 
(5)  Individuals leaving written information, including flyers, leaflets, and brochures, or other forms of advertising, for non-commercial purposes; and 
(6)  Individuals under 14 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 006-09, § 1, 2-1-10) 
Sec. 50-3. - Registration required. 
    All peddlers shall register with the code enforcement officer before engaging in any activities described in section 50-1. Such registration shall be made at least 24 hours, excluding weekends and holidays, prior to the date a peddler seeks to begin conducting activities described in section 50-1. 
(1)  Information required. Every person desiring to act as a peddler as defined in this chapter shall first register, under oath or affirmation, with the code enforcement officer. Upon such application, such person shall provide the following: 
a.  The applicant's name, age, and address; 
b.  A copy of a government-issued photo I.D.; 
c.  The applicant's previous criminal record, if any; 
d.  The name and address of the person for whom the applicant works and a letter appended to the application authorizing the applicant to represent the firm the applicant purports to represent, if any; 
e.  The type or types of article, device, subscription, contribution, service or contract which he/she desires to sell or for which he/she wishes to solicit within the town; 
f.  The type of vehicle the applicant uses, if any, and its registration number; 
g.  The name, address and title of a company officer upon whom process or other legal notice may be served, if the applicant is a corporation or company or is associated with a corporation or company; 
h.  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor within five years preceding the date of the application and the nature of the offense or violation (excluding traffic offenses); and 
i.  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has had a civil judgment for fraud, deceit, or misrepresentation entered against him or her within five years preceding the date of the application. 
Where an individual makes application for himself or herself and one or more additional individuals, all applicable personal information specified above shall be included for each prospective peddler who will be operating under the license. Only one license shall be issued per application, but separate identification badges shall be issued for each peddler. No license or identification badge issued under this chapter shall be transferable from one individual to another. No individual shall be permitted to operate as a peddler without a valid identification badge that has been issued pursuant to a valid license. 
(2)  Issuance of license. Upon registering with the town, the town shall have 24 hours, excluding weekends and holidays, to determine whether to issue a license. The town may refuse to issue a license and/or an identification badge for a specific applicant for the following reasons: 
a.  An applicant provided false information in the application; 
b.  An applicant or any prospective peddler under the applicant's license has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving a sex offense, trafficking in controlled substances, burglary, theft, or any violent acts against person or property, within five years preceding the application date; or 
c.  A civil judgment for fraud, deceit, or misrepresentation was entered against the applicant or any prospective peddler under the applicant's license within five years preceding the date of application. 
(3)  License duration and content. Each peddler operating under a license issued by the town shall be permitted to peddle within the town for the licensed period beginning on the date such license is issued. Such license shall not be transferable. Each license shall expire December 31 at 11:59 p.m. of the year in which it was issued, with the exception that any license issued in the month of December shall expire December 31 at 11:59 p.m. of the year following the year in which the license was issued. Each license issued shall contain the following: The permit number, the fee paid, the issue date, the expiration date, and the name, signature, and employer of each peddler who will be operating under the license. 
(4)  Identification badge content. Each peddler listed on a license shall be issued an identification badge, issued in card form, and containing the following information: The peddler license number, and the peddler's name, age, weight, address, employer, and signature. 
(5)  Display of identification badge. Every solicitor or peddler shall, at all times while engaged in peddling in the town, carry a town-issued identification badge upon his or her person and shall exhibit such evidence upon request to all police officers, town officials and citizens. 
(6)  Fees. No license shall be issued under this chapter except upon payment of a fee of $50.00, and the full fee shall be required irrespective of when during the year a license is issued. For each additional applicant listed on an application as a prospective peddler beyond the first applicant, an additional fee of $15.00 shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 006-09, § 1, 2-1-10) 
Sec. 50-4. - Entrance to premises restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any peddler to enter upon any private property when such property is included in the town's "no solicitation registry" or has a sign posted stating "no peddlers allowed" or "no solicitations allowed" or other words to such effect. 
(Ord. No. 006-09, § 1, 2-1-10) 
Sec. 50-5. - Refusing to leave premises. 
    Any peddler who enters upon premises owned, leased, or rented by another and refuses to leave such premises after having been notified by the owner or occupant of such premises, or his agent, to leave the same and not return to such premises shall be subject to penalty. 
(Ord. No. 006-09, § 1, 2-1-10) 
Sec. 50-6. - False or fraudulent statements. 
    It shall be unlawful for any peddler to make false or fraudulent statements concerning the goods, wares, merchandise or services for the purpose of inducing another to purchase the same. 
(Ord. No. 006-09, § 1, 2-1-10) 
Sec. 50-7. - Hours of operation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any peddler to engage in the business of peddling within the town between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m., except by specific appointment with or invitation from the prospective customer. 
(Ord. No. 006-09, § 1, 2-1-10) 
Sec. 50-8. - Peddling restrictions. 
(1)  Prohibited areas. No peddler shall solicit or do business of any nature whatsoever in the following areas: 
(a)  Public property in any commercial zone of the town as defined and described in appendix A ("zoning ordinance") to this Code pertaining to zoning and the zoning map of the town; 
(b)  Any location on private property except at the property's primary entrance. 
(c)  Private property located in any commercial zone as defined in this section without obtaining prior written approval of the private property owner; and 
(d)  Within 200 feet of any church or place of worship, or any place occupied exclusively as a public or private school or for school purposes. 
(2)  Prohibited activities. 
(a)  No peddler shall permit his/her cart, wagon or vehicle to stand on any public highway within 200 feet of any church or place of worship, or any place occupied exclusively as a public or private school or for school purposes. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person to stand or sit in a roadway, roadway median, or the shoulder of a roadway anywhere within the town to solicit money, or to distribute any material to the occupant of any motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 006-09, § 1, 2-1-10) 
Sec. 50-9. - Records; supervision of license holders. 
    The code official shall keep a record of all registrations made under this chapter, and the code official shall supervise the activities of all peddlers included in such licenses. 
(Ord. No. 006-09, § 1, 2-1-10) 
Sec. 50-10. - Revocation of license; hearing. 
(1)  Revocation of license. Any license issued hereunder may be revoked by the code enforcement officer upon the failure of any peddler operating under the license to comply with the standards of conduct established herein or upon ascertainment that any peddler operating under the license has made any false statements in the application for the license hereunder or upon any peddler operating under the license being arrested and convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving a sex offense, trafficking in controlled substances, burglary, theft, or any violent acts against persons or property after being issued a license or having a civil judgment for fraud, deceit, or misrepresentation entered against any peddler operating under the license. If a license is revoked, all peddlers operating under the license shall be prohibited from peddling in the town. 
(2)  Hearing. Any person who was denied a license or whose license has been revoked shall be entitled to appear, with counsel if desired, before the town council at a regular or special meeting and be heard on behalf of a request for issuance or reinstatement of said license. 
(Ord. No. 006-09, § 1, 2-1-10) 
Sec. 50-11. - No solicitation registry. 
(1)  Any resident or business of the town may place his/her/its address on the town's "no solicitation registry" by completing a form provided by the town. 
(2)  The "no solicitation registry" will be provided to peddlers upon their receiving a license. 
(Ord. No. 006-09, § 1, 2-1-10) 
Sec. 50-12. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a criminal violation and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00 and/or imprisonment for not more than ten days. 
(Ord. No. 006-09, § 1, 2-1-10) 
Chapters 51 - MOBILE FOOD VENDORS 

Sec. 51-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Mobile food vendor means a food establishment operated within a self-propelled vehicle or within a trailer, kiosk or cart (or something similar) that is pulled by a vehicle, where food or beverage is cooked, prepared and/or served in a ready-to-consume condition in individual portion sizes. Ice cream trucks are specifically exempted from this definition. 
    Public property means any parcel of land or any street, sidewalk, alley, parking lot, or right-of-way owned or controlled by the Town of Smyrna. 
(Ord. No. 006-16, § 1, 10-3-16) 
Sec. 51-2. - Licenses. 
(1)  Each operator of a mobile food vendor shall secure a license issued by the town authorizing the operation of their mobile food service business within the town for the licensed period beginning on the date such license is issued. Such license shall not be transferable. Each license shall expire one year after the date of issuance identified on the license. Each license issued shall be signed by an authorized representative of the mobile food vendor and shall contain the following: name of the mobile food vendor, the permit number, the fee paid, the issue date, the expiration date, and the name of each individual who will be operating under the license. The fee for a mobile food vendor license shall be $25.00. 
(2)  Prior to the town issuing a mobile food vendor license, the operator of the mobile food vendor shall provide the town with proof of insurance and such license, certificate, or other documentation from the State of Delaware evidencing that the mobile food vender has obtained all necessary approvals and inspections from the State of Delaware. Such evidence, along with the license issued by the town, shall at all times be prominently displayed in a publically visible location on the mobile food vendor. 
(Ord. No. 006-16, § 1, 10-3-16) 
Sec. 51-3. - Restrictions 
(1)  Location restrictions. Mobile food vendors shall be subject to the following restrictions. 
a.  No mobile food vendor shall be located within 50 feet of the primary entrance (e.g. front doors) of a restaurant, measured in a straight line from the mobile food vendor to the primary entrance of the restaurant, without the express written consent of the owner of the restaurant. 
b.  No mobile food vendor shall violate any building setback line or be located beneath any overhead utilities. 
c.  A mobile food vendor may be parked or otherwise situated on public property in conjunction with a public event when authorized by the Town of Smyrna pursuant to the public event procedures outlined herein. 
d.  A mobile food vendor may be parked or otherwise situated on public property as long as the mobile food vendor (and any associated vehicle) complies with all parking restrictions and motor vehicle laws. A mobile food vender shall not be situated on public property in such a way that it impedes the flow of traffic or makes it difficult for two cars to pass in opposite directions in the vicinity of the mobile food vendor. 
e.  A mobile food vendor shall not be parked on sidewalks but may serve food from a location on a street to customers standing on an abutting sidewalk. 
f.  Locations on public property where mobile food vendors may operate shall be available on a first come, first served basis. In the event two or more mobile food vendors are routinely seeking to park at the same public property location, the town may use a lottery system to determine a schedule for that particular location. 
(2)  Trash receptacles. All mobile food vendors shall have sufficient trash receptacles to accommodate the trash generated by their customers. 
(3)  Dining areas. Mobile food vendors may provide tables, chairs, benches, stools, and/or any other furniture for use as a dining area as long as such furniture is located within ten feet of the mobile food vendor and does not impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(4)  Self-contained. All mobile food vendors must be self-contained with all cooking equipment, fuel sources, electric power, or other facilities being part of the mobile food vendor unit. 
(5)  Public events. When participating in a public event sponsored or supported by the Town of Smyrna, mobile food vendors may be located on public property provided that mobile food vendors shall only operate at those locations and during those hours specifically designated by the town for mobile food vendors at the public event. For any such event, the town may place a limit on the number of mobile food vendors that are permitted to participate if, given the circumstances surrounding the event and the event's location, limiting the number of mobile food vendors is necessary to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the town or to promote a diversification of goods being sold at a particular event. If the town places a limit on the number of mobile food vendors permitted to participate in a public event, the town shall use a lottery system to determine which mobile food vendors may participate, and any mobile food vendor(s) not selected shall be given first priority at the next public event in which the mobile food vendor seeks to participate. If two or more mobile food vendors are not selected and seek priority status at the same subsequent public event, a lottery system shall again be used as outlined herein. 
(6)  Insurance requirements. Mobile food vendors shall provide the town with a certificate of a general liability insurance policy in the amount of at least $100,000.00 before a license will be issued to the mobile food vendor, which insurance shall be maintained for the duration of the license, including any subsequent license renewals. The insurance policy shall list the town as an additional insured and shall include a provision prohibiting the cancellation of the policy without prior advanced notice to the town. 
(7)  Hours of operation . Mobile food vendors shall not operate or be parked on public property overnight between one hour past dusk and one hour before dawn. When located on private property, mobile food vendors shall open no earlier and close no later than the opening and closing times of the principal business located on the property on which the mobile food vender is situated. When located on private property that does not have an associated principal business, the public property restrictions on operating hours shall apply. 
(8)  Signs . No more than three signs shall be attached to the mobile food vendor establishment, and the maximum aggregate display surface area of the signs shall not exceed 30 square feet. 
(9)  Lighting . Only self-contained lighting is allowed. High intensity lights or lighting that spills over from the site sufficient to cause glare, distract drivers, or obstruct vision is prohibited. 
(10)  Sales of non-food items . Items offered for sale must be primarily food-related. Selling merchandise unique to the mobile food vendor, such as clothing or other items containing the mobile food vendor's logo, is allowed as long as such activities are ancillary to the selling of food. 
(Ord. No. 006-16, § 1, 10-3-16) 
Sec. 51-4. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than $150.00 nor more than $500.00. Each day a violation continues shall be considered an additional violation under the ordinance, which shall be subject to additional penalties. 
(Ord. No. 006-16, § 1, 10-3-16) 
Chapter 54 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Amusements, ch. 10; animals, ch. 14; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 38; parks and recreation, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; taxation, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 70; vegetation, ch. 74. 
State Law reference- Garbage and refuse, 16 Del. C. § 1701 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 002-11, § 1, adopted April 18, 2011, repealed the former Arts. I, II §§ 54-1, 54-26-54-30, 54-41-54-49, and enacted a new Art. I as set out herein. The former Arts. I, II pertained to deposit of yard waste on streets, curbs, sidewalks or alleys; collection and disposal and derived from Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 27, §§ 1-6, Tit. 66, §§ 1-4; Ord. of 2-16-93(1), § 1; Ord. of 12-18-95, § 2; Ord. of 6-16-97(1), § 1; Ord. of 12-15-97(2), § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, §§ 1-7; Ord. No. 012-05, §§ 1-3, 3-7-05; Ord. No. 016-10, § 1, 12-6-10. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 54-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Any word not defined in this section shall have its common dictionary meaning. 
    Ashes means the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible materials that has been extinguished and contains no burning residue. 
    Bulk refuse means large items that exceed 40 pounds and/or do not fit inside an empty rigid container, including, but not limited to, refrigerators, washing machines, ovens, air conditioning units, mattresses, dressers, and couches. All non-collectible items are excluded from this definition. 
    Heavy duty plastic bag means a plastic or polyethylene bag not less than one and one-fourth mils thick having a tie or twist fastener and containing no more than 30 gallons or 50 pounds when filled, of sufficient strength to carry its contents without ripping or rupturing. 
    Non-collectible items means construction/demolition debris, building materials, and hazardous materials (including, but not limited to, herbicides, pesticides, tires, car parts, motor oil, paints, solvents, explosives, and liquefied petroleum gas bottles). 
    Non-organic refuse means all nonputrescible solid waste (excluding ashes, non-collectible items, yard waste, and bulk refuse, as defined herein) consisting of combustible and noncombustible wastes including, by way of example but not limitation, paper, excelsior, cardboard, metals, tin cans, dirt, stone, crockery, glass, plastic, and similar material commonly known and referred to as "trash" or "rubbish". 
    Nonputrescible means wastes not liable to decay or spoil or become putrid. 
    Organic refuse means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes, including, but not limited to, wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. Yard waste as defined herein is not included in this definition. 
    Person means any natural person, firm, partnership, corporation or unincorporated association. 
    Putrescible means waste liable to decay or spoil or become putrid. 
    Recyclables means fibers and containers including, but not limited to, the following: Narrow-neck plastic bottles (such as milk jugs, bleach-detergent containers, and shampoo bottles), glass bottles and jars, metal containers (such as aluminum, steel, and tin), plastic grocery bags, magazines, junk mail, envelopes, newspapers, corrugated cardboard, boxboard (cereal boxes), clean paper bags, catalogs, telephone books, soft cover books, colored paper, and white office paper. Any item with food residue (such as pizza boxes) is not considered a recyclable, and all liquid containers must first be emptied. 
    Rigid containers means metal, plastic, or vinyl receptacles of rigid construction and durability. 
    Yard waste means grass clippings, leaves, branches, twigs, tree limbs and prunings, flower cuttings, weeds, shrub and hedge clippings, sod, and garden waste (including but not limited to vines, plants, fruit/vegetables and vegetable matter). 
(Ord. No. 002-11, § 1, 4-18-11) 
Sec. 54-2. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before any court of competent jurisdiction, be subject to a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $25.00, plus costs. Citations may be issued for violations. This section shall be subject to the provisions of section 1-12, commonly known and referred to as the town mail-in fine ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 002-11, § 1, 4-18-11) 
Sec. 54-3. - Littering on public and private property prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful and a nuisance to throw, put, place or deposit any ashes, organic refuse, non-organic refuse, yard waste, bulk refuse, non-collectible items, recyclable, or other foreign substance 
(a)  Upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, avenue, street, lane, alley, bridge, park or other public place or upon any property owned by the town unless the same is properly containerized and placed in a location authorized by section 54-30(a); 
(b)  In, on, or in front of any lot in town where the same was collected or gathered from a different lot in town; or 
(c)  In, on, or in front of any private or public property where the same was collected or gathered from any place outside the town limits. 
(Ord. No. 002-11, § 1, 4-18-11) 
Sec. 54-4. - Public waste containers. 
    All public waste containers placed by the town along any of the avenues, streets, alleys or sidewalks of the town shall be used by the members of the general public as the place of disposal of waste paper and material accumulated by the members of the general public while using the public ways of the town. To this end, no person engaged in business, either as owner, manager, operator, employer, or another capacity, and no person residing in any dwelling, either as owner, tenant, employee or guest, shall dispose of or place any ashes, non-collectible items, non-organic refuse, organic refuse, recyclables or yard waste generated or accumulated by a business or residential dwelling in any public waste container of the town. 
(Ord. No. 002-11, § 1, 4-18-11) 
Secs. 54-5-54-25. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS, MULTIFAMILY DWELLINGS WITH FEWER THAN TEN UNITS UNDER ONE OWNERSHIP AT ONE LOCATION AND CERTAIN COMMERCIAL UNITS 

Sec. 54-26. - Applicability. 
(a)  Generally. The rules and regulations set out in this division shall govern the disposition and collection of ashes, recyclables, yard waste, organic refuse, bulk refuse, non-collectible items, and non-organic refuse in the town. 
(b)  Single-family, multifamily dwellings with fewer than ten units under one ownership and certain commercial units. The rules and regulations set out in this division shall govern and apply to all residential and commercial units qualifying to receive town trash and/or recycling collection services, which shall include the following qualifying units: single-family residential units (i.e. single-family dwellings, townhouse dwellings, duplexes, etc.), multifamily residential dwellings (i.e. apartments, condominiums, etc.) with fewer than ten units at one location, commercial units requesting just one 65-gallon trash container, and commercial units with limited space to store trash containers that request multiple 65-gallon trash containers. 
(c)  Other properties. Any other properties in the town that do not qualify to receive town collection services are required to arrange for private collection. Arrangements for private collection shall be subject to approval by the town manager as to location of pickup, hours, containers, screening of containers and frequency of pickup. Any contract or arrangements for private collection shall remain subject to revision by the town manager where, in his reasonable opinion, the terms thereof require modification in the public interest of the town. 
(Ord. No. 002-11, § 1, 4-18-11; Ord. No. 009-17, § 1, 11-20-17) 
Sec. 54-27. - Collection of organic refuse, non-organic refuse, and ashes. 
(a)  Generally. All qualifying single-family residential units shall be entitled to use one 65-gallon trash container. All qualifying multifamily residential dwellings and commercial units with limited storage space for trash containers may request multiple containers, but an separate fee for each additional container shall be assessed to the property owner or occupant. All trash and recycling containers shall be rigid containers as defined herein, and the town may require that residential and commercial units use standardized trash and recycling containers. The maximum size rigid container used for organic refuse, non-organic refuse, and ashes shall be 65-gallons and the filled weight shall not exceed 100 pounds. All organic refuse and ashes shall be placed inside rigid containers unless otherwise provided for herein. 
(b)  Non-organic refuse. Heavy duty plastic bags may be used for non-organic refuse as long as the heavy duty plastic bags are of sufficient strength to carry their contents without ripping or rupturing. 
(c)  Organic refuse and ashes. All organic refuse and ashes shall be wrapped in paper and/or deposited into plastic bags of sufficient strength to hold their contents without ripping or rupturing. Organic refuse and ashes so wrapped or placed into plastic bags shall then be deposited into a rigid container for collection. 
(d)  Non-collectible items. No person shall place non-collectible items in rigid containers, rigid containers used for recyclables, heavy duty plastic bags, or any other container used to dispose of items to be collected by the town collection contractor. 
(e)  Collection of bulk refuse. Bulk refuse not otherwise designated herein as a "non-collectible item" may be collected as long as notice is provided to the town five business days prior to the date the large item is to be collected and the large item is placed for collection in accordance with the requirements of section 54-30(a). 
(f)  Yard waste. No person shall place yard waste in rigid containers, rigid containers used for recyclables, heavy duty plastic bags, or any other container used to dispose of items to be collected by the town collection contract except as otherwise provided in section 54-29. 
(Ord. No. 002-11, § 1, 4-18-11; Ord. No. 009-17, § 2, 11-20-17) 
Sec. 54-28. - Collection of recyclables. 
(a)  Each individual pickup location shall have at least one rigid container that is used strictly for recyclables. The maximum size of the rigid container for recyclables shall be 96 gallons. Heavy duty plastic bags may be used for recyclables after the original rigid container for recyclables has been filled to its maximum capacity. Cardboard boxes may be stacked for collection next to rigid containers and/or heavy duty plastic bags as long as they are broken down and secured so as to prevent their scattering by wind or other means. 
(b)  No person shall place into a rigid container for recyclables any items that are not defined by this article as recyclables. In the event that a rigid container for recyclables is found to contain one or more items not defined as recyclables, a written warning for the first violation shall be issued to the person listed on the town's records as receiving collection services at that address. The written warning shall include a list of approved recyclable items. After a written warning has been issued, any subsequent violations shall be subject to the penalties found in section 54-2. 
(c)  Collection of recyclables shall be provided to customers according to the state-mandated schedule found in 7 Del. C. § 6053 . 
(Ord. No. 002-11, § 1, 4-18-11) 
Sec. 54-29. - Deposit of yard waste on streets, curbs, sidewalks or alleys. 
(a)  Authorized yard waste disposal methods. All yard waste, with the exception of branches, twigs, tree limbs and prunings, shall be bagged in heavy duty plastic bags of sufficient strength to carry their contents without ripping or rupturing and be deposited separate from other organic refuse, non-organic refuse, ashes, and recyclables at the appropriate street or alley line for collection. Each individual bag of yard waste shall not exceed 40 pounds in weight. Branches, twigs, tree limbs and prunings may be either tied together in bundles or placed in heavy duty plastic bags or cardboard boxes, which shall not exceed 40 pounds in weight and four feet in length, and shall be deposited separate from other organic refuse, non-organic refuse, ashes, and recyclables at the appropriate street or alley line for collection. Branches, twigs, tree limbs and prunings that are not tied in bundles or placed in heavy duty plastic bags or cardboard boxes shall not be collected. 
(b)  Prohibited conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to do the following: 
(1)  Dispose of or mix yard waste with any non-organic refuse, organic refuse, or recyclables for regular trash collection or to dispose of yard waste in any dumpster or location not specified for such purpose; or 
(2)  Deposit, place, discard, drop or in any other manner scatter any yard waste in or upon the streets, curbs, sidewalks or alleys of the town except as otherwise indicated in this section. 
(c)  Collection of unbagged leaves. Unbagged leaves may be deposited in the streets of the town, near the curb, for pickup beginning September 15 through December 31 of each year. Leaves must be bagged at all times beginning January 1 through September 14 of each year. 
(d)  Temporary scattering of yard waste. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the temporary scattering of grass clippings, leaves or the like on town streets, curbs, alleys or sidewalks where the same occurs incidental to and during mowing, raking or clipping operations, but the same shall thereafter be removed and corrected immediately at the conclusion of such operations. 
(Ord. No. 002-11, § 1, 4-18-11; Ord. No. 009-17, § 3, 11-20-17) 
Sec. 54-30. - Placement for collection; collection times. 
(a)  Placement for collection. All properly containerized non-organic refuse, ashes, recyclables, organic refuse and/or bulk refuse shall be placed along the curb or property line in front of such lot, or at the rear alley thereof, in order that it may be conveniently collected by the town's collection contractor. Yard waste shall be placed for collection as provided in section 54-29. 
(b)  Setting out and removing rigid containers and heavy duty plastic bags. All non-organic refuse, ashes, organic refuse, bulk refuse, and recyclables properly bagged or containerized shall be placed at the appropriate place for collection after 4:30 p.m., prevailing time, the day preceding the day designated for collection. All empty rigid containers and lids shall be removed by 12:00 midnight of the same day the collection is scheduled. 
(c)  Improperly containerized non-organic refuse, ashes, recyclables, or organic refuse. Any non-organic refuse, ashes, organic refuse, recyclables, bulk refuse, or yard waste not properly containerized, bagged, bundled, or otherwise placed as required by this article shall not be accepted by the collectors, and it shall be the duty of the person responsible to immediately remove the same, including any loose non-organic refuse, ashes, organic refuse, recyclables, or yard waste. 
(d)  Lids; responsibility for scattered materials. It is recommended, but not required, that all rigid containers used to dispose of organic refuse, non-organic refuse, recyclables, and ashes have tight fitting lids. Each person shall be responsible for gathering and properly disposing of any non-organic refuse, ashes, organic refuse, recyclables, or yard waste set out for collection by that person (or stored on the property where the person resides) which are disbursed as a result of wind, animals, birds, or other means or which are otherwise not collected by the town's collection contractor. Any person failing to gather and properly dispose of their non-organic refuse, ashes, organic refuse, recyclables, or yard wastes shall be in violation of this article and subject to the penalties in section 54-2. 
(Ord. No. 002-11, § 1, 4-18-11) 
Sec. 54-31. - Collections. 
(a)  Except as provided in this article, all non-organic refuse, bulk refuse, ashes, recyclables, yard waste, and/or organic refuse shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the town or by licensed collectors under contract to the town. 
(b)  All persons engaged in the collection and removal of non-organic refuse, ashes, recyclables, yard waste, bulk refuse, and/or organic refuse, including those employed by the town for that purpose, shall collect and transport the same through or along the avenues, streets, lanes, alleys or other public ways of the town in a sanitary, covered, liquid-tight container or motor vehicle body as set forth by the regulations of the state solid waste authority. 
(c)  Holidays. When the day for regularly scheduled collection falls on a legal holiday, such collection shall not take place until the next business day immediately thereafter. 
(d)  Weather delays; landfill closings. When collections are delayed because of weather and/or the closing of the state landfill, collections will resume on the next business day immediately thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 002-11, § 1, 4-18-11) 
Sec. 54-32. - Fees; penalty for nonpayment. 
(a)  The town shall collect from the occupant or owner of each parcel of property subject to this division an annual collection fee, regardless of whether or not the owner uses the town collection service. For properties using multiple 65-gallon trash containers, in addition to the annual collection fee, a separate annual fee shall be assessed for each additional trash container. The annual collection fee for each additional trash container shall be 50 percent of the annual collection fee for the use of just one 65-gallon trash container. The amount of the annual fee shall be set by the town council and may be revised as necessary to reflect changing costs of collection and/or disposal. The fee shall be billed monthly as part of the town utility bill and payable as prescribed pursuant to the town's rules and policies relating to payment of utility bills. 
(b)  All final accounts and all new accounts, in any given month, shall be assessed a monthly trash bill. The monthly trash bill on all final accounts and all new accounts shall be prorated on a weekly basis. 
EXCEPTION: If the new account is a transfer from the current tenant back to the original property owner, it shall not be considered a new account for the balance of that calendar month unless that property owner uses the trash service or the property is or becomes occupied for any portion of the balance of that month. This exception applies only to the property owner, not a new tenant. The property owner must request removal of the trash fee prior to payment of the bill for this section to be applicable. No refunds will be made after the bill has been paid. 
(c)  The town manager, or his or her designee, shall be authorized to promptly adjust the amount of all monthly trash bills in order to pass through any increases or decreases in the fees charged to the town by the state solid waste authority in connection with the town's disposition of its solid waste at the authority's landfills. Such adjustments shall be computed and allocated in such manner as to allow the town to recover or refund any increase or decrease in such fees over the remainder of that current fiscal year. The town manager shall report such adjustments to the town council at the next regular council meeting following such adjustment and shall promptly amend the town's schedule of fees to reflect such adjustments. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the town manager or his or her designee to adjust the annual trash collection fee or monthly trash collection bill for any customer except in response to increases or decreases in the fees charged to the town by the state solid waste authority. 
(Ord. No. 002-11, § 1, 4-18-11; Ord. No. 009-17, § 4, 11-20-17) 
Sec. 54-33. - Adjustments. 
(a)  Generally. The town will make appropriate credits or refunds in cases of overcharge or may bill for additional amounts in cases of undercharge. Reasons for adjustments could include, but are not limited to, clerical errors, improper application of the rate schedule or, upon documentation in writing, change of use or occupancy. 
(b)  Refunds. In no case will additional charges to the customer under the application of subsection (a) of this section be collected for a period which is more than three years prior to the month of discovery. If the customer has been overcharged, the town shall refund the amount due or credit the customer's account at the customer's election to the date the error was made, not to exceed three years prior to discovery. In the event of a change in occupancy or use, refunds shall not be retroactive. In the absence of an election by the customer for a refund by check, the town shall credit the customer's account. If additional charges are due the town, installment payments shall be offered for not more than the number of months the account was billed in error. An installment service payment charge shall not be applied to such installment payments. 
(c)  Temporary adjustments. The town manager shall waive the fee for trash service on a monthly basis upon written request and certification that a property is not occupied because: 
(1)  It is for sale; 
(2)  It is under construction; or 
(3)  If the owner of an owner-occupied property changes residency for a period of three or more consecutive months and: 
a.  Electric and/or water service is temporarily disconnected at the request of the property owner; or 
b.  The property owner provides a deed or lease showing proof of alternative residence. 
Requests shall be presented to the town manager with the current monthly bill. The manager shall not consider partial or retroactive payments on accounts. 
Any violation of this section will result in the repayment of all credit received. 
(Ord. No. 002-11, § 1, 4-18-11) 
Sec. 54-34. - Payment plans for delinquent accounts. 
    When a customer's account becomes delinquent, the customer may enter into a written payment plan with the town, signed by the customer, wherein the customer shall pay the amount past due in equal consecutive monthly installments with the next three regular monthly bills. Such installment payments shall become a part of the customer's regular monthly bill and failure to pay the installment amounts in full when due shall result in the same late payment penalties and procedures as would apply to regular monthly bills. If the customers pays all the installments when due, any and all late payment penalties shall not be charged on the portion of the account past due during the time covered by the payment plan. A customer shall only be allowed to enter into such a payment plan with the town once every nine months. 
(Ord. No. 002-11, § 1, 4-18-11) 
Sec. 54-35. - Collection of delinquent accounts by third party agency. 
    Upon a customer's account being terminated, the town billing manager shall forward the collection of such past due amounts to a third party collection agency or to the town solicitor. The cost of the third party collection agency or the town solicitor to collect past due amounts shall be added to the amount past due. Additionally, the town may take other legal and appropriate actions as may be needed to collect past due amounts. 
(Ord. No. 002-11, § 1, 4-18-11) 
Secs. 54-36-54-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LITTERING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 002-11, § 2, adopted April 18, 2011, renumbered Article III as Article II. 

Sec. 54-66. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Litter means, but is not limited to, scrap paper, food wrap, paper products, drink containers, newspapers, food, circulars, handbills or other similar types of refuse, debris or garbage. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 57, § 2) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 54-67. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a criminal violation and, upon conviction, be subject to criminal penalties as provided under section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 57, § 4; Ord. of 8-5-02(1), § 19) 
Sec. 54-68. - Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, discard, throw away, drop or in any other manner scatter any litter in and about the streets, alleys or public places within the limits of the town. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 57, § 1) 
Sec. 54-69. - Exemption. 
    For the purposes of sections 54-66 and 54-68, littering shall not be considered as the deposit of the items set forth in the definition of litter in section 54-66 in containers which are located in and around the town, designated for the collection of such debris and other items; such containers to be considered as garbage cans, litter baskets and garbage collection points. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 57, § 3) 
Secs. 54-70-54-83. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TOWN'S AUTHORITY TO REMOVE SOLID WASTES DEPOSITED OR ACCUMULATED IN VIOLATION OF THIS CHAPTER; NOTICE; HEARING; RECOVERY OF COSTS; LIEN; PENALTIES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 002-11, § 3, adopted April 18, 2011, renumbered Article IV as Article III. 

Sec. 54-84. - Town's authority to remove. 
    Whenever solid wastes are deposited or left in or upon any public place and/or upon any private property in violation of any provision of this chapter, the town shall have the power and authority (but not the obligation) to pick up, collect, containerize and/or remove the same from such public place and/or private property and dispose of the same, and/or to hire an independent contractor to do so, in accordance with the procedures hereinafter set out. 
(Ord. No. 008-03, 3-3-03) 
Sec. 54-85. - Solid wastes defined. 
    "Solid Wastes" for purposes of this article and chapter shall mean: 
(1)  Any physical substance or thing regulated by chapter 54 of the Code including but not limited to ashes, garbage, refuse, tires, construction/demolition debris, building materials, and/or hazardous waste; 
(2)  Any accumulation of waste paper or waste lumber; 
(3)  Any accumulation of grass, straw, hay, trash, litter and/or rubbish of any character capable of harboring obnoxious insects and/or rodents; 
(4)  Any damaged, discarded, abandoned or unused appliance, furniture, fixture, equipment, tires, dishes, utensils, glassware, containers, pallets, boxes, propane tanks or other similar items of personalty on any private property not completely enclosed within a roofed building; 
(5)  Any damaged, discarded or abandoned boat, boat trailer, sailboard, jet ski or other means of aquatic conveyance that is inoperable, dismantled, wrecked or from which major components have been removed, is in such a state of disrepair as to be incapable of being used or operated in the manner for which it was designed and is situated on private property in such circumstances as to appear to have been abandoned; 
(6)  Any damaged, discarded or abandoned camper, trailer, pick-up top or cover, that is inoperable, dismantled, wrecked, or from which major components have been removed, is in such a state of disrepair to be incapable of being used or operated in the manner for which it was designed, and is situated on private property in such circumstances as to appear to have been abandoned. 
(7)  Any other accumulation of waste or refuse, matter or substance or substances which, by itself or in conjunction with any other substance or substances, is deleterious to the health, safety, welfare and comfort of the community. 
(Ord. No. 008-03, 3-3-03) 
Sec. 54-86. - Presumptions. 
    Whenever solid wastes are left or deposited on private property or in a public place abutting private property, the owner and/or occupant of that private property shall be presumed to have deposited, caused to have deposited, or to have permitted or acquiesced in such deposit in violation of this article, and the burden of rebutting such presumption, by a preponderance of the evidence, shall be on such persons or legal entities. 
(Ord. No. 008-03, 3-3-03) 
Sec. 54-87. - Responsibility for violations of agent or employee. 
    Whoever hires, employs, authorizes or directs any other person(s) or legal entity(s) to containerize, move, store, place, deposit, or remove any solid waste on, in, to or from any public place or private property in the town, shall be responsible and personally liable for any violations of this article committed by their agent(s) or employee(s). 
(Ord. No. 008-03, 3-3-03) 
Sec. 54-88. - Public property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, discard, throw away, drop or abandon any solid waste in or upon any public place or public property within the town. Any person convicted of violating this provision shall be subject, upon conviction, to the penalties as provided in section 54-93. 
(b)  Whenever solid wastes are left or deposited on public property, the town shall have the power and authority to pick up, collect, containerize and/or remove the same from the public property and dispose of the same. This section shall not apply to any solid waste left out for collection in accordance with sections 54-43 and 54-44 of the Town Code, but shall apply to those solid wastes left out for collection, but not collected, for any reason, and not removed by midnight of the same day the collection is scheduled, in accordance with section 54-44. 
(c)  Whenever the town removes solid wastes pursuant to this section 54-88, it may: 
(1)  Seek penalties under section 54-93; and/or 
(2)  Bring a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction to recover its costs and expenses for such removal; or 
(3)  Provided that the owner/occupant of the abutting property has received at least 24 hours actual notice of the violation from the town and has failed to either: 
a.  Correct the violation within said 24 hours; or 
b.  Within five business days of such notice request, in writing, a hearing before the town manager under section 54-90, the town may add such costs and expenses to the town's annual assessment list as authorized in section 7(b) of the Town Charter. 
(Ord. No. 008-03, 3-3-03) 
Sec. 54-89. - Private property; notification of violation; time allowed to abate. 
(a)  Whenever any member of the police force or the code inspection officer is aware of the existence of a violation of this chapter, on private property, it shall be his/her duty to serve a written notice on the owner (or owner's agent) and/or occupant of the property upon which such violation exists, to remove the waste creating said violation, within 15 days. Such notice shall state the date and time that notice was given and shall advise the recipient that such recipient may, in writing, request a hearing before the town manager concerning whether or not a violation exists and/or whether or not the recipient is the responsible party for said violation, provided that such written request shall be received in the town office prior to the expiration of the 15 days therein specified. The notice shall also advise the owner, agent and/or occupant that should the town be required to remove, or have removed, the violating waste, all costs incurred may be recovered pursuant to section 54-91 of this article, and civil penalties may be imposed upon the person(s) found guilty of violating this article. 
(b)  If any official of the town shall be unable to serve notice personally upon such owner (or owner's agent) and occupant, the notice may be given by posting the same in some conspicuous place on the property; and the official shall make at least two attempts to provide such notice by telephone or facsimile if such telephone numbers are reasonably available. 
(Ord. No. 008-03, 3-3-03) 
Sec. 54-90. - Hearing before town manager; determination and order. 
(a)  If a written request for a hearing is made, pursuant to sections 54-88 or 54-89, the town manager shall hold a hearing, upon notice of the person(s) requesting such hearing, within five business days of the date the written request for hearing is received by the town; provided however, that the town manager may, in his reasonable discretion and for cause shown, postpone the hearing for a reasonable time, not to exceed 15 days. 
(b)  If, after a hearing, the town manager however determines that no violation exists or that none of the owner, owners agent, or occupant are responsible for the violation, the notice of violation shall be withdrawn. 
(c)  If, after a hearing, the town manager determines that a violation exists and that any of the owner, owners agent, or occupant, or abutting owner is responsible for the violation, he shall: 
(1)  For a violation of section 54-88, cause the costs and expenses of such removal as set out in section 54-91(b) to be added to the town's annual assessment list as provided in section 7(b) of the Town Charter; or 
(2)  For a violation of section 54-89, order the violation to be corrected within 15 days from the time of such decision. 
(Ord. No. 008-03, 3-3-03) 
Sec. 54-91. - Failure to comply with notice of violation or order. 
    Upon the failure, neglect, or refusal of the owner, owners agent, or occupant to correct a violation under section 54-89 within 15 days of notice (if no hearing is requested), or within 15 days of the town manager's order to correct (if a hearing is requested), the town may: 
(1)  Remove, or, through an independent contractor, cause to have removed, the waste or condition causing said violation; 
(2)  Recover the cost and expenses of such removal, at a rate of $50.00 per hour, per man, with a $50.00 minimum charge for all work performed by the town, or if by an independent contractor, the actual costs incurred by the town, plus any equipment, material, landfill or disposal fees. There shall also be assessed a $25.00 administrative fee. The town may recover said costs from any or all of the following: 
a.  The person(s) or legal entity(s) depositing or accumulating and/or causing to be deposited or accumulated such solid waste in public places or on private property in violation of this article. 
b.  The person(s) or legal entity(s) granting permission or acquiescing to the deposit of such solid wastes on such private property or in such public place in violation of this article. 
Such recovery of costs and expenses may be made in any manner authorized by law, including but not limited to, a civil action for debt, and/or adding such costs and expenses to the town's annual assessment list and/or thereby creating a lien upon the subject real property, and any other property owned in the county, as authorized by the Town Charter, and the subsequent execution thereon. 
(3)  Institute proceedings to impose civil penalties, together with court costs, and recovery of reasonable attorney's fees, from the person(s) responsible. 
(Ord. No. 008-03, 3-3-03) 
Sec. 54-92. - Reserved. 
Sec. 54-93. - Penalties. 
    Any person determined by any court of competent jurisdiction to have violated this article shall forfeit and pay to the town a civil penalty in the amount of not less than $50.00 per day, nor more than $150.00 per day plus court costs, and victims compensation fund assessment. Each day violation exists constitutes a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 008-03, 3-3-03) 
Chapter 58 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Amusements, ch. 10; civil emergencies, ch. 22; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 38; parks and recreation, ch. 46; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 50; solid waste, ch. 54; traffic and vehicles, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 70; zoning regulations, app. A; subdivision regulations, app. B. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Repair, overhauling of motor vehicles on streets and alleys. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Streets and alleys of the town means those areas located between the right-of-way lines for any streets, byways or alleys within the limits of the town. 
(b)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, as principal agent or employee, the repairing, major overhauling or replacement of any parts on a motor vehicle while such motor vehicle is located in the streets or alleys of the town. 
(c)  Exception. For the purpose of this section any minor repairs or emergency-type repairs shall not be included as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Penalty. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a criminal violation and, upon conviction, be subject to criminal penalties as provided under section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 56, §§ 1-4; Ord. of 8-5-02(1), § 20) 
Secs. 58-2-58-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIDEWALKS, CURBS AND GUTTERS 

Sec. 58-26. - Placement of goods, wares or merchandise on sidewalks prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall permit any goods, wares, or merchandise of any kind or nature whatsoever to be placed or remain upon any sidewalk within the corporate limits of the town without the written permission of the town council, except for the purpose of loading and unloading; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit newspaper vending machines or "honor boxes" on the sidewalks of the town provided that such machines do not: 
(1)  Exceed 50 inches in height, 20 inches in width, and 18 inches in depth; 
(2)  Unreasonably impede or restrict public travel along the sidewalk; 
(3)  Interfere with access into any building, alley, driveway or block or inhibit the view into or out of any window facing onto such sidewalk; and 
(4)  Exceed more than three in number along any 50-foot length of sidewalk. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a criminal violation and, upon conviction, be subject to criminal penalties as provided under section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 11, § 2; Ord. of 8-5-02(1), § 21) 
Sec. 58-27. - Regulating sidewalks in the town. 
(a)  The town manager shall make an annual recommendation to the mayor and town council for street maintenance projects. This recommendation may include any or all of the following: repair, replacement or installation of roadways, utilities, curbs, drainage and sidewalks, etc. Any recommendation made by the town manager for street repair, replacement or installation shall also include recommendations as follows: 
(1)  The repair and replacement of existing sidewalks along said streets. 
(2)  The installation of new sidewalks where over 50 percent of the block has existing sidewalks already installed (the 50 percent measurement shall relate to both sides of the street). By way of example: if there is a block which has sidewalks along one entire side of the street and there is one little section on the other side of the street, the other side would be required to install sidewalks along the entire length of the street. 
(3)  The installation, repair and/or replacement as out lined in subsections (1) and (2) of this section of all sidewalks along state maintained roads in which the town can provide at least six months notice, before payment is due to affected property owners who hire the town to complete the work. 
(4)  For the repair or replacement of hot mix (asphalt) parking lots and driveways which are in areas where sidewalks are required. Hot mix may remain in these areas but it must meet the same standards for condition as sidewalks. All repairs must be saw cut and excavate so that a minimum of six inches of crushed stone and a minimum of two inches of hot mix can be installed. These minimums may be increased depending on the proposed traffic loads. For the purposes of the over 50 percent rule outlined in subsection (2) above hot mix driveways and parking areas shall be considered sidewalks. 
(b)  If the town council approves any recommendation that includes the repair, replacement or installation of sidewalks located on, adjoining, along, or in front of private property, they shall adopt a resolution as required by the town's Charter which shall state that, on a named day and a named hour and place, the council will meet to consider the question of repair, replacement or installation of sidewalks with a specified material or materials and according to the town "standard specifications manual," on a named street in front of the property of named owners and assessing the costs thereof against such owners. The said resolution shall be published at least one week prior to the meeting aforesaid in at least one issue of a newspaper published in said town or in a newspaper published elsewhere in the county, if there be none published in said town. The council shall hold a meeting in said town in accordance with said resolution and thereat shall hear the aforesaid owners of property and other residents of the town appearing on the question referred to in the said resolution. 
(c)  After such hearing, the mayor and council shall decide whether to proceed immediately with such repair, replacement or installation and to charge the property owner or owners for the whole and entire cost of such sidewalk repair, replacement or installation as hereafter provided in paragraph (e) or to allow the property owner(s) the opportunity to have such sidewalk repaired, replaced or installed as hereafter provided in paragraph (d). 
(d)  Following any public hearing conducted as provided in paragraph (b) above, the town council may, in the sound exercise of its reasonable discretion, allow the property owner(s) affected a reasonable period of time (as determined by the town council) not to exceed one year, to cause such sidewalk repair, replacement or installation to be constructed/performed at their own expense. In such event, the town council shall cause written notice of such decision to be sent or delivered to such property owner(s) which notice shall state: 
(1)  That the town council has determined that certain sidewalk repairs, replacements or installations are required to be made on, adjoining, along, or in front of the property owner's property and identifying such property(s) by street address and/or tax map parcel number; 
(2)  That the property owner has been given a specified period of time (not to exceed one year from the date of the notice) to cause such repairs, replacements or installations to be constructed or performed at the property owner(s) expense; 
(3)  That, if the property owner elects to have the work done himself, the property owner must: 
a.  Obtain a building permit from the town for which the fee shall be waived by the town; 
b.  Cause such construction/repairs to be in compliance with town specifications as set out in the town's "standard specification manual" and in a workmanlike manner; 
c.  Cause such construction to be consistent with the town's planned construction for abutting streets, curbs and properties (with regard to, among other things, material, grade and elevation); and 
d.  Obtain a final inspection and approval from the town building inspector; 
(4)  That, if the property owner does not cause such sidewalk repairs, replacements or installations to be completed within the time specified in subparagraph (3) above, the town will cause such sidewalk repairs, replacements or installations to be done pursuant to paragraph (e) hereafter; and 
(5)  That the property owner may decline the opportunity to have the sidewalk repairs, replacements or installations done himself and his own expense by notifying the town in writing of his desire to have the town proceed under paragraph (e) hereafter. 
(e)  In the event that (1) the town council determines not to allow the property owner(s) an opportunity to cause the sidewalk repairs, replacements or installations to be constructed/performed at their own expense, or (2) the property owner declines, in writing, the opportunity to do so, or (3) the property owner fails to fully complete all such requirement repairs, replacements or installations within the time specified, the town may proceed to have such repairs, replacements or installations constructed/performed and the entire costs of such repairs, replacements or installations shall be the responsibility of the property owner(s). Where such sidewalk repairs, replacements or installations front on two or more properties, the total cost of such repairs, replacements or installations shall be allocated among the property owners affected, pro rata, on a "front foot" basis. Subject to paragraph (f) hereafter, such costs shall be due and payable within 90 days of the completion of the repairs, replacements or installations. 
(f)  In the event that the town council votes to repair, replace or install sidewalks on, adjoining, along, or in front of properties owned by persons who qualify as low to moderate income as defined in subsection (i) of this section and that person's share of the repair, replacement or installation costs are under $1,000.00, they will be permitted to pay the costs in ten equal payments due with their annual taxes. Each payment shall be equal to ten percent of the total cost of the repair, replacement or installation. In the event that their share of the repair, replacement or installation costs exceed $1,000.00, that property will be permitted to pay the cost in 20 equal payments due with their annual taxes. Each payment shall be equal to five percent of the total cost of the repair, replacement or installation. 
(g)  It is the intent of this section that the property owner shall be responsible for the cost of all sidewalk improvements including, but not limited to, settling caused by existing utilities. 
(h)  The costs of any such sidewalk improvements, if not paid prior to the next-succeeding annual tax assessment, shall be added to the assessment list as a lien as provided in § 7(b) of the town Charter. In addition, or in lieu thereof, where any amount due the town for sidewalk improvements is not paid when due as hereinabove provided, the town may proceed to sell the benefitted property as provided in § 12 of the town Charter. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude the town from proceeding under the provisions of 25 Del.C. Ch. 29, as and where appropriate, to secure or collect payment of any amounts due from benefitted properties for sidewalk repairs, replacements or installations made hereunder. 
(i)  Schedule A. For purposes of this section, low to moderate income persons are defined as those persons whose incomes to not exceed the income limits for lower income families pursuant to section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937 as amended and provided to the state by HUD in a table of income limits as set forth by dollar amount and family size. (These income limits are periodically revised by HUD and are made available by the state housing authority to the town.) 
(Ord. of 4-6-98(1); Ord. of 8-17-98(1), §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 1-16-01(1), § 1; Ord. No. 008-11, §§ 1-3, 10-17-11) 
Sec. 58-28. - Sidewalks required. 
    The town manager shall not permit any existing sidewalks in the right-of-way or along the street frontage of any property to be permanently removed. This section shall not prohibit the town manager to grant permission, in writing, for the removal of sidewalks in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the town. 
(Ord. of 5-7-01(1), § 1) 
Secs. 58-29-58-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 58-46. - Permit-Required. 
    A street excavation permit is required for any street excavation performed by any nongovernment activity or agent. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. II, Tit. 12, § 1) 
Sec. 58-47. - Same-Application. 
    An application for a street excavation permit shall be filed with the town manager or his designee. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. II, Tit. 12, § 2) 
Sec. 58-48. - Same-Issuance; conditions. 
    Upon satisfactory review of the application for a permit required under this article, the town manager or his designee shall issue a street excavation permit. The permit shall set forth conditions under which the permit has been issued. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. II, Tit. 12, § 3) 
Sec. 58-49. - Same-Fee. 
    The permit fee rate (nonrefundable) shall be as outlined below: 
(1)  The permit fee rate shall be $10.00 per square foot for streets which have been paved new up to one year. 
(2)  The permit fee rate shall be $9.00 per square foot for streets which have been paved for over one year but not over two years. 
(3)  The permit fee rate shall be $8.00 per square foot for streets which have been paved for over two years but not over three years. 
(4)  The permit fee rate shall be $7.00 per square foot for streets which have been paved for over three years but not over four years. 
(5)  The permit fee rate shall be $6.00 per square foot for streets which have been paved for over four years but not over five years. 
(6)  The permit fee rate shall be $5.00 per square foot for all streets which have been paved for over five years. 
The permit fee shall be doubled for any excavation done without first having obtained a permit from the town, except for emergency situations. In case of an emergency, the permit shall be obtained the next working day. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. II, Tit. 12, § 4; Ord. of 1-18-94(1), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 58-50. - Deposit. 
    A deposit in an amount equal to 150 percent of the estimated cost to repair the road excavation may be required prior to issuance of a permit. The deposit shall be held by the town to assure that the excavation is properly repaired. If the excavation is not properly repaired within 15 days, the town shall make repairs and shall use all or a part of the deposit to cover the actual costs of the repairs made by the town. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. II, Tit. 12, § 5; Ord. of 1-18-94(1), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 58-51. - Repairs to conform to town specifications; permit holder to provide barricades and safety protection. 
    All excavation repairs shall be in accordance with the specifications of the town. It is the responsibility of the street excavation permit holder to provide proper barricades and safety protection at the site. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. II, Tit. 12, § 6) 
Sec. 58-52. - Temporary repairs and emergency excavations. 
(a)  When temporary repairs are made, such repairs shall be permitted only for a 15-day period upon approval of the town manager or his designee. 
(b)  Emergency repairs are permitted for gas main, water main or other similar situations prior to issuance of permit providing a permit is secured the next regularly scheduled workday. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. II, Tit. 12, § 8) 
Secs. 58-53-58-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PARADES AND ASSEMBLIES 

Sec. 58-76. - Penalty. 
    Any person, group, band, lodge, association, firm, corporation or other artificial legal entity violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a criminal violation and, upon conviction, be subject to criminal penalties as provided under section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 55, § 9; Ord. of 8-5-02(1), § 22) 
Sec. 58-77. - License-Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, lodge, association, band, firm, corporation or other organization, with or without music, lights, banners or other paraphernalia, to parade on any public property or street, or gather in an assembly or in any building within the limits of the town, without first obtaining a license therefor from the chief of police of the town. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 55, § 1) 
Sec. 58-78. - Same-Application. 
(a)  In order to obtain a license as required by this article, an application for such license must be filed with the chief of police. Applications must be made at least seven days in advance of the event, and the applications must be made by a resident of the state. 
(b)  Applications must be filled out completely and accurately. They must be signed by the applicant, not his designate. 
(c)  The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the organization requesting the license. 
(2)  Name and address of the applicant. 
(3)  Date of application. 
(4)  Date of the event. 
(5)  Place of the event; if a parade give entire route in detail. 
(6)  Time of the event. 
(7)  Point of assembly. 
(8)  Number of persons taking part. 
(9)  Signature, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 55, §§ 2, 5, 6) 
Sec. 58-79. - Applicants must be representative of organization applying for license. 
    Applicants for licenses under this article must be a representative of the lodge, association, band, firm, corporation or other organizations requesting the license. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 55, § 3) 
Sec. 58-80. - License applicants responsible for participants' conduct, adherence to conditions. 
    Applicants for licenses under this article are responsible for the conduct of all persons taking part in the event applied for, as well as the adherence to date, time and route or place of the event. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 55, § 4) 
Sec. 58-81. - Parade route or assembly point. 
    The parade route or assembly point shall be subject to approval of the police department of the town, and may be changed by the police department at any time without notice. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 55, § 7) 
Sec. 58-82. - Denial of license application. 
    The chief of police may deny any application for a license for failure of the applicant to comply with the requirements of this article, or for any other reason to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the town or property in the town. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 55, § 8) 
Secs. 58-83-58-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Retitled by Ord. No. 017-15, § 1, adopted Nov. 16, 2015, from "Snow Removal." 

Sec. 58-106. - Penalty. 
    Any owner found guilty of violating sections 58-107 or 58-108 of this article shall be guilty of maintaining a public nuisance and of a civil violation and, upon conviction, be subject to civil penalties as provided under section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 41, § 4; Ord. of 8-5-02(1), § 23; Ord. No. 017-15, § 1, 11-16-15) 
Sec. 58-107. - Abutting owners' permitting snow or ice to remain on sidewalks over 24 hours declared nuisance. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any premises in the town, in front or by the side of which shall be a sidewalk, pavement or walkway, to permit or allow snow or ice to remain thereon for a longer period than 24 hours after the snow has ceased to fall or the ice has ceased to form. Every owner shall cause a pathway to be cleared of at least three feet wide or the width of the sidewalk if the sidewalk is less than three feet wide. Every owner who shall permit or suffer the same to remain on such sidewalks, pavement or walkways, in violation of this section, shall be guilty of maintaining a nuisance and upon conviction thereof before any court of competent jurisdiction shall forfeit and pay a fine as provided in section 1-11 of this Code plus the cost incurred in connection with same. Any private agreement between an owner and a tenant or management company pertaining to the maintenance of sidewalks shall not relieve the owner of responsibility for complying with the terms of this article. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 41, § 1; Ord. No. 017-15, § 1, 11-16-15) 
Sec. 58-108. - Abutting owners not to pile snow or ice in street so as to obstruct intersection. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any premises abutting a street intersection in the town to pile or permit to allow snow or ice to remain piled on the side of any street so as to cause a visual or physical obstruction to traffic at any such street intersection. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 41, § 2; Ord. No. 017-15, § 1, 11-16-15) 
Sec. 58-109. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The police department, in conjunction with the assistance of the code enforcement department as needed, may inspect the streets of the town and issue citations in connection with the violation of the provisions of this article. Such summons or citations may be accompanied by or in the form of a voluntary assessment agreement as authorized by section 1-12 under which the person summonsed may admit guilt and pay the civil penalty and court costs by mail. 
(b)  The town manager may, in cases where there are considered to be violations of sections 58-107 and/or 58-108 of this article, have the snow and/or ice removed immediately and charge the costs in connection with such removal to the owner or owners of the premises. Should the amount not be paid within 30 days of billing, such amount may be collected in an action for debt before any court of competent jurisdiction and/or as provided in the Charter of the town for the collection of taxes on real estate and other charges and costs due to the town. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 41, §§ 3, 5; Ord. No. 017-15, § 1, 11-16-15) 
Chapter 62 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 50; solid waste, ch. 54; water rates, § 70-111 et seq.; electrical system rules and regulations, § 70-151 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Real property tax exemption for persons 65 years of age or older 
(a)  Exemption amount. By the second regularly scheduled council meeting in January of each year, the town council shall annually vote to determine whether or not a real property tax exemption shall be made available during the upcoming tax year to eligible applicants, and if so, the amount of the exemption (e.g. the first $30,000.00 of assessed value of an applicant's real property). 
(b)  Eligibility. To be eligible for a real property tax exemption under this section, applicants shall: 
(1)  Be legally domiciled within the Town of Smyrna, Delaware; 
(2)  Be 65 years of age or over; 
(3)  Own the dwelling for which the exemption is sought and have continuously resided therein for at least one year prior to May 1 of the year for which the exemption is sought; and 
(4)  Have had an income for the tax year immediately preceding the year for which the exemption is sought not exceeding: 
i.  $24,000.00 for an individual applicant; or 
ii.  $30,000.00 for applicants living in the same dwelling and filing jointly. 
For purposes of this section, the applicant's income means all income from whatever source derived (other than Social Security, Veteran Disability Compensation, and Railroad Pension) including capital gains, pension annuities and retirement. 
(c)  Filing procedures. To be considered for a real property tax exemption under this section, an applicant shall file a real property tax exemption application at Town Hall by the third Friday in March at 4:30 p.m. The application shall include: 
(1)  A copy of the applicant's IRS Form 1040 or a statement by the applicant that the applicant was not required to file a Federal IRS 1040 Form for the income received in the calendar year immediately preceding the year in which the exemption is sought; 
(2)  A copy of a picture ID for the applicant showing the applicant's birth date; 
(3)  A statement of income for the applicant and the applicant's spouse (if applicable); 
(4)  The names of other owners of the same dwelling; 
(5)  The address of the dwelling for which the tax exemption is sought; and 
(6)  Additional information deemed necessary by the town. 
(d)  Approval of applications. Prior to appeals day, the town manager's office shall review all applications, giving prompt written notice to the applicant of any application not approved, which written notice shall include the procedures outlined herein for appealing the denial of an application. 
(e)  Appealing denied applications. Any applicant whose application was denied by the town manager may appeal that decision to the assessment appeals committee on appeals day, the date and time of which shall be set annually by the town council, by filing a written appeal with the town at least two business days prior to the appeals day, which written appeal shall include the grounds for the appeal, the appellant's daytime phone number, the names of any witnesses that will be testifying, whether the appellant will be represented by an attorney, and the amount of time needed for the appeal (not to exceed 20 minutes). The assessment appeals committee shall hear the appeal pursuant the procedures in section 62-60(b)(3) of the Smyrna Town Code after which the town council shall hear the appeal pursuant to the procedures in section 62-60(c) of the Smyrna Town Code. 
(f)  Property with multiple owners. Where more than one owner of the same dwelling is seeking a tax exemption, each owner shall file a separate application in accordance with the requirements of this section; provided that applicants owning property as tenants by the entirety (i.e. husband and wife) shall only be required to file one application. In addition to being subject to the requirements of this section, the right to claim a tax exemption for owners of property that is held by more than one person (as tenants in common, joint tenants, or tenants by the entirety), or by partnerships or fiduciaries, shall be governed by the provisions of 22 Del. C. § 1004 . 
(Ord. No. 006-11, § 1, 8-1-11) 
Sec. 62-2. - Collections. 
    Any real property taxes that have not been paid by the due date outlined in the Town Charter are a debt owed to the town, and the town may forward the collection of delinquent real property taxes accounts (including all authorized penalties and interest) to a third-party collection agency in accordance with section 2-71 ("Use of third party collection agency"). 
(Ord. No. 004-15, § 2, 4-20-15) 
Secs. 62-3-62-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REALTY TRANSFER TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to levy, § 2(b)(36). 

Sec. 62-26. - Imposition. 
    There is hereby imposed upon the transfer of all real property located within the town limits, as they now or hereafter exist, a tax of one and one-half percent of the value of the property conveyed in conformance with the definitions and exceptions governing the state realty transfer tax as contained within 30 Del. C. § 5401 et seq., and all amendments theretofore or thereafter adopted. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 48, § 1; Ord. of 8-17-98(3), § 1) 
Sec. 62-27. - Allocation of taxes; duty to pay. 
    Any tax imposed by this article shall be apportioned equally between the grantor and the grantee; provided, however, that the parties to any transaction which is subject to the realty transfer tax imposed by this article may, as between themselves, agree to allocate the tax otherwise; but in all events, it shall be the ultimate responsibility of the grantee to see that the appropriate amount of tax is paid no later than the presentation of the document involved in such a transaction for recording at the appropriate recorder of deeds office. Upon receipt of the appropriate amount, the town office or its duly authorized agent shall, upon the document relating to such transaction, confirm that the tax imposed by this article has been paid. The town may appoint the county recorder of deeds or any attorney-at-law as its duly authorized agent to collect a realty transfer tax imposed by this article and to confirm such payment on the face of the document presented for recording. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 48, § 3) 
Sec. 62-28. - Realty transfer tax on new construction. 
(a)  Anything in sections 62-26 or 62-27 to the contrary notwithstanding, there is hereby imposed on all documents described in 30 Del. C, § 5401(8) (as it may from time to time hereafter be amended or in accordance with any future corresponding provision of law) a real estate transfer tax at the rate of one percent on amounts in excess of $10,000.00 which tax shall be borne by the owner of the building whose construction is made subject to the tax under 30 Del. C. § 5401(8). 
(b)  Any person(s) desiring to obtain a building permit from the town shall submit a copy of the form(s) previously submitted to the state division of revenue pursuant to 30 Del. C. §5401(8)(b), and the corresponding receipt received from the state division of revenue, evidencing the cost of such construction. The town shall not issue a building permit for any building, construction of which was subject to the state transfer tax imposed by 30 Del. C. § 5401(8), until the town transfer tax imposed upon such construction under subsection (a) above has been paid. 
(c)  Any person(s) desiring to obtain a certificate of occupancy from the town shall submit a copy of the form(s) previously submitted to the state division of revenue pursuant to 30 Del. C. § 5401(8)(c) and the corresponding receipt from the state division of revenue evidencing the actual cost of such construction. The town shall not issue a certificate of occupancy for any building subject to any additional state transfer tax as a result of such recertification until the town transfer tax imposed upon such construction under subsection (a) above has been paid to the town. 
(d)  Anything in this section to the contrary notwithstanding, the following shall be exempt from the transfer of tax imposed by this section: 
(1)  Those transfers described in section 62-31; 
(2)  Any contract, agreement or undertaking for the construction of all or part of any building all or a portion of which contract, agreement or undertaking was entered into prior to the date this section took effect; 
(3)  The value of the construction (only) under any contract or agreement for the transfer of real property which contract also included construction of all or any part of a building entered into prior to the date this section took effect. 
(e)  This section took effect on November 22, 2000. 
(Ord. of 11-6-00, § 2) 
Sec. 62-29. - Effect of failure to pay; interest; penalties, liens. 
    Where any real property within the town is transferred without payment of the appropriate real estate transfer tax in violation of this article: 
(1)  The amount due shall bear interest at the rate of one-half percent per month commencing with the date that such document is duly recorded in the recorder of deeds office of the appropriate county and the transferee in such transaction shall be personally liable for the full amount of such tax plus all accrued interest to date of payment. 
(2)  The amount of such tax, together with the accrued interest thereon, shall constitute a charge or assessment against the property so transferred and shall be a lien against the property so transferred in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Charter of the town and/or in accordance with the procedures set forth in the general statutes of the state regarding municipal liens. 
(3)  Where any document involved in a transaction subject to the tax imposed by this article is recorded without payment thereof, the grantee shall, upon conviction before any court of competent jurisdiction, pay a fine as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 48, § 4; Ord. of 11-6-00, § 1) 
Sec. 62-30. - Construction, operation and interpretation. 
    This article shall be applied, construed and interpreted according to the provisions of the state realty transfer tax as set forth in 30 Del. C. § 5401 et seq. as it may have heretofore been or is hereafter amended, it being the intent of this article that it apply whenever the state's realty transfer tax applies; provided, however, that: 
(1)  In applying the provisions of the state's realty transfer tax statute through this article, the "Town of Smyrna" shall be substituted (where appropriate) for the "State of Delaware," "Department of Finance," "Division of Revenue" or the like. 
(2)  The provisions of 30 Del. C. §§ 5405 ("Documentary Stamps; Affixing; Cancellation; Other Methods"), 5406 ("Furnishing Stamps; Sales; Agents; Compensation; Bond Premiums"), 5407 ("Enforcement; Rules and Regulations"), 5408 ("Failure to Affix Stamps"), 5412 ("Grantor to Pay Tax"), 5414 ("Tax Lien"), and 5415 ("Distribution of Tax Receipts") or any future corresponding provisions of law shall not be held applicable to the operation and application of this article. 
(3)  The unlawful acts set out at 30 Del. C. § 5410 now and as it may hereafter be amended shall, to the extent applicable to the town ordinances and not otherwise superseded hereby, likewise be unlawful acts under this article, conviction for which shall result in a fine as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(4)  Where any provision of 30 Del. C. § 5401 et seq. is inconsistent with this article, the provisions of this article shall control; and wherever any provision of 30 Del. C. § 5401 et seq. is not applicable or appropriate, it shall be disregarded or construed so as to best achieve the purpose of this article, which is that whenever a realty transfer tax becomes due to the state under 30 Del. C. § 5401 et seq., a realty transfer tax of one and one-half percent shall likewise become due to the town. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 48, § 5; Ord. of 8-17-98(3), § 2; Ord. of 11-6-00, § 1) 
Sec. 62-31. - Exemptions. 
    Notwithstanding the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the transfer of any real property within the town pursuant to a valid written contract entered into prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived (January 1, 1990) shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(Gen. Ords. Art. IV, Tit. 48, § 2; Ord. of 11-6-00, § 1) 
Secs. 62-32-62-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MOBILE HOME PERMIT AND FEE 

Sec. 62-51. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, unless the context otherwise clearly indicates: 
(1)  Mobile home shall mean a structure composed of one or more components, each of which was substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant, built upon a permanent chassis, and designed to be transported to the home site in one or more sections to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. A "mobile home" shall include any "manufactured home" as defined by the "National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, including the federal regulations adopted pursuant thereto, as amended, or any future corresponding provision of law or regulations. [42 U.S.C. § 5402 (6); 24 C.F.R. § 3280-21; but a "mobile home", shall not include any "modular home" excluded from the coverage of the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Act of 1974 (or any future corresponding provision of law) under 24 C.F.R. § 3282.12, as amended, or any future corresponding federal regulation.] 
(2)  Owner of a mobile home means the person or persons designated on the motor vehicle title of the mobile home whether the title is issued by this state or by some other state. 
(Ord. of 6-1-98, § 1) 
Sec. 62-52. - Permit required prior to moving mobile home into town. 
    Every owner of a mobile home, before moving the same into the town, shall apply for and obtain from the town manager or his authorized agent a mobile home permit under this ordinance for such mobile home. The town manager or his authorized agent shall issue no mobile home permit until the permit fee required by this article is paid in full. In accordance with the town zoning ordinance, mobile homes shall not be permitted in any zoning district other than the mobile home park district. 
(Ord. of 6-1-98, § 2) 
Sec. 62-53. - Permit. 
(a)  The owner of a mobile home shall obtain an annual permit for it and shall pay a fee as outlined in the town's fee schedule for each such permit. Such permit shall be obtained and the permit fee paid by January 1 of each year and if such fee is not paid before February 1 of such year, then the amount shall be past due and a penalty of ten percent per month (or any portion thereof) shall accrue on the unpaid balance of the permit fee. The annual permit fee shall be reviewed annually as part of the budget process or whenever the town's real estate property tax rate is revised and adjusted accordingly. 
(b)  Anything in this article to the contrary notwithstanding, whenever a mobile home is moved into the town, payment of the permit fee shall be prorated on a monthly basis for each fractional part of a year during which the mobile home is in the town. If all or any portion of the permit fee is not paid prior to the mobile home being placed in the town, the unpaid amount shall be past due and a penalty of ten percent per month (or any portion thereof) shall accrue on the unpaid balance of the permit fee. No refunds shall be made to any permittee who sells or moves a mobile home after the fee has been paid. 
(c)  Once the annual permit fee has been paid by the owner of the mobile home, he or she may be issued a sticker or other evidence of payment by the town manager or his authorized agent. If issued by the town, the sticker or other evidence of payment must be placed upon the right front of the mobile home facing the street three feet above finished grade and one foot over from the side of the mobile home. 
(d)  For purposes of assessing real property taxes, any mobile home required to obtain a permit under this article shall be considered personal property, severable from the land upon which it is located, and not included for purposes of real property tax assessment, regardless of the manner in which it is attached to or affixed to the real estate upon which it is located. 
(e)  Any mobile home permit fees that are past due as outlined in this section are a debt owed to the town, and the town may forward the collection of delinquent mobile home permit fee accounts (including all authorized penalties and interest) to a third-party collection agency in accordance with section 2-71 ("Use of third-party collection agency"). 
(Ord. of 6-1-98, § 3; Ord. of 4-17-00(1), § 1; Ord. No. 013-08, §§ 1, 2, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 004-15, § 1, 4-20-15) 
Sec. 62-54. - Duties of mobile home park operator. 
(a)  Copies of this article and town mobile home permit application forms shall be furnished to each mobile home park operator who shall give a copy of same to every mobile home owner who applies to the operator to move a mobile home into that operator's park. The mobile home park operator shall provide those documents at the time the operator accepts the mobile home owner's application to move the mobile home into that park. The mobile home park operator shall also provide those documents to any person who purchases or acquires title to a mobile home already located within that park. 
(b)  Mobile home park operators shall maintain a lease record which shall be open for inspection at all times by the town manager or his authorized agent. Before June 1st of each year, the mobile home park operator shall report to the town manager, the names and addresses of all persons having mobile homes on his land. 
(Ord. of 6-1-98, § 4) 
Sec. 62-55. - Use of town utilities. 
    The owner or occupant of any mobile home shall not be entitled to receive town utilities until the permit fee required by this article is paid in full and town personnel shall refuse to provide sewage, water and electricity to the mobile home until satisfactory proof is furnished that such permit fee has been paid. 
(Ord. of 6-1-98, § 5) 
Sec. 62-56. - Exemptions. 
    This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Unoccupied mobile homes located on a dealer's display lot; 
(2)  Mobile homes being transported through the town; 
(3)  Mobile homes legally existing in the town limits prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article derives which are placed on a lot deeded under the same ownership as the mobile home. 
(Ord. of 6-1-98, § 6) 
Sec. 62-57. - Violations, penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a criminal violation and, upon conviction, be subject to criminal penalties as provided under section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 6-1-98, § 7; Ord. of 8-5-02(1), § 24) 
Sec. 62-58. - Reduction in annual mobile home placement permit fee for persons 65 years of age or older. 
(a)  Exemption amount. By the first regular council meeting in November of each year, the town council shall annually vote to determine whether or not a mobile home placement permit exemption shall be made available for the upcoming year to eligible applicants and if so the amount of the exemption. 
(b)  Eligibility. To be eligible for a mobile home placement permit exemption under this section, applicants shall: 
(1)  Be legally domiciled within the Town of Smyrna, Delaware; 
(2)  Be 65 years of age or over; 
(3)  Own the mobile home for which the exemption is sought and have continuously resided therein for at least one year prior to February 1 of the year for which the exemption is sought; and 
(4)  Have had an income for the tax year that most recently concluded prior to the application deadline for applying for the exemption that does not exceed: 
a.  $24,000 for an individual applicant; or 
b.  $30,000 for applicants living in the same dwelling and filing jointly. 
For purposes of this section, the applicant's income means all income from whatever source derived (other than Social Security, Veteran Disability Compensation, and Railroad Pension) including capital gains, pension annuities and retirement. 
(c)  Filing procedures. To be considered for a mobile home placement permit exemption under this section, an applicant shall file a placement permit exemption application at Town Hall by the first Friday in December by 4:30 p.m. The application shall include: 
(1)  A copy of the applicant's IRS Form 1040 or a statement by the applicant that the applicant was not required to file a Federal IRS 1040 form for the income received in the most current calendar year immediately preceding the application deadline; 
(2)  A copy of a picture ID for the applicant showing the applicant's birth date; 
(3)  A statement of income for the applicant and the applicant's spouse (if applicable); 
(4)  The names of other owners of the same dwelling; 
(5)  The address of the dwelling for which the permit exemption is sought; and 
(6)  Additional information deemed necessary by the town. 
(d)  Approval of applications. Prior to second council meeting in December of each year, the town manager's office shall review all placement permit exemption applications, giving prompt written notice to the applicant of any application not approved, which written notice shall include the procedures outlined herein for appealing the denial of an application. 
(e)  Appealing denied applications. Any applicant whose placement permit exemption application was denied by the town manager may appeal that decision to the town council, the date and time of which shall be set annually by the town council, by filing a written appeal with the town at least seven business days prior to the second council meeting in January, which written appeal shall include the grounds for the appeal, the appellant's daytime phone number, the names of any witnesses that will be testifying, whether the appellant will be represented by an attorney, and the amount of time needed for the appeal (not to exceed 20 minutes). After hearing the appeal, the town council will render a written decision within 30 days of the appeal. The deadline for any permit fee required pursuant to the town council's decision shall be 30 days from the date the decision is mailed to the applicant. 
(f)  Property with multiple owners. Where more than one owner of the same dwelling is seeking a placement permit exemption, each owner shall file a separate application in accordance with the requirements of this section; provided that applicants owning property as tenants by the entirety (i.e. husband and wife) shall only be required to file one application. In addition to being subject to the requirements of this section, the right to claim a placement permit exemption for owners of property that is held by more than one person (as tenants in common, joint tenants, or tenants by the entirety), or by partnerships or fiduciaries, shall be governed by the provisions of 22 Del. C. § 1004. 
(Ord. No. 003-12, § 1, 5-7-12) 
Sec. 62-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ASSESSMENT APPEALS 

Sec. 62-60. - Annual assessment appeals. 
(a)  Notice of right to appeal and notice of appeal. Public notice of the annual assessment list posted in accordance with Section 9.7.1 of the Town Charter (which notice must include the date, time and place when appeals will be heard by the assessment appeals committee and the town council) shall include notice that each individual seeking to appeal a tax assessment or addition to a tax bill shall notify the town in writing of this intent at least five business days prior to the date set for hearing appeals, which notice shall include the grounds for the appeal, the appellant's daytime phone number, the names and positions of any witnesses who will be called to testify, whether the appellant will be represented by an attorney, and the amount of time needed for the appeal (not to exceed 20 minutes). 
(b)  Assessment appeals committee. 
(1)  Composition and purpose. The assessment appeals committee appointed pursuant to Section 9.7.2 of the Town Charter shall consist of three council members appointed by the town council. The assessment appeals committee shall be responsible for recommending to the town council whether or not each appeal should be approved by the town council, but the assessment appeals committee shall not have authority to make the final decision on any appeal. 
(2)  Meeting times and scheduling appeals. Prior to the first regularly scheduled town council meeting in April, the assessment appeals committee shall sit to hear appeals at the Smyrna Town Hall. If the town receives no written appeal requests prior to the appeals deadline, the assessment appeals committee shall not be required to appear, and no appeals shall be heard. After the deadline for filing appeals has expired and after considering the amount of time requested for each appeal, the town shall notify each appellant of their assigned appeal time. 
(3)  Appeals procedures. The assessment appeals committee shall hear appeals according to the following procedures: 
i.  Only appeals for which a timely written notice of appeal has been received shall be heard. 
ii.  After hearing each appeal, the assessment appeals committee shall vote whether or not to recommend to the town council that the appeal, or any part thereof, be approved by the town council. 
iii.  The assessment appeals committee may refuse to hear the appeal of any person arriving more than ten minutes after that person's scheduled appeal time. 
iv.  Upon hearing all scheduled and timely-present appeals, the appeals meeting shall be adjourned. 
(c)  Appeals to the Smyrna Town Council. At the first regularly scheduled council meeting in April, the Smyrna Town Council shall sit to hear appeals from individuals seeking to appeal a property tax assessment and/or any additional charges included in the annual assessment list. After hearing the recommendation of the assessment appeals committee and such other information as the town council deems pertinent, and after hearing from each appellant desiring to be heard, the town council shall vote to decide whether or not to grant or deny each appeal, in whole or in part. 
(Ord. No. 005-11, § 1, 8-1-11) 
Sec. 62-61. - Supplemental assessment appeals. 
(a)  Notice. Any individual receiving notice of a supplemental assessment may request, in writing, an appeal of the assessment to the town council. The appeal request must be received at the Town Hall within 14 days of the date the notice of supplemental assessment was mailed to the individual. 
(b)  Hearing before council. An assessment appeals committee shall not be formed to hear supplemental assessment appeals. Individuals appealing a supplemental assessment shall make their appeals directly to the town council at a regularly scheduled council meeting. The town shall mail written notice to the applicant of the date of the council meeting where the appeal shall take place. 
(Ord. No. 005-11, § 1, 8-1-11) 
Chapter 66 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- General penalty for Code violations, § 1-11; alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements, ch. 10; civil emergencies, ch. 22; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; law enforcement, ch. 34; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 38; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 42; parks and recreation, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; zoning regulations, app. A; subdivision regulations, app. B. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 66-1. - Traffic signs and signals. 
(a)  All markings, signs, signals and lights regulating the use thereof and the traffic thereon of all streets, sidewalks, lanes and alleys within the town which were erected, installed or affixed as of February 18, 1997, shall continue in full force and effect until otherwise changed. 
(b)  The chief of police and the town manager shall recommend to the mayor and council the nature and location of any and all markings, signs, signals, lights, one-way streets, no-parking zones, and restricted truck traffic routes as in their opinion may be necessary to properly regulate the use thereof and traffic thereon on all streets, sidewalks, lanes and alleys in the town, and after resolution duly adopted by the town council of the recommendation aforementioned, the chief of police and the town manager are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to erect, install and affix any and all markings, signs, signals and lights of such nature and at such location as as so-approved by the town council. A copy of such resolution, duly certified by the secretary of the town council, shall be maintained at the town hall and at the police station and shall be an official record of the town council's action. 
(c)  All regulations, markings, signs, signals, lights, one-way streets, no-parking zones, and restricted touch traffic routes so approved by the town council shall become effective as of the date specified in such resolution by the town council, but in no event earlier than the date that appropriate markings, signs, signals or other traffic control devices are in place and operational. 
(d)  Any regulations required by an emergency affecting the safety of the public of the town may be promulgated by the chief of police and the town manager and shall become immediately effective and any persons violating same will be subject to arrest and conviction as a result of the violation even though such regulation has not been approved by the mayor and council. 
(e)  Except for emergency regulations adopted pursuant to section 66-1(d) above, it shall be an affirmative defense to any charge brought under section 66-26 (Commercial Vehicles; Travel Over Certain Streets Prohibited), section 66-41 (One-Way Streets), section 66-51 (Signs, Signals, Markings and Devices), section 66-52 (Comply with Signs), section 66-66 (Speed Limits Established; Penalty), section 66-100 (Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours), section 66-101 (Parking Prohibited in Certain Areas at all Times), section 66-102 (Parking Prohibited for Longer than Certain Times in Certain Areas), section 66-103 (Parking in Fire Lanes), section 66-104 (Handicapped Parking and Signage for Persons with Disabilities), section 66-105 (Parking on Certain Streets During Snowfall), and section 66-106 (Parking Prohibited Except When Parallel), that an appropriate traffic control sign, signal, electronic device, and/or lane marking was not in place, properly operating, or otherwise incapable of placing a reasonable person on notice as to the prescribed conduct. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 21, §§ 1-4; Ord. of 2-18-97(2), §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 004-12, § 1, 6-4-12) 
Secs. 66-2-66-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 66-26. - Commercial vehicles; travel over certain streets prohibited. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the term "commercial vehicle" shall be construed to mean those vehicles for which a commercial registration is required by the motor vehicle department of the state. 
(b)  No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, a commercial vehicle over any street designated by resolution of the town council duly adopted pursuant to section 66-1(b) hereof. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit any vehicle, commercial or otherwise, from using the streets referred to in subsection (b) of this section for pickup or delivery service to any residence or place of business located on any of the aforesaid streets. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the movement of hearses, ambulances, pickup trucks, panel trucks or station wagons over any of the streets referred to in subsection (b) of this section. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 13, §§ 1-5; Ord. of 2-18-97(2), § 3) 
Sec. 66-27. - Hanging on to moving vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person with roller skates, sleds or any other article, or in person to hang on to any moving vehicle whatsoever. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a criminal violation and, upon conviction, be subject to criminal penalties of not less than two dollars nor more than five dollars plus court costs and victim's compensation fund assessment if applicable. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 15, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 8-5-02(1), § 25) 
Sec. 66-28. - Heavy vehicles or loads; permit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or to permit the operation of any vehicle carrying a heavier weight than is permitted on the improved highways of the state or hauling, pulling or otherwise moving any object of an unusual weight or size, whether the tires of the wheels or the rollers or other device for such moving are smooth, ridged or cleated, on any street or other public thoroughfare within the corporate limits of the town until application has been made to and a written permit has been issued by the town manager. The application shall be made in writing and shall describe the vehicle carrying or hauling such load or object and shall also describe such load or object as to its nature, approximate size and weight, and stating the nature of the wheels or rollers or similar moving devices, also stating when it is desired to make use of such permit and over what streets in the town of such load or object is desired to be carried or hauled. The town manager in considering the application for a permit shall inspect, if possible, the carrying or hauling vehicle and also the load or object to be carried or hauled, he shall consider the nature and condition of the streets to be traversed and the probability or possibility of damage thereto, and if satisfied that such streets will not be damaged by the moving or hauling of such weight or object, he shall grant a written permit which shall contain a description of the vehicle to be used and the weight or object to be carried or hauled, the route to be traversed and the time the permit shall cover and other conditions which he may consider necessary to protect such streets and thereupon the designated streets may be used for the designated period for the hauling or carrying of the weight or object described in the permit. The town manager shall have power to withhold the permit until such conditions as he imposes for the preservation of the streets shall be complied with. The town manager shall also have the power to require such cash deposit as he deems necessary to indemnify the town from any damage which might be done to the streets upon the granting and use of such permit, which deposit shall be returned in full to the applicant if the town manager determines that no damage has been done but which shall be retained by the town manager for the town, either all or as much thereof as may be necessary to repair damage done. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a criminal violation and, upon conviction, be subject to criminal penalties as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 18, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 8-5-02(1), § 26) 
Sec. 66-29. - Prohibiting commercial vehicles with three or more axles from all streets except: (1) Designated "truck routes" and (2) When making local deliveries or pickups. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, no commercial vehicle having three or more axles shall be operated on any street in the town except on a "truck route" duly-designated by resolution of the town council adopted pursuant to section 66-1(b) hereof. Exceptions: This section shall not apply to any commercial vehicle with three or more axles: 
(1)  Making a local delivery to or pickup from a place in the town incapable of being directly accessed from a designated "truck route." The driver must have available proof of the intended place of delivery or pickup and: 
a.  If entering the town limits, shall use the most direct practical route from a designated truck route to and from the place of delivery or pickup; and 
b.  If originating from within the town limits, shall use the most direct practical route to and from the place of delivery or pickup within the town and/or the most direct practical route to a designated "truck route" if going outside the town limits. 
(2)  Owned by or leased to the town or any volunteer fire company or emergency response organization when engaged in official business, including, by way of example, those vehicles of any fire department, any police department or agency, or to any town or state public works department or agency. 
(3)  Owned by, leased to, or operated by any public utility company (or its subcontractor) while engaged in public utility operations. 
(4)  Garbage and solid waste haulers in the course of their business operations. 
(5)  Operated on any town street officially designated as a detour route where such vehicle could otherwise be lawfully operated upon the street for which such detour is established. 
(Ord. of 8-5-02(2)) 
Secs. 66-30-66-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ONE-WAY STREETS 

Sec. 66-41. - Established. 
    Motor vehicles within the corporate limits of the town shall proceed upon those streets designated by council in a resolution duly adopted pursuant to section 66-1(b) only in the direction prescribed in such resolution. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 12, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 2-18-97(2), § 4) 
Secs. 66-42-66-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RIGHT-OF-WAY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted February 18, 1997, deleted §§ 66-51, 66-52 and added new sections to read as herein set out. Formerly, such sections pertained to traffic control signal intersections and stop sign intersections and derived from Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 19, § 1; Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 20, § 1; Ord. of 12-20-93(3), § 1; Ord. of 12-19-94, § 1; Ord. of 2-21-95(1), (2), § 1; Ord. of 3-6-95, § 1; Ord. of 10-2-95(1), § 1; Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1; Ord. of 12-16-96(1), § 1. 

Sec. 66-51. - Signs, signals, markings and devices. 
    The town council shall, pursuant to section 66-1(b), designate, by resolution, the placement, removal, and modification, of all traffic control signs, signals, lane markings, and/or other electric traffic control devices. 
(Ord. of 2-18-97(2), § 5) 
Sec. 66-52. - Comply with signs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, required by law to comply with any such traffic control signs, signal, lane marking, and/or electronic traffic control device to fail to comply therewith. 
(Ord. of 2-18-97(2), § 5) 
Secs. 66-53-66-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SPEED 

Sec. 66-66. - Speed limits established, penalty. 
(a)  Speed limits on all streets, lanes, and alleys of the town shall be as designated by the town council, by resolution, pursuant to section 66-1(b) of the Town Code; provided that on any street, lane, or alley for which the town council has not so established a speed limit, the speed limit shall be as otherwise established by state law. 
(b)  Any person violating any speed limit established under paragraph (a) of this section shall be guilty of a criminal violation and, upon conviction, be subject to the same penalties as provided by 21 Del C. § 4169 as it may from time to time hereafter be amended or as provided by any future corresponding provision of law. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 30, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 2-18-97(2), § 6; Ord. of 8-5-02(1), § 27) 
Secs. 66-67-66-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - TURNING MOVEMENTS 

Sec. 66-76. - U-turns. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, a vehicle is defined as any two, three, four or more wheeled vehicle which may be transported or drawn upon a public alley, street, boulevard or highway. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make a U-turn while driving a vehicle anywhere on Market Street Plaza between South Street and Commerce Street, or to enter either Commerce Street or South Street with a U-turn back onto Market Street Plaza. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 31, §§ 1, 2) 
DIVISION 6. - LOUD SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEMS 

Sec. 66-77. - Loud sound amplification systems prohibited. 
(a)  No person operating or occupying a motor vehicle on a street, highway, alley, parking lot or driveway shall operate or permit the operation of any sound amplification system from within the vehicle so that the sound is plainly audible at a distance of 50 or more feet from the vehicle. 
(b)  "Sound amplification system" means any radio, tape player, compact disc player, loud speaker or other electronic device used for the amplification of sound. 
(c)  "Plainly audible" means any sound produced by a sound amplification system from within the vehicle, which clearly can be heard at a distance of 50 feet or more. Measurement standards shall be by the auditory senses, based upon direct line of sight, words or phrases need not be discernible, and bass reverberations are included. The motor vehicle may be stopped, standing, parked or moving on a street, highway, alley, parking lot or driveway. 
(d)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the operator was not otherwise prohibited by law from operating the sound amplification system, and that any of the following apply: 
(1)  The system was being operated to request medical or vehicular assistance or to warn of a hazardous road condition; 
(2)  The vehicle was an emergency or public safety vehicle; 
(3)  The vehicle was owned and operated by the town or a gas, electric, communications or refuse company; 
(4)  The system was used for the purpose of giving instructions, directions, talks, addresses, lectures or transmitting music to any persons or assemblages of persons in compliance with ordinances of the town; 
(5)  The vehicle was used in authorized public activities, such as parades, fireworks, sport events, musical productions and other activities which have the approval of the department of the town authorized to grant such approval. 
(Ord. of 4-15-96(2)) 
Sec. 66-78. - Penalty. 
    Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this division shall be guilty of a criminal violation and, upon conviction, be subject to criminal penalties of not less than $15.00 for a first offense, $50.00 for a second offense, and $500.00 for a third or subsequent offense. Each day any violation hereof is found to exist or continues to exist shall be a separate offense and punishable as such hereunder. For purposes hereof, only violations occurring within one year (i.e. any 365-consecutive-day period) shall be deemed to be a prior offense. 
(Ord. of 4-15-96(2); Ord. of 8-5-02(1), § 28) 
Sec. 66-79. - Payment of fines by mail. 
    Any person charged with violating any provision of this division may elect to proceed under section 1-12 of chapter 1, part II of the Smyrna Town Code ("payment of penalties by mail ..."). 
(Ord. of 4-15-96(2)) 
Secs. 66-80-66-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 

Sec. 66-96. - Scope; enforcement. 
    The parking regulations in this article shall be in full force and effect at all times, and the town's police department is authorized and empowered to install any necessary signs or symbols clearly setting forth the areas mentioned in this article as a no parking zone. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 25, § 2) 
Sec. 66-97. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless context clearly indicates otherwise: 
(1)  Boat: Any vessel that may he propelled by oars, paddles, cads, power or motor that is designed or intended to be used on any body of water. 
(2)  Driveway: A surface used to accommodate vehicles in accordance with the applicable building code regulations and being that part of the passage located on private property that provides vehicular ingress and egress to a property fronting on a public street. 
(3)  Front yard area: A yard extending the full width of the lot between the front street line and the residential dwelling, except for driveway. 
(4)  Highway: The entire width between boundary lines of every way or place of whatever nature open to the use of the public as a matter if right for purposes of vehicular travel, but does not include a road or driveway upon grounds owned by private persons, educational institutions, or businesses. 
(5)  Intersection: The area embraced within the prolongation of the lateral curb lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of two or more highways which join one another at an angle, whether or not one such highway crosses the other. 
(6)  Motor vehicle: Includes all self-propelled vehicles, except farm tractors, electric personal assistive mobility devices, and OHV's. 
(7)  Off-highway vehicle (OHV): A motor-driven off-road vehicle capable of cross-country travel without benefit of a road or trail, on or immediately over land, snow, ice, marsh, swampland or other natural terrain. It includes, but is not limited to, a multi-wheel-drive or low-pressure-tire vehicle, a motorcycle or related two-wheel vehicle, an amphibious machine, a ground-effect air-cushion vehicle or other means of transportation deriving motor power from a source other than muscle or wind. OHV does not include a farm vehicle being used for farming, vehicles use for military fire, emergency or law enforcement purposes, a construction or logging vehicle used in performance of its common function or a registered aircraft. 
(8)  Private road or driveway: Includes every road or driveway not open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
(9)  Recreational vehicle: Includes every other vehicle, self-propelled or capable of being towed by a passenger vehicle, bus, van, station wagon or pickup truck, of such size and weight as not to require any special highway movement permits from the state department of motor vehicles, which is primarily designed or constructed to provide temporary, movable human living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use. 
(10)  Roadway: That portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" as used herein shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively. 
(11)  Trailer: Includes, a mobile home, travel trailer, house trailer, boat trailer, office trailer, camping trailer or any vehicle without motive power designed to carry property or passengers wholly on its own structure and to be drawn by a motor vehicle. 
(Ord. of 12-16-02(2), § 1; Ord. No. 012-04, § 1, 6-21-04) 
Sec. 66-98. - Positioning of vehicle; obedience to markings. 
    All vehicles are hereby required to be parked on the streets of the town according to Street markings designated for that purpose, and on the streets that are not so marked, including any street or section of street designated in a resolution adopted pursuant to section 66-1(b), all vehicles are required to be parked parallel to and not more than one foot from the curb to the right side of the street in the direction of the flow of traffic. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 11, § 16; Ord. of 12-16-02(2), § 2; Ord. No. 016-03, § 1, 6-2-03) 
Editor's note- The editor has treated Ord. of Dec. 16, 2002, § 2, as renumbering former section 66-97 as new section 66-98. 
Sec. 66-99. - Stopping, standing or parking in specified places. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic controlled device in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk. 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway. 
(3)  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant. 
(4)  On a crosswalk. 
(5)  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection. 
(6)  Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway. 
(7)  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of the entrance when properly signposted. 
(8)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking a vehicle would obstruct traffic. 
(9)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
(10)  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping. 
(11)  Within 15 feet of an intersection. 
(12)  Wherever a curb is marked yellow or a yellow line is placed at the edge of a roadway or shoulder. 
(b)  No person shall move a vehicle not owned by such person into an area prohibited under subsection (a) of this section or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 11, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 12-16-02(2), § 3; Ord. No. 012-04, § 2, 6-21-04) 
Editor's note- Ord. of Dec. 16, 2002, § 3, renumbered former section 66-103 as new section 66-99. 
Sec. 66-100. - Parking prohibited during certain hours. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park or to allow to remain parked any motor vehicle during the days and hours designated for any street by resolution adopted pursuant to section 66-1(b). 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 11, §§ 3, 10, Tit. 24, § 1; Ord. of 3-7-94, § 1; Ord. of 2-18-97(2), § 9; Ord. of 12-16-02(2), § 4) 
Editor's note- Ord. of Dec. 16, 2002, § 4, renumbered former section 66-107 as new section 66-100. 
Sec. 66-101. - Parking prohibited in certain areas at all times. 
    It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle at any time in any area of the town designated by resolution adopted pursuant to section 66-1(b). 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 11, §§ 7, 8, 10, 12-15, Tit. 25, § 1, Tit. 26, § 1, Tit. 27, § 1; Ord. of 2-18-97(2), § 10; Ord. of 12-16-02(2), § 5) 
Editor's note- Ord. of Dec. 16, 2002, § 5, renumbered former section 66-108 as new section 66-101. 
Sec. 66-102. - Parking prohibited for longer than certain time in certain areas. 
(a)  Fifteen minutes seven days a week. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for a period exceeding 15 minutes at any time, at any location designated by resolution adopted pursuant to section 66-1(b), seven days a week including holidays, such designated locations being marked with signs or the street painted reading "15-Minute Parking." 
(b)  Thirty minutes. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle longer than 30 minutes in any area designated pursuant to resolution adopted pursuant to section 66-1(b). 
(c)  Two hours at any time. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle longer than two hours at any time in any area designated pursuant to resolution adopted pursuant to section 66-1(b). 
(d)  Two hours between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle longer than two hours at any one time between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Sundays and holidays excluded, on any street designated pursuant to resolution adopted pursuant to section 66-1(b). 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 11, §§ 14, 15; Ord. of 2-18-97(2), § 11; Ord. of 12-16-02(2), § 6) 
Editor's note- Ord. of Dec. 16, 2002, § 6, renumbered former section 66-109 as new section 66-102. 
Sec. 66-103. - Parking in fire lanes. 
(a)  Prohibited conduct. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any place which has been designated and properly identified as a fire lane pursuant to regulations of the state fire marshal, except in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device. 
(b)  Enforcement by towing. Any police officer in the town is hereby authorized to remove or cause to be removed, and stored at the owner's expense, any unattended vehicle left standing wholly or partially within a fire lane or any unattended vehicle left standing in a location so as to cause an obstruction to the accessibility to a fire lane, fire hydrant or standpipe connection. When any vehicle is so removed, the procedures established in article V of this chapter shall be complied with. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person convicted of a violation of subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a civil violation and, upon conviction before any court of competent jurisdiction, shall pay a fine of $50.00 and costs. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 33, §§ 2, 3; Ord. of 12-16-02(2), § 7; Ord. No. 002-14, § 1, 3-17-14) 
Editor's note- Ord. of Dec. 16, 2002, § 7, renumbered former section 66-99 as new section 66-103. 
Sec. 66-104. - Handicapped parking and signage for persons with disabilities. 
(a)  With the exception of a "vehicle being used by a person with a disability" as defined in 21 Del. C. §§ 4183, 2134, and 2135, it is unlawful to park on public or private property any vehicle in any area under the control of the municipality or under the control of an owner or lessee of private property that is designated and conspicuously mark as a parking space or zone for persons with disabilities which limit or impair the ability to walk. 
(b)  Parking spaces or zones for use by persons with disabilities which limit or impair the ability to walk shall be provided in accordance with the International Building Code as amended and adopted by the town council. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, "conspicuously marked" means that a vertical sign has been placed at an approximate height of at least five feet but no more than seven feet when measured from the surface directly below the sign to the top of the sign for each parking space or zone. The sign shall comply with federal specifications for the identification of a parking zone or space for persons with disabilities which limit or impair the ability to walk. A sign at least 12 inches wide (horizontal) by 18 inches tall (vertical) that includes the internationally recognized wheelchair symbol of access shall be required for each parking space or zone for persons with disabilities which limit or impair the ability to walk. These requirements may not be construed to preclude additional markings, such as the international wheelchair symbol or a striped extension area painted on the space or zone, or a tow-away warning sign. 
(d)  Any officer authorized to issue a parking summons and citation shall issue a written notice of violation and corrective order to an individual of record or artificial entity of record of private property that is generally accessible to the public who has failed to erect and maintain signage pursuant to this section. Such corrective order shall afford the individual of record or artificial entity of record found in violation of this section with at least ten calender days and not more than 30 calender days to achieve compliance with this section. If after 30 days from the date that the written notice of violation and corrective order is issued, the individual of record or artificial entity of record has not erected and or maintained the required signage, the officer may issue a summons (with associated penalties and fines) or apply for a warrant in the name of the offending individual or artificial entity. 
(e)  Upon the discovery on private property of a vehicle, other than "a vehicle being used by a person with a disability" as defined in 21 Del. C. § 4183, in a designated parking space or zone for persons with disabilities, the owner or lessee of the private property may cause the illegally parked vehicle to be removed to a private storage area maintained for the safe storage of vehicles. Any costs of removal and storage shall be borne by the owner or operator of the vehicle. 
(f)  Upon the discovery of a vehicle illegally parked in a designated parking space or zone for persons with disabilities that is under the control of the municipality or private property that is generally accessible to the public, any officer authorized to issue a parking summons and citation may cause the illegally parked vehicle to be removed to a private storage area maintained for the safe storage of vehicles. Any costs of removal and storage shall be borne by the owner or operator of the vehicle. In the alternative, any officer authorized to issue a parking summons and citation may cause a uniform parking summons to be attached to an unattended vehicle found in violation of this section. It is prima facie evidence that the individual or artificial entity in whose name the unattended vehicle is registered is responsible for the violation. 
(g)  An individual or artificial entity who violates any provision of this section shall receive a mandatory fine of $100.00 for a first offense, and for a subsequent like offense, a mandatory fine of $200.00 or a term of imprisonment of not less than ten nor more than 30 days, or both. Any officer authorized to issue a parking summons and citation may cause the illegally parked vehicle to be removed to a private storage area maintained for the safe storage of vehicles at the cost of the owner or operator of the vehicle. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 32, §§ 2-4, 7; Ord. No. 002-04, § 1, 4-5-04; Ord. No. 002-14, § 2, 3-17-14) 
Sec. 66-105. - Parking on certain streets during snowfall. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle or permit any vehicle to remain parked during any snowfall exceeding on hour in duration on any street designated by resolution of the town council pursuant to section 66-1(b). 
(b)  Any vehicle parked on the aforesaid streets after a snowfall of one hour duration shall, after an unsuccessful attempt by the police department to locate the owner or operator thereof, be removed or towed away to a storage area designated by the police department or by any person authorized by the police department to do so at the expense of the owner thereof, such expense to be paid prior to release of vehicle in addition to any fine or costs. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 22, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 2-18-97(2), § 7; Ord. of 12-16-02(2), § 8) 
Editor's note- Ord. of Dec. 16, 2002, § 8, renumbered former section 66-100 as new section 66-105. 
Sec. 66-106. - Parking prohibited except when parallel. 
    It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any street or section of street designated in a resolution adopted pursuant to section 66-1(b) unless such vehicle is parked parallel and within one foot of the curb or side of such street. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 11, §§ 3-7, 9-11, 14; Ord. of 2-18-97(2), § 8) 
Sec. 66-106.5. - Parking of trucks and other heavy equipment. 
(a)  No person shall park or allow to remain parked any truck, mobile heavy construction equipment, or any other vehicle licensed by this state or any other state as a commercial vehicle where such commercial vehicle is: (i) in excess of 14,900 pounds, or (ii) having in excess of two axles, or (c) designed, modified, or operated to carry 15 or more passengers on any public street, road, alley or way within the limits of the town, except as provided in subsequent sections of this division. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not limit or restrict in any way the temporary parking of such trucks for the purpose of loading and unloading or serving residents or places of business of the town. 
(c)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to that area of the town known as and designated as the DuPont Highway, also known as and designated as U.S. Route 13, where same passes through the town. 
(d)  Any person convicted of violating this section shall be deemed guilty of a criminal violation and, upon conviction before any court of competent jurisdiction, shall be penalized as follows: 
(1)  First offense ..... $10.00 
(2)  Second offense ..... 25.00 
(3)  Third and each subsequent offense ..... 50.00 
For purposes of determining whether a violation of this section is a second, third or subsequent offense, only violations occurring within 180 days immediately prior to the violation in question and resulting in convictions shall be counted. 
(e)  Each day that a violation of this section or any of the provisions thereof continues shall be considered as a separate offense and penalties shall be imposed accordingly. 
(f)  With the consent of a person charged with a first offense violation of this section, the chief of police or his authorized representative is authorized to accept and receive, without a hearing, the sum of $5.00 as a penalty for such violation, if paid within five days after the date of the violation, and to accept and receive, without a hearing, the sum of $10.00 if the penalty is paid after the expiration of five days from the date that the violation occurs. Such payment at the office of the police department shall be considered an admission of the violation charged, a conviction for purposes of computing second, third and subsequent offenses, a waiver of the right to a hearing and a waiver of all rights of appeal. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 23, §§ 1-6; Ord. of 8-5-02(1), § 29; Ord. of 12-16-02(2), § 9; Ord. No. 007-12, § 1, 7-16-12) 
Editor's note- Ord. of Dec. 16, 2002, § 9, renumbered former section 66-101 as new section 66-106. In order to avoid duplication of section numbers, the editor has redesignated the provisions of said section as section 66-106.5. 
Sec. 66-107. - Parking of boats, boat trailers and OHVs. 
    No boat, boat trailer, or OHV shall be parked, placed, stored, or maintained on any front yard area, public roadway, street or other public property for a time period exceeding 24 hours. 
(Ord. of 12-16-02(2), § 10) 
Sec. 66-108. - Parking of recreational vehicles. 
(a)  No recreational vehicle shall be parked, placed, stored, or maintained on Any front yard area, public roadway, street or other public property. 
(b)  Parking of recreational vehicles on any public roadway, street or other public property shall be permitted on a temporary basis, not to exceed 14 days, by any person visiting a lot owner, lessee or sub-lessee. A visitor wishing to avail themselves of this privilege must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Parking on the roadway during the 14-day period shall be limited to the portion of the fronting on the lot which is the subject of the visit. 
(2)  The visitor shall obtain a temporary permit from the town which permit shall designate the vehicle to be parked, to whom the permit is issued and the date upon which the permit is to expire. The temporary permit must be displayed on the rearview mirror of the recreational vehicle during the time it is parked on the roadway. 
(3)  A fee set by resolution of the town from time to time exists to defray the costs of administering the permit procedure. The fee shall be due and payable to the town clerk upon filing application. 
(4)  Failure to display the temporary permit shall be deemed to be a violation of this article and punishable as herein provided. 
(5)  No more than three temporary permits may be issued in any calendar year to any individual. 
(c)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, all owners of recreational vehicles currently parked on any public roadway, street or other public property, who do not have private property on which to park the recreational vehicle shall be permitted to continue to park the recreational vehicle on same, subject to the condition that this exemption shall expire on the earlier of the two following occurrences, the intent of this provision being to assure that exemption rights are non-transferrable with respect to the vehicle and place of residence: 
(1)  The recreational vehicle is sold by the owner who qualified for the exemption. 
(2)  The recreational vehicle owner has moved from the property which served as the residence on the date this provision was adopted. 
(d)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, no exemption shall exceed a period of six months from the date of the adoption of this section. 
(Ord. of 12-16-02(2), § 11) 
Sec. 66-109. - Parking of vehicles loaded with livestock or poultry. 
(a)  The parking of vehicles loaded with livestock and/or poultry on the streets and other thoroughfares within the corporate limits of the town for a period of more than one hour is hereby declared to be a common and public nuisance. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or permit to remain standing on the streets or other public thoroughfares of the town a truck or other vehicle in which there is livestock and/or poultry for a period longer than one hour, which time limit, shall include all parking at any and all places in the town as aforesaid and shall not permit one hour parking in each of various places in the town as aforesaid. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 17, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 12-16-02(2), § 12) 
Editor's note- Ord. of Dec. 16, 2002, § 12, renumbered former section 66-98 as new section 66-109. 
Sec. 66-110. - Parking for loading or unloading livestock or poultry. 
(a)  The loading or unloading of any vehicle and the transferring from one vehicle to another of livestock and/or poultry on the streets or any other public thoroughfares within the limits of the town are hereby declared to be common and public nuisances. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to load or unload any vehicle, or transfer from one vehicle to another any livestock and/or poultry on any street or other public thoroughfare within the corporate limits of the town, except in the event of the breakdown of the truck or other vehicle transporting such livestock and/or poultry. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 16, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 12-16-02(2), § 13) 
Editor's note- Ord. of Dec. 16, 2002, § 13, renumbered former section 66-102 as new section 66-110. 
Sec. 66-111. - Parking on town-owned property, prohibitions and restrictions. 
(a)  Regulations prohibiting and/or restricting parking on town-owned property will be developed by the police chief and the town manager who shall cause signs to be erected to provide for proper and appropriate notification of said prohibitions and/or restrictions. 
(b)  Said prohibitions and/or restrictions shall become immediately effective after the erection of proper and appropriate signs and any persons violating same will be subject to arrest and conviction as a result of the violation even though such regulation has not been approved by the mayor and council. 
(c)  These prohibitions and/or restrictions may be waived upon approval by the police chief and the town manager. 
(d)  Persons violating posted prohibitions and/or restrictions shall be fined according to provisions of section 66-112 of this article. 
(e)  The police chief and/or the town manager may cause to have towed any vehicle found to be in violation of this section according to the provisions of article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 007-04, § 2, 4-5-04) 
Sec. 66-112. - Penalty for violations of article. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided, any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be guilty of a civil violation and, upon conviction before any court of competent jurisdiction, shall pay a fine of $15.00 and costs. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 24, §§ 2, 3; Ord. of 12-3-01, § 1; Ord. of 8-5-02(1), § 30; Ord. of 8-19-02(2), § 1; Ord. of 12-16-02(2), § 14; Ord. No. 007-04, § 1, 4-5-04; Ord. No. 015-10, §§ 1, 2, 12-6-10; Ord. No. 002-14, § 3, 3-17-14) 
Editor's note- Ord. of Dec. 16, 2002, § 14, renumbered former section 66-105 as new section 66-111. Ord. No. 007-04, § 1, adopted April 5, 2004, further renumbered said section 66-111 as new section 66-112. 
Secs. 66-113-66-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BICYCLES AND PLAY VEHICLES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 66-131. - Unlawful to remove or alter bicycle frame serial number. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the serial number of any bicycle frame. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the police force from stamping numbers on the frames of bicycles on which no serial number can be found or on which the number is illegible or insufficient for identification purposes. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 28, § 5) 
Sec. 66-132. - Parents' responsibility. 
    It shall be the parental responsibility to see that each bicycle in their household is in safe operating condition and is registered with the police department. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 28, § 6) 
Sec. 66-133. - Operation governed by state law. 
    Operation of bicycles and play vehicles will be governed by the motor vehicle laws of the state, 21 Del. C. §§ 4190-4196. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 28, § 6) 
Secs. 66-134-66-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 014-18, § 5, adopted November 5, 2018, repealed art. IV, div. 2, §§ 66-146-66-149. Former div. 2 pertained to bicycle licenses and derived from Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 28, §§ 1-4. 

Secs. 66-146-66-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TOWING OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 66-171. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Hazardous Vehicle and Illegally Parked Vehicle Towing Ordinance." 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 34, § 1) 
Sec. 66-172. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Vehicle means a machine propelled by power other than human power designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners, or slides and transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall include without limitation, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and wagon. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 34, § 2) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 66-173. - Vehicles creating a hazard. 
    Any police officer of this town, while in the performance of his duty, may remove and tow away or have removed and towed away by commercial towing service from any public highway, highway right-of-way, street or alley within the town, any vehicle parked or left standing in such a manner as to create a hazard by interfering with the normal movement of traffic, by preventing the exit from or entrance to any public highway, private road or driveway, by interfering with emergency firefighting equipment or any other emergency vehicle, or by being involved in an accident and rendered incapable of being moved under its own power. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 34, § 3) 
Sec. 66-174. - Vehicles violating parking ordinances. 
    Any police officer of this town, while in the performance of his duty, may remove and have towed away by a commercial towing service, from any public highway, highway right-of-way, street or alley within the town, any vehicle parked in violation of an ordinance of the town prohibiting parking in a designated area or restricting the length of time a vehicle may be parked therein, or prohibiting parking in a metered area for a longer period than that covered by the amount paid. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 34, § 4) 
Sec. 66-175. - Removal of vehicles. 
    Except for the town police department and employees of the town working in concert with the town police department, vehicles shall be removed and stored only by commercial wreckers or towing services duly licensed by the state. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 34, § 5) 
Sec. 66-176. - Notice after removal. 
    Within 24 hours of the removal of a vehicle pursuant to this article, the town police department shall give written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the registered owner of the vehicle, if known, that such vehicle has been impounded and stored pursuant to this article. Such notice may be hand-delivered to the registered owner or to such person lawfully entitled to possession should such person appear personally at the town police station to claim the vehicle; provided, however, that if such person is not the registered owner, written notice shall be sent to the registered owner. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 34, § 6) 
Sec. 66-177. - Records. 
    When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is authorized to be towed away, the police department shall keep and maintain a record of the vehicle towed, listing the color, year of manufacture, manufacturer's trade name, manufacturer's series name, body style, vehicle identification number and license plate year and number displayed on the vehicle. The record shall also include the date and hour of tow, location towed from, location towed to, reason for towing and the name of the officer authorizing the tow. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 34, § 7) 
Sec. 66-178. - Ascertainment of registered owner. 
(a)  When the town police department is unable to ascertain the identity of the registered owner of the towed vehicle, it will, within one business day of the removal of such vehicle, contact the state's division of motor vehicles, and such other agencies and departments of government in this and other states as are reasonably necessary to ascertain the name and address of the registered owner. 
(b)  Once the identity of the registered owner of the vehicle is determined, the town police department shall give written notice pursuant to section 66-176. If the town police department is unable to ascertain the registered owner after exhausting all reasonable efforts, it shall be sufficient notice under this section to publish the notice described in section 66-179, with all known information, once in a newspaper of general circulation in the town. Such notice by publication may contain multiple listings of vehicles. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 34, § 8) 
Sec. 66-179. - Contents of notice. 
(a)  Notice of removal under this article shall give the location of where the towed vehicle is stored and the costs being incurred for removal and storage. 
(b)  Notice of removal under this article shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Year, make, model and serial number of vehicle. 
(2)  The name and address of the last known registered owner of the vehicle, if available. 
(3)  The vehicle registration number and the title registration number of the vehicle, if available. 
(4)  The date on which the vehicle was removed. 
(5)  The location from which the vehicle was removed. 
(6)  The reason for towing, including citation of ordinance violated, if any. 
(c)  Notice of removal under this article shall also advise the registered owner of the vehicle that he or the person legally entitled to possession may request a hearing before a magistrate at which hearing he may introduce such witnesses and evidence as he deems necessary and relevant to the issues of whether costs incurred for removal and storage are reasonable. The notice shall state that any request for a hearing shall be made within 72 hours, not counting weekends or holidays, following receipt of this notice. The notice shall state that the hearing will be scheduled within 24 hours following receipt of a written or oral request by the town police department unless a request for an extension is submitted to the town police department with the hearing request. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 34, § 9) 
Sec. 66-180. - Hearing procedures. 
(a)  Upon receiving a request for a hearing pursuant to section 66-179, the town police department shall set a hearing within 24 hours before a magistrate of the town unless an extension is requested by the registered owner. Notice shall be given to the person requesting the hearing by certified mail, return receipt requested, and if possible, by telephone and to the town police department. 
(b)  At such hearing, the town police department shall produce evidence relevant to the issue of whether or not probable cause existed for towing pursuant to this article. The person requesting such hearing shall then be permitted to introduce such witnesses and evidence as he desires relevant to that issue. 
(c)  Evidence may also be received as to the reasonableness of removal and storage costs incurred. 
(d)  All witnesses shall be placed under oath. Strict rules of evidence shall not be required, but the magistrate may accept any relevant evidence of a probative nature which, in its opinion, is such as could reasonably be relied upon by persons of common sense and prudence. 
(e)  At the conclusion of such hearing, the magistrate shall determine whether or not probable cause existed for towing pursuant to this article. The magistrate shall also determine whether removal and storage costs incurred are reasonable. Upon a finding that removal and storage costs are unreasonable, the magistrate shall have the authority to reduce such costs. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 34, § 10) 
Sec. 66-181. - Bond. 
    The town police department shall, pending a hearing, release a vehicle to the registered owner or to a person legally entitled to its possession upon the posting of bond as surety in an amount equal to the removal and storage costs incurred; and upon a showing a proof of ownership or proof of the right to possession of the vehicle. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 34, § 11) 
Sec. 66-182. - Liability for costs. 
    The registered owner of a towed vehicle shall be responsible for payment in full of all removal and storage costs, absent a decision by a magistrate that no probable cause existed for towing. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 34, § 12) 
Sec. 66-183. - Disposition of vehicles following payment of costs. 
    Subsequent to a decision by the magistrate that probable cause existed for towing, or in the absence of a request for a hearing by the registered owner following proper notice, the town police department shall release the vehicle to the registered owner or to a person legally entitled to its possession upon payment in full of all removal and storage costs; and upon a showing of proof of ownership or proof of the right to possession of the vehicle. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 34, § 13) 
Sec. 66-184. - Return of vehicles following decision adverse to town. 
    Subsequent to a decision by the magistrate that no probable cause existed for towing, the town police department shall release the vehicle to the registered owner or to a person legally entitled to its possession upon a showing of proof of ownership or proof of the right to possession of the vehicle. The town shall be responsible for payment in full of all removal and storage costs. Any bond posted shall be refunded in full. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 34, § 14) 
Sec. 66-185. - Notice as to unclaimed vehicles. 
(a)  The town shall give written notice as provided for in subsection (b) of this section if: 
(1)  Within 72 hours following a decision by the magistrate that probable cause existed for towing, the vehicle is not reclaimed and all removal and storage costs are not paid; or 
(2)  Within 72 hours following receipt of the notice provided for in section 66-176, a hearing is not requested and the vehicle is not reclaimed and all removal and storage costs are not paid. 
(b)  Notice under this section by certified mail, return receipt requested, shall be directed to the registered owner of the vehicle, if known, and shall advise that the vehicle is subject to all the provisions of the state garageman's lien statute, 25 Del. C. § 3901 et seq., that under the terms thereof it is subject to being sold at public sale unless reclaimed and that the person who is entitled to possession of the vehicle may reclaim it upon payment of all charges incurred in the removal and storage of the vehicle. Notice shall also state the following: 
(1)  Year, make, model and serial number of vehicle. 
(2)  The name and address of the last known registered owner of the vehicle, if available. 
(3)  The vehicle registration number and the title registration number of the vehicle, if available. 
(4)  The date on which the vehicle was removed. 
(5)  The location from which the vehicle was removed. 
(6)  The location at which the vehicle is being stored. 
(7)  The costs incurred for removal and storage. 
(c)  The town police department shall also contact the state's division of motor vehicles and such other agencies and departments of government in this and other states as are reasonably necessary to ascertain the names and addresses of other persons with record interest in the vehicle, including lienholders. Such other persons shall be given notice in the same manner as stated in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  If unable to identify properly the last registered owner of any vehicle, or if unable to obtain with reasonable certainty, the names and addresses of the owner or other interested parties, including lienholders, it shall be sufficient notice under this section to publish the notice described in subsection (b) of this section once in the newspaper of general circulation in the town. Such notice by publication may contain multiple listings of vehicles. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 34, § 15) 
Sec. 66-186. - Disposition of unclaimed motor vehicles. 
    Any person who tows, removes, stores or keeps a vehicle at the direction of the town police department acting under the provisions of this article shall, from the time of taking possession thereof, be entitled to all rights, remedies and authority as provided under the state garageman's lien statute, 25 Del. C. § 3901 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time hereafter or any future corresponding provision of law; provided, however, that no attempt shall be made to satisfy the garageman's lien until the provisions of section 66-185 of this article are complied with by the town. In exercising such rights, remedies and authority, such persons shall be governed in all respects by the terms of that statute. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. I, Tit. 34, § 16) 
Chapter 70 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to acquire, construct and improve utility systems, § 2(b)(3)(d)-(g); authority to grant utility franchises, § 2(b)(15); authority to tax utility property, § 2(b)(25); water system, § 14; sewer system, § 15; electric current, power plan and franchises, § 16. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; plumbing code, § 18-271 et seq.; civil emergencies, ch. 22; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 38; parks and recreation, ch. 46; solid waste, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; zoning regulations, app. A; subdivision regulations, app. B. 
State Law reference- Public service commission's jurisdiction over municipally owned public utilities, 26 Del. C. § 202. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 70-1. - Obstructions near, attachments to utility fixtures or fire hydrants. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Responsible person means the person who placed, directed or authorized the obstruction in violation of subsections (b) through (d) of this section, who failed to cause its timely removal in violation of subsection (f) of this section, or who made or directed the unauthorized attachment in violation of subsection (g) of this section. Whenever a violation occurs on private property, the owner of record and/or person in possession shall be presumed to be the responsible person. 
    Unauthorized attachment means any object or thing physically attached to a utility fixture without written permission of the town manager (but shall not include lawful attachments by any authorized cable television service or by any other authorized public utility). Unauthorized attachments shall include posters, placards, handbills and other notices or advertisements. 
    Utility fixture means, without limitation, town utility poles, transformers, antenna towers, transformer pads, or other fixtures or equipment attached or affixed to real estate used or usable in connection with electric, telephone, gas, water or sewage service in the town. 
(b)  Fixture, improvements within ten feet. It shall be unlawful to erect, construct, built, place or maintain any improvement, fixture or other object which is not capable of being moved by one adult within ten feet of any utility fixture or fire hydrant within the town. 
(c)  Trees, shrubs, etc. within ten feet. It shall be unlawful to plant, cultivate or maintain any tree, shrub or bush within ten feet of any utility fixture in the town. 
(d)  Trees, shrubs, etc. near fire hydrants. It shall be unlawful to plant, cultivate or maintain any tree, shrub, bush or other vegetation in such proximity as to materially obstruct the accessibility or visibility of any fire hydrant in the Town; and in no event within ten feet of any such fire hydrant. 
(e)  Obstructions existing as of effective date. Any person responsible for the placement or maintenance of any obstruction prohibited by subsections (b) through (d) of this section which existed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall remove such obstruction at their own expense within such period of time as specified by the town manager under subsection (f) of this section. 
(f)  Removal of obstruction. Whenever the town manager discovers any obstruction in violation of subsections (b) through (d) of this section, he shall provide the responsible person with a written notice and order, by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal delivery, which notice and order shall specify: 
(1)  The location and nature of such obstruction. 
(2)  An order to remove the obstruction within a stated time period, not less than 21 days. 
(3)  That failure to remove such obstruction may result in financial penalties. 
(4)  That in lieu of or in addition to such penalties, failure to remove such obstruction may result in the town's removal of same with the cost thereof being assessed against the responsible person. 
(5)  That any person may appeal the town manager's order to the town council in writing within ten days of the receipt of such order. 
The filing of an appeal shall stay further action by the town manager until such appeal is decided by the town council. If the town council affirms the order, the unexpired time specified in the town manager's notice and order shall commence to run again the day following the town council's decision. 
(g)  Unauthorized attachments. It shall be unlawful for any person to attach any object or thing, including placards, posters or handbills, to any utility fixture in the town. 
(h)  Violations declared nuisances. Any violation of subsections (b) through (g) of this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. In addition to or in lieu of the penalties set out in subsection (i) of this section, the town may seek appropriate injunctive relief or may proceed to correct the violation itself and collect the costs thereof from the person responsible. 
(i)  Penalties. Any person violating subsections (b) through (d) and (f) shall be guilty of a criminal violation and, upon conviction, forfeit and pay a fine in the amount of ten dollars plus costs of prosecution. Any person making any unauthorized attachment to any utility fixture in the town in violation of subsection (g) of this section shall be guilty of a criminal violation and, upon conviction, forfeit and pay a fine of not less than $25.00 and not more than $50.00, plus costs of prosecution. Each utility fixture to which an unauthorized attachment was made shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 17, §§ 1-6; Ord. of 8-5-02(1), § 31; Ord. No. 007-03, § 1, 3-3-03) 
Sec. 70-2. - Billing; due date. 
    Utility bills are due upon receipt. Late charges will be applied after 4:30 p.m. on the 20th of each month. If the 20th of any month falls on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, late charges will be applied after 4:30 p.m. on the next regularly-scheduled business day. 
(Ord. No. 012-07, § 13, 11-19-07) 
Sec. 70-3. - General termination and reconnection of utility services. 
(a)  Termination without prior notice. Without notice, the town reserves the right to terminate service to a customer under one or more of the following circumstances: 
(1)  Unavoidable shortage or interruptions in the town's source of supply or other cases of emergency. This includes emergency repairs or alterations. 
(2)  Whenever a hazardous electrical or electrical related condition is found to exist on a customer's premises. 
(3)  Diversion of electric service, tampering with the town's electric meters, or unauthorized use of equipment. 
(4)  The customer's use of equipment is determined by the town to adversely affect the town's equipment or the town's service to other customers. 
(5)  An uncollaterized check offered on a delinquent account in an effort to avoid termination. 
(6)  At the customer's request. 
(7)  Upon discovery of plumbing facilities or sanitary sewer facilities on the customer's premises which are in such poor condition, leak or otherwise, as to pose a risk to the health, safety or welfare of occupants or other persons of the town; or if unmetered which cause undue loss of water through leaking. 
(8)  For tampering with the water meter or otherwise intentionally damaging or interfering with the town's water and/or sewer facilities. 
(9)  Failure to comply with an order for relocation of a water meter under subsection 70-81(c). 
(10)  Failure of any tenant, lessee, sub-lessee, or other occupant of a rental unit to comply with a "notice and order to vacate" issued pursuant to section 18-407 of the this Code. 
(b)  Termination with prior notice. Subject to the notice provisions set forth below in subsection (c), the town may terminate service for among other reasons, the following: 
(1)  Failure to remedy conditions having a detrimental effect on the service of others. 
(2)  Nonpayment of any utility bill due the town. Checks returned for insufficient funds also constitute nonpayment of an electric bill. 
(3)  Violations of or non-compliance with these rules and regulations or other written agreements between the customer and the town. The town may refuse to restore service until the customer has corrected the conditions constituting such violation or non-compliance. 
(4)  Failure to pay a deposit. 
(5)  Falsification, misrepresentation, or failure to disclose a material fact in an apparent attempt to defraud the town or to avoid payment of any outstanding bill for service rendered. 
(6)  Repeated refusal to grant access during reasonable working hours for maintenance, meter reading or removal of equipment, inspection, or replacement of equipment as provided in section 70-164(b) of these rules and regulations. 
(7)  Failure of any tenant, lessee, sub-lessee, or other occupant of a rental unit to comply with a "notice and order to vacate" issued pursuant to section 18-407 of the this Code. 
(c)  Disconnection procedures. 
(1)  Unless utility bill is paid in full, utility services will be disconnected five days after late charges are applied. 
(2)  Priority accounts. Priority accounts are all residential accounts where life support equipment is: 
a.  In continuous use or, if disabled or removed would immediately place a user in a life-threatening situation and will not operate with out electricity; 
b.  Used at intervals or seasonably for medical relief; (central and/or window air conditioning units and/or central and/or space heating units are not considered life support equipment); or 
c.  Used at intervals and monitors or supports bodily functions and will not immediately place the user in a life-threatening situation if electricity is interrupted; 
Only doctor-approved life support equipment which operates electronically will be included in this category. It is the responsibility of the authorized account holder/applicant to obtain written verification from the attending physician as to the address of the person with the condition, what the condition is, the type of equipment needed, the type of utilities needed to support the equipment and, if possible, the time frame that the equipment will be needed. 
Annual reviews will be made of all priority accounts in order to establish and maintain their validity. If an account appears to be ineligible for continued participation in this program, the manager will notify the customer by certified mail return receipt requested, of his/her findings and permit 15 calendar days for reply and/or objection. It is the customer's responsibility to reaffirm their eligibility or change in status for continued priority status. Service to priority accounts may not be disconnected for nonpayment unless the following conditions are met: 
a.  A disconnection notice must be sent certified mail return receipt requested; 
b.  Arrangements to catch-up the balance due cannot be made and sustained; 
c.  The doctor who issued the most recent letter supporting the need for a utility has been sent notice registered mail return receipt requested. This is to notify the doctor of the pending disconnection; 
d.  Load limiting equipment cannot reasonably be installed because of technical or safety reasons; and 
e.  In no event shall such termination occur if any occupant of any dwelling unit shall be so ill that the disconnection shall adversely affect their health or recovery, which has been so certified by a signed statement from any duly licensed physician of the state and received by the business office of the town. Signed statements from a licensed physician obtained pursuant to this section are effective for 120 days. Signed statements may be renewed by means of a new signed statement to prevent termination. 
(3)  Normal disconnection procedure. At or about 8:00 a.m. on the morning of disconnection during winter months and at or about 12:00 noon during summer months, written documentation shall be made of the outside temperature in accordance with the standard operating procedures handbook. During the winter months, electric disconnections will be carried out only if the outside temperature exceeds 32° F at or about 8:00 a.m. If the temperature does not exceed 32° F at or about 8:00 a.m., electric disconnection will be delayed until the next available day. During the summer months, electric disconnections will be carried out only if the outside temperature does not exceed 90 degrees at or about 12:00 noon. If the temperature exceeds 90 degrees at or about 12:00 noon, disconnection will be delayed until the next available day. Water disconnections are not affected by outside temperature. No additional notification will be made for rescheduled disconnection days and the staff will not stay beyond normal business hours (4:30 p.m.) On the normally scheduled disconnection day, the staff will stay until 7:00 p.m. unless the town manager determines that it would be more cost effective for the staff to be dismissed at an earlier time. Once notices have been approved by the information systems manager, manager of accounting and business services or town manager, they will be assigned to the appropriate departments for disconnection. Once the town employee has been dispatched, the disconnection fee is due regardless if the actual disconnection takes place. 
a.  Third-party notification program. Customers choosing to participate in this program must complete a form designating a third party and giving the town permission to notify the person designated of monthly utility bill. Upon a completed third party notification form, landlords can request a copy of their tenant's utility bill. 
(d)  Reconnection charge/deposit. 
(1)  Service disconnected by the town, for any reason other than as noted in section 70-2(a)(1), shall be restored only on payment (in cash, or by certified check or money order) of the previous balance due, the reconnection fee (see fee schedule). 
(2)  Any customer whose services have been disconnected may be required to post a deposit or increase an existing deposit in order to have service restored. 
(3)  Once the town employee has been dispatched for disconnection, the reconnection fee is applicable regardless of whether the disconnection actually occurs. 
(e)  After-hours reconnection charge. 
(1)  After-hours restoration of electric service will be performed only if a disconnect ring is installed. (see fee schedule) 
(f)  Load limiting devices. At the town's option, in lieu of disconnection of residential customers for non-payment, the town may install load limiting devices that restrict the amount of power flow to the customer. 
(g)  Termination by customer. 
(1)  Notice of discontinuance. The customer must give the town at least one business day's notice to discontinue service and shall be liable for service taken until the meter has been disconnected or read. Failure to allow the town access to premises may result in the inability of the town to disconnect. When the town is unable to disconnect, the customer continues to be responsible for the energy used. Such notice prior to the expiration of a contract term shall not relieve the customer from any minimum or guaranteed payment under any contract or service classification. 
(2)  Failure to complete term of contract. If for any reason, whether through act, neglect, or default by a customer or his agent, the town's service is suspended or the town is prevented from supplying service in accordance with the terms of any contract it may have entered into, the minimum charge for the unexpired portion of the contract term shall become due and payable immediately as liquidated damages in lieu of the anticipated revenue from the contract. 
(3)  Final bill. The final bill for service shall be based on an actual meter reading and is due and payable at the due date. 
(h)  Continuation of service for activated reserve and National Guard military personnel. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, the town shall not discontinue electric service to the residence of a qualifying customer, as defined in subsection (h)(7). 
(2)  A qualifying customer may apply for protection from disconnection of electric service by notifying the town that the qualifying customer is in need of assistance caused by a reduction in household income as a result of a household member's call to active duty status in the military reserves or National Guard. 
(3)  The town may request verification of the call to active duty status from the qualifying customer every three months. The town may also request periodic verification of the qualified customer's reduction in household income. 
(4)  A qualifying customer shall receive protection from disconnection under this paragraph for as long as the emergency active duty status continues and for 30 days after that status has ended. 
(5)  A qualifying customer receiving assistance under this paragraph shall notify the town no later than ten days after the return from active duty status. 
(6)  The protection form disconnection provided under this paragraph does not void or limit the obligation of the qualifying customer to pay for such services received. 
(7)  As used in this paragraph, "qualifying customer" means" 
a.  A residential household where the income is reduced because the customer of record, or the spouse of the customer of record, is a member of the National Guard or the military reserve and is called to active military service by the President of the United States or the governor of the state during a time of declared national or state emergency or war; 
b.  Assistance is needed by the residential household to maintain electric service; and 
c.  The residential household notifies the town of the need for assistance and provides verification of the call to active duty status and the reduction in household income. 
(Ord. No. 012-07, § 14, 11-19-07) 
Secs. 70-4-70-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 70-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Customer means the owner of the property where water and/or sewer service is being provided. 
    Equivalent dwelling unit means any four plumbing fixtures from which water is dispensed, used or consumed, including, by way of example and not in limitation, any faucet (e.g., kitchen sink, bathroom sink, laundry sink), commode, toilet, urinal, shower head and/or tub faucet, automatic dishwasher, automatic clothes washer, or hose bib; provided, however, that any single-family dwelling, townhouse or apartment occupied by a closely connected group of persons living together essentially as a single-family unit shall be deemed to contain a single equivalent dwelling unit regardless of the number of actual plumbing fixtures in place. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 11, §§ 8.3, 12.1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 70-27. - Customer's responsibilities. 
    It shall be the sole responsibility of all customers connected to the town water and/or sewer systems to: 
(1)  Maintain the water service line from the customer's side of the curb box and all spigots and other attachments on their property in good condition and free from leaks. 
(2)  Maintain the sewer lateral from the customer's side of the town's cleanout in good condition and free from leaks. 
(3)  Prevent the deliberate discharge of stormwaters and surface waters into the town's sanitary sewer system. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 11, § 4) 
Sec. 70-28. - Grease and sand traps. 
(a)  All commercial businesses where it is found by the town manager that a sand, grease, oil or silt problem exists shall be required to install an interceptor (i.e., trap) within 60 days of notification, in writing, that such problem exists. 
(b)  All commercial businesses which installed interceptors prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived and commercial businesses which have been required to install interceptors by this section shall keep and maintain on the premises a maintenance record which shall include the dates of when maintenance was conducted and the name of the company which conducted the maintenance, with a brief status report. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 11, § 10) 
Sec. 70-29. - Damages, obstructions, interference with town system. 
(a)  No person shall damage, obstruct or in any manner interfere with any part of the town's water and/or sewer systems, nor permit any refuse or other substance tending to obstruct or damage any part of such systems to get into same. 
(b)  Where any damage, obstruction or blockage of the town water or sewer system is determined to have been caused by the intentional acts of any person or by the failure of any person to comply with the provisions of this section, the town may recover the costs of cor-recting or repairing such damage, obstruction or blockage from such responsible person in a civil action for debt in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 11, § 11) 
Sec. 70-30. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a criminal violation and shall forfeit and pay a fine as follows: 
(1)  For violation of: subsection 70-47(c), penalties for refusal to permit; section 70-96, stop use order; section 70-29, damage, obstructions, interference with town systems: 
a.  $10.00 for the first offense. 
b.  $20.00 for the second offense. 
(2)  For violation of section 70-28, grease and sand traps: Any person found guilty of violating section 70-28 shall, upon conviction, be subjected to a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $25.00. 
(3)  For violation of section 70-61, obligation to connect and abandon: Not less than $25.00 nor more than $100.00 for the first offense and not less than $50.00 nor more than $200.00 for the second or any subsequent offense. Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(4)  For violation of sections 70-29, unauthorized access to town water and sewer system, 70-34, private wells, and/or 70-62, unauthorized connections: Any person found guilty of violating sections 70-29, 70-34, or 70-62 shall be fined $500.00 for the first offense and $1,000.00 for any second or subsequent offense. Each day of a continuing violation shall be a separate offense. Each separate occurrence shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  Where any person is convicted of violating section 70-61 of this article, no prosecution for a second or any subsequent offense shall be brought sooner than 15 days after the date of such decision and, if an appeal is taken, then not less than 15 days after such an appeal is finally decided. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 11, § 13; Ord. of 8-5-02(1), § 32; Ord. No. 020-03, §§ 2, 3, 6-16-03; Ord. No. 001-16, § 2, 2-16-16) 
Sec. 70-31. - Record keeping. 
    Records shall be maintained in the town office which reflect the expenses charged to the water and sewer departments and the source of revenue to meet all operations and maintenance expenses. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 11, § 14) 
Sec. 70-32. - Violations declared nuisances; injunctive relief. 
    Any violation of this article which poses a threat to the public health, safety or welfare of the town or the state is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and, in addition to prosecution for violation of any penal section of this article, the town may seek appropriate injunctive relief in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 11, § 16) 
Sec. 70-33 - Unauthorized access to town water or sewer system. 
(a)  No person shall access the town water and/or sewer system at any time for any purpose, including by way of example, but not limited to, the opening of any valve or cock, the opening of any fire hydrant, the opening of any water gate, the opening of any man-hole, accessing any well or well site, accessing any pump or lift station, accessing any meter station, or any other way of connecting to and/or accessing the town water and/or sewer system without prior authorization of the town in accordance with this chapter. 
(b)  Any person violating this section may be prosecuted under 70-29. 
(Ord. No. 020-03, § 1, 6-16-03) 
Sec. 70-34. - Private wells. 
(a)  No person shall install a private well on (i) any property connected to the town's water system or (ii) any property in the town required by the town Code to be connected to the town's water system. For purposes of this section, private wells include all wells not owned and operated by the town or Tidewater Utilities, Inc. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, a private well may be installed solely for agricultural or irrigation purposes on properties larger than five acres when the purpose of the well is to provide non-potable water to an agricultural or horticultural business. 
(c)  No private well shall be connected to the town's water system. No private well shall be connected to the plumbing system of any building or structure on (i) any property connected to the town's water system or (ii) any property in the town required by the town Code to be connected to the town's water system. 
(d)  Prior to the installation of any private well, all necessary permits shall be obtained from the state and a letter of no objection shall be obtained from the town. 
(Ord. No. 001-16, § 1, 2-16-16) 
Secs. 70-35-70-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 70-46. - Supervision and control. 
    The town manager shall have supervision and control of the municipal water and sewer systems owned or operated by the town, whether located within or without the municipal limits of the town. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 11, § 1.1) 
Sec. 70-47. - Right to inspect. 
(a)  Generally. The town manager, the mayor and any member of the town council, or any agent or employee of the town duly authorized for that purpose by the town manager or town council shall have the right to inspect any premises within the town or, if connected to town water and/or sewer, any premises outside the town during normal business hours and upon reasonable notice to the owner or occupant for any purpose within the scope of this article. 
(b)  Emergency inspection. If there exist reasonable grounds to suspect that conditions exist on any premises in violation of this article which pose a serious threat to the health, safety and welfare of the occupants thereof or to the other citizens of the town, the town shall have the right to inspect any premises at any time of the day or night without prior notice. 
(c)  Penalties for refusal to permit. Should any owner or occupant unreasonably refuse, under the circumstances, to permit inspection of their premises by any person duly authorized to do so under this article, the town may: 
(1)  Disconnect water and/or sewer service to the premises upon notice to the owner or occupant, who may demand, in writing, an appeal to the town council, which appeal shall stay disconnection until decision by the town council; provided, that in emergency situations under subsection (b) of this section, disconnection may occur immediately, without prior notice, with a post-disconnection right of appeal for reconnection to the town council by the owner or occupant. 
(2)  Prosecute the owner or occupant for unreasonably denying the right of inspection to persons authorized under this article under section 70-29. 
(3)  Seek injunctive relief in any court of appropriate jurisdiction for an order prohibiting the owner or occupant from refusing the requested inspection. 
(d)  Proper purposes. In addition to any other circumstances which may arise which reasonably justify or necessitate inspection of any premises under this article, the following shall be deemed a proper purpose justifying inspection: 
(1)  To ascertain whether or not a premises fronting on a street, alley or way in the town in which there is a town water and/or sewer main is connected to the town water and sewer system. 
(2)  To ascertain the nature, number, location and condition of all plumbing facilities and fixtures and all sanitary sewage disposal facilities, including cesspools, septic tanks, privies and/or other types of toilets. 
(3)  To examine the lines, connections and other facilities, including water meters, connecting the customer's water and/or sewer lines to the town system. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 11, § 1.2) 
Secs. 70-48-70-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 70-61. - Obligation to connect where available. 
(a)  Water. Where any land and/or building abuts a street, alley or way in the town in which there is a town water main, within 90 days of the date such town water main is available for connection to such land and/or building, all plumbing facilities on such land or in such building shall be connected to the town water system and all private wells located thereon shall be permanently disconnected, sealed off, and abandoned in accordance with state regulations. 
(b)  Sewer. Where any land and/or building abuts a street, alley or way in the town in which there is a town sewer main, within 90 days of the date such town sewer main is available for connection to such land and/or building, all sanitary sewage disposal facilities shall be connected to the town sewer system and all private cesspools, septic tanks, or any other private sanitary sewage disposal facilities shall be permanently disconnected, sealed off, and abandoned in accordance with state regulations. 
(c)  Violations. If any plumbing facilities and/or sanitary sewage disposal facilities are not connected to the town water and/or sewer system within 90 days of the date that such water and/or sewer line becomes available for connection, in violation of this section, or if any private wells or private cesspools, septic tanks, or any other private sanitary sewage disposal facilities are not permanently disconnected, sealed off, and abandoned in accordance with DNREC regulations within 90 days of the date that such water and/or sewer line becomes available for connection, in violation of this section, the owner and/or occupant may be prosecuted under section 70-30. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 11, § 2; Ord. No. 001-16, § 3, 2-16-16) 
Sec. 70-62. - Unauthorized connections. 
(a)  No person shall tap into or make any connection to the town sewer and/or water system, nor break ground in any public street, alley, way or thoroughfare in the town for such purposes; all connections to the town water and sewer systems shall be made by the town. 
(b)  Any person violating subsection (a) of this section may be prosecuted under section 70-29. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 11, §§ 3.1, 3.2) 
Sec. 70-63. - Town's responsibility. 
    In connecting any premises to the town water and/or sewer system, the town will extend service from the main to the edge of the public street, alley, way or thoroughfare abutting the property to be connected and will provide all labor and materials to install curb stop, sewer cleanout and road resurfacing. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 11, § 3.3) 
Sec. 70-64. - Connection and repair fees. 
    All connection, "tapping" or repair fees shall be based on the actual construction costs for equipment, labor (including benefits) and materials. A ten percent handling charge shall be added to the cost of materials. One minimum deposit will be charged for multiple connections that are in the same excavation. The following minimums shall apply and be deposited with the town in advance: 
Service Within town limits Outside town limits Water connection $400.00 $800.00 Sewer connection $550.00 $1,100.00 Repair (customers side of the town's water curb stop or town's sewer clean out.) Estimate 
(If the time permits) Estimate 
(If time permits)  
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 11, § 3.4; Ord. of 2-16-93(2), § 1; Ord. of 9-5-95(1), § 1; Ord. No. 001-06, § 1, 2-6-06) 
Sec. 70-65. - Sewer and water capital recovery connection fee. 
(a)  All properties located north of Duck Creek, whether located within or without the municipal limits of the Town of Smyrna, connecting to the town's water and sewer system shall pay a capital recovery connection fee of $2,859.80 for each equivalent dwelling unit (EDU) connecting to the town's water and sewer systems north of Duck Creek. This fee shall be in addition to any impact fee that may be required, but this fee shall be in lieu of the connection fee identified herein in section 70-64. 
(b)  Payment of the capital recovery connection fee shall be a condition precedent to the connection of any property to the town's sanitary sewage collection facilities and/or to the town's water treatment and distribution system. 
(c)  Such capital recovery connection fee shall represent that property owner's proportionate share of the town's actual capital costs of supplying water and sewer utilities to those properties located north of Duck Creek. For purposes of this subsection, an EDU shall be assigned for every 300 gallons per day (gpd) of water estimated to be consumed by a particular use based on the following table. For any uses not specifically enumerated in the table, the Town shall calculate the EDUs based on the use or uses in the table that are individually or collectively the most comparable to the proposed use. 
Usage Gallons Per Day (gpd) Residential (single-family homes, townhouses, apartments, condominiums, mobile homes) 300 Office 0.1 per square foot Warehouse 0.03 per square foot Retail Store 0.05 per square foot Service Station 0.18 per square foot Restaurant (typical) 25 per seat Restaurant (24 hours or along freeway) 50 per seat Tavern/bar with limited food service 25 per seat School/Day Care 7.5 per student/12.5 per employee Motel 50 per room Hotel 50 per room pus ancillary uses Hospital 150 per bed Nursing & assisted living facilities 100 per person Assembly Halls 2.50 per seat Church 4 per pew seat Factory, service use, etc. 12.5 per employee  
  
(d)  All property owners connecting to the town's water and sewer system within 12 months of water and sewer utility services becoming available shall have 50 percent of the capital recovery connection fee waived. No property owner shall have more than $10,000.00 in capital recovery connection fees waived. 
(e)  All capital recovery connection fees collected by the town shall be specifically designated to pay for the costs of installing water and sewer infrastructure, provided that the town council shall determine the time and manner in which these connection fees are applied towards the water and sewer infrastructure costs. 
(Ord. No. 016-14, § 1, 12-15-14) 
Sec. 70-66. - Adjustment of connection fees for inflation 
    Annually, beginning January 1, 2016, the amount of the minimum connection fees and the sewer and water capital recovery connection fee shall automatically be increased to reflect inflation based upon changes in the consumer price index as established by the U.S. Department of Labor for the Philadelphia-Wilmington-Atlantic City (Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Delaware, Maryland) region for the preceding 12 months; provided however, that the town council may act, by resolution adopted on or before December 31st of each year, to waive or to increase the adjustment more than the posted change in the CPI for the following year. 
(Ord. No. 016-14, § 2, 12-15-14) 
Secs. 70-67-70-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - WATER METERS 

Sec. 70-76. - Required. 
(a)  As of January 1, 1988, every property connected to the town water system, whether within or outside the municipal limits of the town, shall have a water meter, meeting specifications prescribed by the town, installed to measure all water used by or at that property from the town water system. 
(b)  Every equivalent dwelling unit connected to the town water system, whether within or outside the municipal limits of the town, constructed on or after January 1, 1991, shall be required to have its own water meter, meeting specifications prescribed by the town, installed to measure all water used by or at that equivalent dwelling unit from the town water system. 
(c)  Every newly installed meter shall be inspected and calibrated by the town to be sure it is property installed and registering usage correctly. All calibrations require 24-hour advance notice. If, when the town representative arrives on-site, the meter is not properly installed and ready for calibration and if the inspection/calibration was not cancelled at least one hour in advance, a $50.00 fee must be paid at the town hall before the inspection/calibration will be rescheduled. An additional fee of $50.00 shall be charged for each follow-up inspection required because of uncompleted or unsatisfactorily completed items found by the town representative on a previous inspection/calibration. 
(d)  The town shall have the right to inspect any meter installation and approve or disapprove same if not in accordance with the town's specifications. The town may, but shall not be obligated to, purchase water meters and provide them at cost to customers for installation at the customer's expense. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 11, § 5.1; Ord. No. 015-06, §§ 1, 2, 8-7-06) 
Sec. 70-77. - Accessibility. 
    Meters shall be installed in a space so that they are at all times accessible for reading and repair. If, subsequent to installation, the customer has installed any appliance, heating equipment or other fixture that hinders free access to the meter, the meter shall be relocated at the customer's expense. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 11, § 5.2.1) 
Sec. 70-78. - Meter pit. 
    Where conditions make it impractical to place a water meter within a building, it shall be installed in a meter pit, approved by the town, with a suitable iron cover or other approved ;b1; enclosure (meter box), provided by and at the customer's expense on the customer's property. Pit installations shall have the water meter installed in a yoke with the meter register not more than 12 inches nor less than six inches below finished grade. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 11, § 5.2.2) 
Sec. 70-79. - Compound meters. 
    Any water service requiring a two-inch meter or larger may require a compound meter and shall provide bypass capability. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 11, § 5.2.3) 
Sec. 70-80. - Remote recording devices. 
    A remote water meter recording device shall be installed, at the customer's own cost and expense, within six inches of the customer's electric meter. If a water customer is not receiving electric service at that location, the remote water meter recording device shall be located at such readily accessible location as specified by the town manager or his designee. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 11, § 5.2.4) 
Sec. 70-81. - Compliance procedures pertaining to inaccessible meters. 
(a)  Warning letter. Where the town manager determines that any water meter or remote water meter recorder is inaccessible under section 70-77 or because of any fence, locked door, locked gate, dog or other impediment that interferes with ready access by authorized town employees, the town manager shall send a letter to the customer which letter shall specify the reason that such meter has been determined to be inaccessible, giving the customer not less than 21 days to correct the problem, and warning the customer that, if the problem is subsequently encountered by authorized town employees, a fee of $15.00 will be imposed for each unsuccessful attempt to gain access to the meter by authorized town employees. Such letter shall be sent certified mail, return receipt requested, to the customer at his last known address as shown on the town's billing records, or personally delivered to the customer (or an adult residing at the customer's address) by any town employee. 
(b)  Inaccessibility fee. Whenever a customer fails to correct a problem of inaccessibility within the time period specified in the notice sent to him under subsection (a) of this section, the customer shall be billed the sum of $15.00 for each subsequent unsuccessful attempt to gain access to the meter by authorized town employees. The billing notice for the inaccessibility fee shall be accompanied by a brief written explanation of the customer's appeal rights under this article, which are as follows: 
(1)  Customers may appeal the imposition of an accessibility fee to the town manager in person, in writing or by telephone within five days of their receipt of the billing statement and no formal procedure shall be required. The town manager shall give the customer an opportunity to be heard concerning why the fee should not be imposed and may, as appropriate, deny the appeal, postpone the imposition of the fee or cancel the imposition of the fee. The town manager shall provide the customer with a written statement of his decision. 
(2)  Any customer may appeal the town manager's decision to the town council by filing a written notice of appeal in the town manager's office within five days of the customer's receipt of the town manager's written decision under subsection (b)(1) above. Such appeal shall be scheduled for the next town council meeting following the filing of the appeal. The town council may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the town manager on the basis of information presented at such hearing. 
(c)  Relocation of meter; disconnection. Whenever, in any 12-month period, it becomes necessary to charge a customer two or more inaccessibility fees under subsection (b) of this section, the town manager may order the customer to relocate the water meter or remote the water meter recorder to a location specifically approved by the town manager under section 70-80. Such order shall be in writing, sent certified mail, return receipt requested, to the customer at his last known address as shown on the town's billing records, or personally delivered to the customer or an adult residing at the customer's address by any town employee. Such order shall specify: 
(1)  A date, not less than 21 days from the date of such order's delivery, by which the meter must be relocated; 
(2)  That the customer should contact the town manager to identify an approved location for the meter; and 
(3)  That failure to comply with the relocation order by the date specified may result in disconnection of water service. 
If any customer fails to comply with an order for relocation of the water meter under this section, the town may proceed under division 7 of this article to disconnect water service to the customer; provided, however, that if the customer appeals the notice of disconnection to the town manager under subsection 70-127(2), the town manager shall notify the customer of his decision in writing and afford the customer an opportunity to appeal that decision to the town council prior to disconnection of service. Any appeal to the town council taken under this subsection shall be in writing and filed in the town manager's office within five days of the customer's receipt of the town manager's written decision. Such appeal shall be scheduled for the next town council meeting following the filing of the appeal. The town council may affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of the town manager on the basis of information presented at such hearing. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 11, § 5.3) 
Sec. 70-82. - Malfunctioning meters. 
(a)  Repair or replacement. The cost to repair or, if necessary, replace any water meter found to be damaged or malfunctioning from causes other than normal use shall be borne by the customer. The cost to repair or, if necessary, replace any water meter found to be malfunctioning because of inherent defect, normal wear and tear, and the like shall be borne by the town. 
(b)  Estimated usage for period of malfunction. During any period of time that it is demonstrated that a water meter has been malfunctioning for any reason, water usage shall be estimated by using the average water consumption for the immediately preceding nine months prior to such period of malfunction; and, if less than nine months, then the average for the number of months prior usage then available. Water and sewer bills shall be computed for the period of malfunction based upon such estimated usage. 
(c)  Requests for meter tests. Upon written request by a customer, the town shall test the customer's water meter. The town shall charge the customer a fee of $50.00 for testing the meter. If, upon testing, the meter is found to be registering improperly, the fee will be refunded. A written report of the test findings shall be mailed to the customer within ten days after the completion of the test. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 11, § 6.2; Ord. of 5-1-00, § 1) 
Secs. 70-83-70-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - WATER EMERGENCIES 

Sec. 70-96. - Stop use order. 
    When the governor declares a drought warning or greater or whenever the town manager determines, upon reasonable basis, that a threat to the town's water supply exists, then the town manager may, subject to reversal by a majority vote of town council, order all water customers of the town to limit or stop the washing of automobiles, the sprinkling of streets, grass, trees or other vegetation and such other nonessential water use activities as he deems appropriate under the circumstances. Persons violating a stop-use order may be prosecuted under section 70-29. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 11, § 7.1; Ord. of 4-15-02(1), § 1) 
Sec. 70-97. - Emergency cutoff. 
    In the event of breakdown, emergency or for any other unavoidable cause the town shall have the right to cut off the water supply to any or all customers on a temporary basis in order to make necessary repairs, connections, etc. In such event, the town shall not be liable for any damage or inconvenience suffered by any customer for any claim for interruption of service, lessening of supply, inadequate pressure, poor water quality or the like. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 11, § 7.2) 
Secs. 70-98-70-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - RATES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Taxation, ch. 62. 

Sec. 70-111. - Metered rates. 
    Water service shall be available to customers taking service from the town as follows: 
(1) Water: ..... See fee schedule (2) Sewer: ..... See fee schedule  
(3)  Prorating services : The minimum availability charge for water and sewer shall be pro-rated on a weekly basis for all final accounts and all new accounts. 
(Ord. of 12-21-92, § 1; Ord. of 10-4-93, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 7-3-95(4), §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 12-4-95, § 1; Ord. of 10-19-98(1), § 1; Ord. of 1-3-00, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 12-18-00(5), § 1; Ord. of 1-7-02, § 1; Ord. No. 034-03, § 1, 1-20-04; Ord. No. 013-05, § 1, 3-7-05; Ord. No. 001-06, § 2, 2-6-06; Ord. No. 012-07, § 7, 11-19-07) 
Sec. 70-112. - Commercial and industrial sewage flow. 
(a)  Any commercial or industrial customer receiving water service from the town may, at its own cost and expense, install a sewer flow meter to record the amount of waste water discharged into the town's sanitary sewer system. In such event, the customer shall be billed at the controlling rate for water and sewer based upon actual usage as measured by that customer's water meter and sewage flow meter. 
(b)  Sewage flow meters installed under this section shall be readily accessible to authorized town employees for inspection, repairing and calibration, and, if not within close proximity of that customer's water meter, a remote reading device shall be installed at the customer's expense at an appropriate location approved by the town. 
(c)  Any residential, commercial or industrial class customer receiving water and sewer service from the town may, at its own cost and expense, install a second water meter for the purpose of separately measuring the volume of water which does not enter the sanitary sewer system. This meter must be installed according to town specifications and be inspected by the town prior to receiving a credit on the sewer bill. Only in situations where there is an extreme hardship and after receiving approval from the town manager shall a customer be allowed to install the meter in a position in their system where it would be used to subtract from the primary meter. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, tit. 11, § 8.2; Ord. of 9-19-94, § 1) 
Sec. 70-113. - Interim flat rates for unmetered premises. 
    Any unmetered premises, within or without the town limits, connected to the town water and/or sewer system, whether or not actually taking service (unless a turnoff fee is paid under section 70-128), shall pay a flat fee, per equivalent dwelling unit, per month as follows: 
(1) Water: ..... See fee schedule (2) Sewer: ..... See fee schedule  
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 11, § 8.3; Ord. of 1-3-00, § 3; Ord. No. 012-07, § 8, 11-19-07) 
Sec. 70-114. - Adjustments for increases or decreases in sewage treatment fees charged to the town by county. 
    The town manager or his designee shall be authorized to promptly adjust the amount of all monthly water and sewer bills in order to "pass through" any increases in the fees charged or obligated to the town by the county in connection with its treatment of sanitary sewage metered from or through the town. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 11, § 8.4; Ord. of 2-16-93(3), § 1; Ord. of 1-18-94(2), § 1; Ord. of 8-17-98(2), § 1) 
Sec. 70-115. - Adjustment of charges for meter errors. 
(a)  The town will make appropriate credits or refunds in cases of overcharge or may bill for additional amounts in cases of undercharge. Reasons for adjustments could include, but are not limited to: Improper connection of metering equipment, stopped meters, clerical errors, incorrect meter readings or improper application of the rate schedule. 
(b)  In no case will additional charges from the customer under the application of the preceding paragraph be collected for a period which is more than three years prior to the month of discovery. If the customer has been overcharged, the town shall refund the amount due or credit the customer's account at the customer's election to the date the error was made, not to exceed three years prior to discovery. In the absence of an election by the customer for a refund by check, the town shall credit the customer's account. In the event additional charges are due the town, installment payments shall be offered for not more than the number of months the account was billed in error. An installment service payment charge shall not be applied to such installment payments. 
(Ord. of 8-17-98(2), § 2) 
Sec. 70-116. - Charge for flow testing fire hydrants. 
    Fire hydrants shall be flow tested upon written request with a fee of $150.00 due and payable prior to the actual test. This fee shall be adjusted administratively as necessary to cover the cost. 
(Ord. No. 011-10, § 1, 5-17-10) 
Sec. 70-117. - Advance payment required for customers receiving service outside town limits. 
(a)  Whenever the town elects to extend water and/or sewer service to serve properties outside the town limits, the town shall require, in advance, prior to connection of such service, an advance payment from such customer in an amount estimated to equal 150 percent of that customer's reasonably estimated average monthly bill for such services, but in no event less than $10.00. The amount of such cash advance payment may be increased by the town or reduced at the request of the customer, based upon actual billings for the first three consecutive months. 
(b)  The town shall not require advance payment from customers receiving water and/or sewer service outside town limits as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived unless such customer has a history of delinquent payments for service previously received. In any case where an existing customer outside the town limits is not required to provide advance payment because of a satisfactory payment history with the town, the town may subsequently require such advance payment if future delinquencies indicate such advance payment is appropriate. 
(c)  If service to any customer under section 70-127 is discontinued for any reason, the town shall be entitled to apply any amounts held by it as that customer's cash advance payment toward satisfaction of any balance outstanding on that customer's water and sewer account. If, after full payment of that customer's water and sewer account, there still remains any portion of that customer's cash advance payment, the town shall be authorized to apply such amount toward satisfaction and payment of any other amounts owed to the town by that customer for electric service, charges of any other nature, including all interest, penalties and costs thereon, in compliance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The town shall send written notice, certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last address provided to the town by such customer, indicating: 
a.  The amount of the customer's cash advance payment being held by the town at the time of discontinuance of service. 
b.  The amount, if any, of the cash advance payment applied toward satisfaction of the customer's outstanding water and sewer account balance, and the amount still remaining in the town's possession. 
c.  An itemization of any and all other amounts claimed to be due to the town from the customer, including electric service charges or municipal charges of any nature, including all interest, penalties and costs thereon. 
d.  A notice that the customer may, within ten days of receipt of the notice, request a hearing to contest the validity of any amounts claimed to be due the town and the identity, by name or job title, address and telephone number of an individual authorized by the town to hear and resolve such disputes. 
e.  A notice that, if a request for such hearing is not made, the town will apply so much of the customer's cash advance payment yet remaining in its possession as is necessary toward satisfaction of any amounts claimed to be due the town. 
(2)  If the customer fails to request a hearing to contest any amounts claimed to be due the town, the town may immediately apply such part of the customer's cash advance payment as is necessary to satisfy such claims. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 11, § 8.6; Ord. of 6-20-94(1), § 1; Ord. of 8-17-98(2), § 4) 
Secs. 70-118-70-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - DISCONNECTION AND RECONNECTION 

Sec. 70-126. - Reasons for disconnection. 
    Water service to any customer may be disconnected by the town under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Upon discovery of plumbing facilities or sanitary sewer facilities on the customer's premises which are in such poor condition, leak or otherwise, as to pose a risk to the health, safety or welfare of occupants or other persons of the town; or if unmetered which cause undue loss of water through leaking. 
(2)  For tampering with the water meter or otherwise intentionally damaging or interfering with the town's water and/or sewer facilities. 
(3)  Failure to have water meter installed by June 30, 1988. 
(4)  Failure to comply with an order for relocation of a water meter under subsection 70-81(c). 
(5)  Failure of any tenant, lessee, sublessee, or other occupant of a rental unit to comply with a "notice and order to vacate" issued pursuant to section 18-407 of the this Code. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 11, § 9.1; Ord. of 7-20-98(3); Ord. No. 012-07, § 10, 11-19-07) 
Sec. 70-127. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 012-07, § 11, adopted November 19, 2007, repealed § 70-127, which pertained to disconnection procedure and derived from Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 11, § 9.2. 
Sec. 70-128. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 012-07, § 12, adopted November 19, 2007, repealed § 70-128, which pertained to charges and derived from Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 11, § 9.3; Ord. of 6-17-96(1), § 3; Ord. of 1-16-01(2), §§ 3, 4. 
Secs. 70-129-70-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRIC DEPARTMENT RULES AND REGULATIONS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; taxation, ch. 62. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 70-151. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means any person or any agency of the federal, state, or local government requesting electric service from the town. The term also refers to current customers who apply for modification of service or facilities. 
    Customer means any person or any agency of the federal, state, or local government being supplied with electric service by the town. 
    Residence, dwelling or equivalent dwelling unit (EDU) means a bona fide dwelling unit suitable for occupancy as a yearround permanent human residence, permanently installed on a foundation or anchored, in the case of trailers, and connected to working water and sewer systems and an active electrical supply. 
    Rules and regulations means the comprehensive document, of which this article is a part, which provides the rules and regulations and the tariff of the town electric utility. 
    Service. See section 70-161 for a better description. 
    Service installation means the connection between the distribution system of the town and the customer's point of delivery. 
    Tariff means part of the rules and regulations in sections 70-171 through 70-174 which list the service classifications and electric rates for those classifications. 
    Utility means the town municipal electric department. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 13) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 70-152. - General information. 
(a)  Filing and posting of rules and regulations. The electric service rules and regulations, with latest amendments, as adopted by the mayor and council of the town, also referred to as the town in this article, shall be on display in the town office during normal office hours. Notification shall be published at least once in a paper of local distribution that amendments have been adopted by the mayor and council, and such amendments shall be available for review in the town office; provided, however, that failure to give published notice as provided in this section shall not void or invalidate the applicability or enforceability of these rules and regulations or any amendments to the rules and regulations. 
(b)  Revisions. The rules and regulations may be revised, amended, supplemented, or otherwise changed from time to time by the mayor and council, in accordance with rules and procedures of the Charter of the town. 
(c)  Statements by agents. No representative of the town has authority to modify any rule or provision of the rules and regulations or to bind the town to any promise or statement contrary to the tariff, unless such shall be incorporated in a contract approved by the mayor and council and signed by an authorized representative. 
(d)  Rules and regulations. The rules and regulations are a part of every contract for service and govern all classes of service unless otherwise specifically stated by a service classification or modified by a rider. 
(e)  Prejudice of rights. The failure of the town to enforce any provision of the rules and regulations shall not be deemed a waiver of its right to do so. 
(f)  Gratuities to employees. The town's employees are strictly forbidden to demand or accept any personal compensation or gifts for services rendered by them while working for the town. 
(g)  Disputes. If there is a dispute between the town's electric department and a customer or applicant, either party may submit the particulars of the complaint to the town manager for review and further action if necessary. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 13, § 1) 
Sec. 70-153. - Application for service. 
(a)  Contract for service. An application for the supply of electricity is required from each applicant. Applications may be obtained from the town office. This application constitutes a contract between the town and the customer, subject to the terms of the applicable service classification and the rules and regulations. Receipt of electric service makes the receiver a customer of the town, whether service is based on an accepted signed application, verbal or written agreement, contract, or otherwise. Applicants must be 18 years of age or older. Charges for service shall begin at the time service is made available to the customer. An example of the application for electric service can be found in the appendix, exhibit no. 1. 
Editor's note- The fee schedule and the appendix are not published in this volume, but are available in the town offices. 
(b)  Right of rejection. The town reserves the right to reject any application for service if the applicant does not meet all the requirements of the rules and regulations. Upon request, the applicant shall be given the reason for rejection of the application for service in writing. Reasons for rejection could include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  When requested service may affect the supply of service to other customers. 
(2)  When service is not available under the standard tariff. 
(3)  When delivery at a location involves excessive supply cost. 
(4)  Failure to pay a deposit, if required. 
(5)  Outstanding balance owed on a previous account. 
(6)  Failure to establish acceptable credit or payment terms. 
(7)  Fraudulent means to secure application. 
(c)  Point of delivery. 
(1)  The point of delivery will be that point where the customer takes service from the town. The town will own and maintain all facilities up to the point of delivery. The town will also own and maintain the meter, even when it is on the customer's side of the point of delivery. 
(2)  The customer shall own and be responsible for the meter socket when it is the point of delivery or is on the customer's side of the point of delivery. Any distribution, receiving, or transforming facilities on the customer's side of the single point of delivery are: 
a.  Furnished, installed, and maintained by the customer. 
b.  Operated by the customer. 
c.  Owned or leased by the customer. 
(3)  The customer should refer to the line extension policy for further specifics on ownership of facilities. The customer's facilities at the point of delivery and the service entrance will be in accordance with the National Electrical Code and the town's standards for such facilities. 
(4)  At each point of delivery, the town will supply only one type of service classification. 
(5)  On existing installations where more than one meter is installed for a single class of service, the demand, consumption, customer charge, and minimum charge shall be considered separately for each meter in calculating the amount of the bill. 
(6)  The town reserves the right to deliver service to more than one point of delivery where the customer's service or load requirements necessitate and will be facilitated by such a delivery. If the customer desires an extra supply circuit which is not necessitated by service or load requirements, the customer shall pay for the entire cost of the additional facility. 
(d)  Service at new locations. Service at new locations will be rendered only under the following conditions: 
(1)  Where bills for service to the customer at any other location for the same class of service in the town's system have been paid. 
(2)  When all conditions of the town's electric rules and regulations have been satisfied. 
(e)  Nontransferability of service. The contract for service is not transferable. When the application is made jointly by cosigners, upon the death of either customer, such application or contract shall be deemed to be held solely by the survivor, subject to and upon the tariffs provided for in this article. 
(f)  Permanent service contracts. Standard contracts shall be for terms as specified in the applicable service classification. Where large or special investment is necessary for the supply of service or where service is to be used for temporary, seasonal, or unusual purposes, contracts for terms other than specified in the service classification or with special guarantees of revenue or both may be required. The customer shall refer to the line extension and new development policy for further detail. The town does not offer to supply energy with nonstandard characteristics. 
(g)  Seasonal service. Seasonal service is service required for periods of less than one year to permanent structures or at the same location annually, usually at the same season of the year. Such service will be rendered under the seasonal provision of the applicable service classification. In rural territory, except as provided for in this article, seasonal service will be rendered in accordance with the town's line extension plan (see section 70-162) which provides for the payment of the contracted minimum monthly bill for the duration of the contract. 
(h)  Temporary service. 
(1)  Temporary service is not recurrent in nature and is required for temporary structures or during construction of permanent structures. Examples of this class of service are trailers not in an established park and carnivals. Temporary service will be provided when and where the town determines that such service is feasible. The town shall charge the customer in advance for all costs incurred for installing and removing the temporary service. The town shall also charge a deposit in advance to cover energy consumed through the service. There will be a connection charge (see fee schedule) in addition to all other charges. Temporary service must be removed no later than 12 months after the date of connection. 
Editor's note- The fee schedule is not published in this volume, but is available in the town offices. 
(2)  Any temporary extension of the distribution system necessary to provide the temporary service connection shall be paid by the customer, subject to credit for materials returned in a first class condition. Any extension beyond 100 feet is considered to be abnormal and the customer will be responsible for the additional costs of the line extension. The applicant should refer to the Line Extension and New Development Policy for further details. 
(i)  Selection of rate schedule. When there are optional schedules in effect for any class of service, the town will call the prospective customer's attention to them and will furnish such information as may be requested for use in the selection of the most desirable schedule from the standpoint of the customer. In rendering such assistance, it is expressively agreed by the customer that no liability is assumed by the town if the schedule selected by the customer is not, in fact, the most desirable one. 
(j)  Special contracts. Standard contracts are for the terms as specified in the rules and regulations and respective rate tariffs. Where large or special investment is necessary for the supply of service, special guarantees of revenue may be required as outlined in the Line Extension and New Development Policy. 
(k)  Required property information. The applicant shall furnish as required by the town, at no charge to the town, property plats, utility plans, grading plans, roadway profiles, property line stakes, grade stakes, and other items showing details of proposed construction. This information is required in reasonable time to allow the town to design and construct its facilities in a safe and efficient manner to meet service requirements and to comply with applicable laws, codes, and rules and regulations. 
(l)  Construction areas. 
(1)  The construction area as designated by the town shall be graded to within six inches of final grade before the town will commence construction. 
(2)  If subsequent to construction startup the town is required to relocate or adjust any of its installed facilities due to change in grade, adjustments of property lines or change in lines or change in plans, the cost of such relocation shall be borne by the applicant, his successors or assignees. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 13, § 2) 
Sec. 70-154. - Rights-of-way. 
(a)  Generally. The applicant requesting service shall furnish at a nominal cost (see fee schedule) to the town suitable rights-of-way, permits, or easements on forms provided by the town for the installation of facilities on, over, under, and across the premises of the applicant (that is land other than public space or land dedicated for utility use) for the purpose of providing electric utility service to the applicant and to the premises and other users in the vicinity. 
Editor's note- The fee schedule is not published in this volume, but is available in the town offices. 
(b)  Tree trimming. 
(1)  These rights-of-way shall grant the town the right to trim and clear trees and other obstructions as it deems necessary. 
(2)  These rights-of-way shall grant the town permission to utilize locations and equipment enclosures which are suitable, in the town's opinion, for the installation of town facilities. 
(c)  Obtaining rights-of-way. If it is necessary to acquire such rights from others, such as abutting property owners, lessors, railroads, etc., in order for the town to serve the applicant, the applicant shall be responsible for obtaining such rights as the town deems necessary. The town will not in any way be subject to any claims from the customer deriving from delays in obtaining rights-of-way. 
(d)  Construction area requirements. 
(1)  Where, due to the nature of the property to be served, the town finds that the exact boundaries are of critical importance, the applicant shall locate and mark such boundaries to the reasonable satisfaction of the town. 
(2)  The applicant shall be responsible for clearing all trees, tree stumps, and other obstructions from the construction area as designated by the town; such clearing to be completed in reasonable time to meet service requirements. Shrubbery shall not be planted within six feet of transformers. 
(3)  The town shall be responsible for any additional tree trimming that may be required for the clearance and safety of its facilities. 
(e)  Primary voltage distribution line rights-of-way. The town shall construct, own, operate, and maintain underground or overhead primary distribution lines only along public streets, roads, and highways which the town has the legal right to occupy. The town also shall construct such lines on public lands and private property across which rights-of-way and easements satisfactory to the town have been obtained within a reasonable time period and without cost or condemnation by the town. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 13, § 3) 
Sec. 70-155. - Advance payment policy. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Detrimental credit records means adverse credit reports from recognized credit reporting services available to the general business community or from an unpaid balance or late payments shown on the accounting records of the town. 
    Satisfactory payment record means payment of the last 12 consecutive monthly bills without an unpaid previous balance and no detrimental credit records against the customer's account within the last 12 months. 
(b)  Advance payment required. 
(1)  A cash advance payment shall be required from any customer or prospective customer as security for the payment of final bills and in compliance with the town's rules and regulations. The advance payment may be equal to the estimated amount of the customer's bill for two months' service, but not less than the amount listed in the fee schedule. The advance payment will be due and payable on all new applicable electric accounts and on all delinquent electric accounts before reinstallation of electric service where service has been disconnected for nonpayment and any previous deposit or advance payment has been applied toward the delinquent account. 
Editor's note- The fee schedule is not published in this volume, but is available in the town offices. 
(2)  When the town holds more than one deposit for separate accounts for the same customer, the town shall administer each deposit individually. Service may be denied or terminated for failure to pay a deposit when requested. 
(3)  The difference in deposits will be refunded on accounts where the existing deposit exceeds the new deposit as amended by this article only on accounts where the history does not indicate a detrimental credit record as outlined in section 70-155(a) of this article. 
(c)  General service customers (commercial and industrial). The advance payment of one month's high bill, not to exceed 2/12 of the annual estimated bill, will be required. The advance payment will be retained by the town until the customer discontinues the service and all bills are finalized. Upon review of customer's credit worthiness and other relevant factors, the town manager, with the consent of mayor and council, may waive all or part of the advance payment. 
(d)  Assignment of unclaimed customer advance payment. If service to any customer is discontinued for any reason, the town shall be entitled to apply any advance payment amounts held by the town toward satisfaction of any balance outstanding on that customer's electric account. If, after full payment of that customer's electric account, there still remains any portion of that customer's advance payment, the town shall be authorized to apply such amount toward satisfaction and payment of any other amounts owed to the town by that customer for water and sewer service, municipal taxes or municipal assessments or charges of any nature, including all interest, penalties and costs thereon, in compliance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The town shall send written notice, certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last address provided to the town by such customer, indicating the following: 
a.  The amount of the customer's advance payment being held by the town at the time of discontinuance of service. 
b.  The amount, if any, of the advance payment applied toward satisfaction of the customer's outstanding electric account balance and the amount still remaining in the town's possession. 
c.  An itemization of any and all other amounts claimed to be due to the town from the customer, including water and sewer service charges, municipal taxes and municipal assessments or charges of any nature, including all interest, penalties and costs thereon. 
d.  A notice that the customer may, within ten days of receipt of such notice, request a hearing to contest the validity of any such amounts claimed to be due the town and the identity (by name or job title), address, and telephone number of an individual authorized by the town to hear and resolve such disputes. 
e.  A notice that, if a request for such hearing is not made, the town will apply the customer's advance payment yet remaining in its possession toward satisfaction of any amounts claimed to be due the town. 
(2)  If the customer fails to request a hearing to contest any amounts claimed to be due the town, the town may immediately apply such part of the customer's advance payment as is necessary to satisfy such claims. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 13, § 4; Ord. of 6-16-97(2), §§ 6, 7; Ord. of 8-19-02, § 1; Ord. No. 017-03, §§ 1, 2, 7-7-03; Ord. No. 011-08, §§ 1, 2, 12-15-08) 
Sec. 70-156. - Service classification. 
(a)  Customer classes. The following electric customer classes are available: 
(1)  Residential. 
(2)  Residential with hot water (grandfathered). 
(3)  Residential; all-electric homes and water heater service. 
(4)  General commercial. 
(5)  General commercial with electric heat (grandfathered). 
(6)  Industrial secondary. 
(7)  Industrial primary. 
(8)  Industrial primary time-of-use. 
(9)  Private area lighting (grandfathered). 
(10)  Economic incentive rate. 
(b)  Voltage availability. The following voltages are supplied by the town; however, every voltage listed is not available at all locations on the town's system: 
(1)  240/120 volts (single phase), 480 Y/277 volts (three phase). 
(2)  240/120 volts (three phase). 
(3)  208 Y/120 volts (three phase). 
(4)  25,000 kv primary. 
(5)  14,400 volts primary. 
The voltages listed are voltages supplied by the town as requested by a customer. If a customer requests a change in voltage, the customer will pay all costs. 
(c)  Choice of service classification. When two or more service classifications are found to be appropriate, the customer shall select the service classification to be applied to his service. 
(d)  Town assistance. The town, upon request, shall assist the customer in the selection of the most advantageous service classification, but the duty and responsibility of making the selection shall remain the customer's choice. 
(e)  Changing service classifications. 
(1)  When a customer has selected the service classification for his service, his application shall remain in effect for a minimum of 12 months. If a customer's consumption characteristics change so that they fall within the parameters of different service classifications, the town reserves the right to change the customer's service classification at any time. 
(2)  When the applicant requests a class of service which is available but different from the town designated service class, the applicant shall pay for the necessary equipment, labor, and all other costs incurred by the change in service. 
(f)  Load inspections. When the supply of service is under service classifications which base the billing demand or minimum charge upon the customer's connected load, the town's representative shall have access to the premises at reasonable times to inspect and count the connected load. 
(g)  Billing charges. When demands are reassessed or redetermined, or the power factor is recomputed or the customer is found to be in an improper service classification or remeasured as the result of an investigation made at the customer's request or by routine inspection, the change of billing to the new demand or power factor shall first apply to the bill for the month during which the investigation is made. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 13, § 5; Ord. of 5-6-96(3), § 1) 
Sec. 70-157. - Delaware Municipal Electric Corporation ("DEMEC") Board of Directors. 
(a)  Appointments. The town manager of the Town of Smyrna shall serve as the director representing the Town of Smyrna on the DEMEC Board of Directors. The business office manager of the Town of Smyrna shall serve as an alternate director representing the town on the DEMEC Board of Directors in the absence of the director and subject to the procedures outlined herein. In the absence of the director, the alternate director shall have full power and authority to act on the town's behalf. 
(b)  Removal of director. If the town manager is unable or unwilling to serve as a director on the DEMEC Board of Directors, or if in the opinion of a majority of the town council there is good cause for the town manager to be removed from her/his position as a director on the DEMEC Board of Directors, council shall adopt a resolution confirming the business office manager as the director representing the Town of Smyrna on the DEMEC Board of Directors. Council may also appoint a new alternate director if it deems it necessary to do so. Within 72 hours of the approval of the resolution, council shall confirm the new appointment(s) by sending written notification, including a signed copy of the resolution, to DEMEC. Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, no action by council shall be required for the alternate director to act in the absence of a director who has not been removed from office. 
(c)  Reinstatement of town manager as director. At any time after the business office manager is appointed by council as a director on the DEMEC Board of Directors, if the town manager is willing and able to serve as the director and a majority of the town council believes the best interest of the Town of Smyrna will be served by having the town manager serve as the director, the town council may adopt a resolution reinstating the town manager as the director representing the town on the DEMEC Board of Directors, which resolution shall be forwarded to DEMEC within 72 hours after its adoption. 
(d)  Notification. At the beginning of each calendar year, or as otherwise requested by DEMEC, the Town of Smyrna shall send DEMEC written notice confirming that the town manager is the director and the business office manager is the alternate director representing the town on the DEMEC Board of Directors. If, pursuant to the procedures outlined in this section, someone other than town manager is serving as director, and/or someone other than the business office manager is serving as alternate director, the town shall confirm who is serving as the director and alternate director, which written notification shall include a copy of the resolution whereby such appointments were made. 
(Ord. No. 012-15, § 1, 8-3-15) 
Sec. 70-158. - Adjustment of charges for meter errors. 
(a)  Adjustment for over-registration. Whenever a watt-hour electric meter in service is found to have over-registered more than four percent, the town shall credit or refund the customer an amount equal to the excess paid for the kilowatt hours incorrectly metered. The credit or refund will not be issued if it is less than $1.00. The refund shall be for the period that the customer received service through the meter, but not for more than the following period: 
(1)  Known date of error. If the date on which the error first developed or occurred can be established, the bills for service shall be recalculated from that time. 
(2)  Unknown date of error. If the time at which the error first developed or occurred cannot be established, it shall be assumed that the over-registration existed for a period of a minimum of three months to a period of a maximum of three years or a period equal to one-half of the time since the meter was last tested, whichever is less. 
(b)  Adjustment for under-registration. When a meter is found to have under-registered by more than four percent or if a polyphase meter is operating with an inactive element, the town or the town's consulting engineers shall estimate the proper charge for the under-registered service by reference to the customer's consumption during similar normal periods or by appropriate mathematical computation. Except for tampering, theft, inaccessibility to the meter, or unauthorized overload, such an estimate for a slow or stopped meter shall not cover a period of more than three years. For tampering, theft, or inaccessibility to the meter, the customer is responsible for all consumption, either registered or unregistered. 
(c)  Demand meter. The readings or indications of a demand meter are utilized in computing the charges for service. Whenever a demand meter is found upon test by the town to be in error in excess of the following limits, the charges to the customer shall be adjusted in the same manner as prescribed under watt-hour meters in subsection (a) of this section: 
Meter Type    Limits of Accuracy Integrated demand meters 2% of full scale reading Lagged demand meters 4% of final indication  
(d)  Request for meter tests. Upon request by a customer, the town shall test the customer's meter, provided such tests need not be made more frequently than once in 36 months. If tests of meters at the customer's request are performed more frequently than once in 36 months, the town shall charge the customer a fee (see fee schedule) for testing a meter. No charge shall be made for testing meters which, upon test, are found to exceed the allowable accuracy limits as defined in this section. The customer or his representative may be present when the customer's meter is field tested. A written report of the test results shall be mailed to the customer within ten days after the completion of the test. 
Editor's note- The fee schedule is not published in this volume, but is available in the town offices. 
(e)  Meter testing. Alternating current meters that are in service shall be periodically tested according to the following schedule: 
(1)  Primary time-of-use. Meters will be tested annually. 
(2)  Primary and large industrials. Meters will be tested annually. 
(3)  Other industrials. Meters will be tested once every three years. 
(4)  Commercial (nondemand). Meters will be tested after eight years of use. A determination will be made to recycle, retest, or replace the meter at this time. 
(5)  Residential. Meters will be tested after eight years of use. A determination will be made to recycle, retest, or replace the meter at this time. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 13, § 7) 
Sec. 70-159. - Customer installation requirements. 
(a)  Wiring within customer's premises. All wiring and equipment within the customer's premises shall be furnished, installed, and maintained by the customer. The town will not be liable for loss or damage resulting from the customer's wiring or equipment. The town may delay the construction of an extension and service until the applicant has completed the wiring and installation of the equipment necessary to receive and use service. 
(b)  Description of installation provided to town. The customer shall present in writing complete specifications of equipment, site and grading plans, location of plants, location of electric vaults, connected electric loads, cable runs, substations, and other data required so that the town may determine the nature of the service the town shall furnish, the point at which it shall be connected and metered, and any other requirements associated with the service. 
(c)  Electrical inspection by approved agency. 
(1)  All new or changed wiring and equipment shall conform to town standards, standards of the National Electrical Code, and those standards of local public authorities in force at any time. 
(2)  The town shall render service only after receipt of a notice of approval issued by a duly recognized electrical inspection agency. In no event shall the town be under any obligation to inspect the wiring or appliances of the applicant. The town may refuse to supply electricity to the applicant if the town believes the wiring or appliances do not comply with recognized requirements. 
(3)  The town will render temporary service only after receipt of an executed cut-in card. A temporary cut-in card expires when the finished structure (residence or commercial building) has been occupied for 15 days in accordance with 24 Del. C. § 1433, as amended, or in accordance with any subsequent corresponding law. An example of a cut-in card can be found in the appendix, exhibit no. 3. 
(4)  The town shall not reconnect electric service to any building which, according to town records, has been without electric service for over six months until such building has been inspected by an approved electrical inspection agency. 
Editor's note- The appendix is not published in this volume, but is available in the town offices. 
(d)  Temporary emergency reconnection. A licensed electrical contractor and the property owner may request a temporary electrical reconnection while awaiting inspection and approval of the electrical inspection authority, if and only if the electrician and property owner provide certification to the town that an emergency situation exists that requires immediate electrical reconnection of that property owner's electric service. Certification of the emergency shall be in writing upon the attached town-approved form and shall be submitted to the town prior to reconnection. If a cut-in card issued by the authorized inspection agency is not received within ten days from the date of temporary emergency reconnection, the town shall disconnect the property owner's electric service. 
(e)  Reverse phase relay. The customer shall install at his expense a reverse phase relay of approved type on all motors and other equipment where a definite direction of rotation must be maintained. 
(f)  Phase outage protection. The customer shall install, own, and maintain suitable voltage or current type devices which will protect his equipment from damage during phase outages. 
(g)  Motor requirements. The customer shall consult with the town with regard to the requirements of the size of motor and starting current limitations, as well as the voltage and phase of service which will be required. The town reserves the right to refuse service to single-phase motors rated five horsepower or more and to polyphase motors and installations rated less than five horsepower. 
(h)  Right to inspect. The town reserves the right, but is not obliged, to inspect any installation before electricity is introduced or later. The town reserves the right to reject any wiring or appliances not in accordance with the town's standard requirements and will not be held liable or responsible for any loss or damages resulting from defects in the installation, appliances, or wiring which may occur on the customer's premises. 
(i)  Surge protection for computers. The customer shall install, own, and maintain suitable surge protection equipment to protect computers and other sensitive electronic devices. When the customer has important, sensitive electronic data, the customer shall be responsible for installing uninterruptible power supply (UPS) equipment to protect the data. The town will in no way be liable for any damage to the customer's electronic equipment, computer hardware, damages of consequential value, or loss of data associated with the computer hardware and associated equipment. 
(j)  Service above 200 amps. Any service above 200 amps, either single phase or three phase, is required to have a disconnect switch installed before the meter and a bypass switch in the meter pan. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 13, § 8; Ord. of 3-5-01(3), § 1; Ord. No. 011-03, § 1, 4-21-03) 
Sec. 70-160. - Meter installation, power factor and demand determination. 
(a)  Meters. The town shall normally furnish, install, maintain, and own one set of metering equipment for measurement of the amount of energy (kwh) and demand (kw) supplied under each contract. The metering equipment installed will be adequate to properly measure the electricity supplied for billing and load research as judged by the town. All bills will be calculated from the reading of these meters. 
(b)  Meter sockets. Meter sockets for new installations will be specified by the town and provided by the customer. Meter sockets will be installed by the customer. If the applicant should desire to have multiple pan meter sockets, these sockets must be approved by the town prior to installation of meters and must be purchased, installed, and maintained by the applicant. The town reserves the right to disconnect service to an applicant whose sockets are not maintained in a safe, workmanlike operating manner. The town does not stock meter sockets and cannot be responsible for the interruption or replacement of the meter socket if failure occurs. 
(c)  Meter locations. 
(1)  The town shall designate the location of meters. The customer shall provide a suitable place for the meter and other equipment. For secondary or primary metered installations, the customer shall provide a support or other facility as required for mounting of metering equipment. The customer is responsible for keeping metering areas clean, clear of debris, and accessible to the town at all times. Also see subsection 70-167(b)(1) concerning failure to provide access to the town's meter. 
(2)  In buildings where multiple meters are required, each meter position shall be clearly and visibly marked in a permanent fashion so that each meter position is identified as to the location to which service is being supplied. Meters shall not be installed by the town until this has been accomplished. 
(d)  Right to service or remove town's equipment. All meters, instrument transformers or other service equipment supplied by the town shall remain its exclusive property. The town shall have the right to test, alter, or remove all its property from the premises of the customer at any time. Reasons could include: 
(1)  Hazardous conditions endangering equipment. 
(2)  Evidence of illegal tampering. 
(3)  Violation of any of the terms of these rules and regulations. 
(4)  Failure to pay any billing or fees due the town. 
(5)  Periodic replacement. 
(e)  Reverse registration. The town may, by ratchet or other device, control its meters to prevent reverse registration. 
(f)  Meter tests. The town shall test single-phase, self-contained watt-hour meters and all other meters in accordance with the test schedule found in subsection 70-158(e). Meter tests can be performed at the request of the customer (see subsection 70-158(d)). 
(g)  Remote reading devices. 
(1)  The town, at its discretion or upon request from a customer, may install remote reading devices, subject to available technology. Remote reading devices shall be owned, installed, and maintained by the town. When requested by the customer and approved by the town, such installation shall be made at a cost payable by the customer. The location of the remote reading device shall be subject to town approval. 
(2)  A periodic verification reading must be taken on the meter and on the remote reading device. The town shall notify the customer when the verification is required. Service shall be subject to disconnection if the customer fails to make arrangements with the town for a verification reading within 60 days after such notice is provided by the town. 
(3)  In cases of dispute, the town's meter reading, not the reading of the remote device, shall be used as the final determinant in measuring consumption and in all cases shall take precedence over any readings on remote reading devices. 
(h)  Automatic meter reading device. The town reserves the right, as technology develops, to utilize automatic meter reading. 
(i)  Capacity of meters. The meters, instrument transformers, service connections, and equipment supplied by the town for each customer has a definite load capacity, and no additions to the equipment or connected load will be allowed except by prior written consent by the town. 
(j)  Relocation of meters. 
(1)  Customer's request. All costs for moving an installed electric meter at the request of the customer will be borne by the customer. 
(2)  Town's request. Relocation of the electric meter at the town's request will be done at no cost to the customer. The customer will be notified by mail so that arrangements can be made to curtail the electric service for reinstallation. If there is any violation of the terms and conditions of services under these rules and regulations that requires a relocation of the electric meter, the cost will be borne by the customer. 
(k)  Billing demand. The billing demand is the greatest 15-minute measured demand registered during the billing period. 
(l)  Power factor. 
(1)  The average power factor under normal operating conditions at the point where the electric service is metered should not be less than 90 percent lagging. 
(2)  Where lighting, welding, motors or other electrical equipment or devices having low power factor characteristics are installed, the customer may furnish, install, and maintain at his own expense corrective apparatus which shall increase the average power factor of the individual units or the entire installation to 90 percent lagging or greater. 
(3)  The town reserves the right to charge for power factors which are below or above the 90-percent average power factor standard. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 13, § 9; Ord. No. 005-06, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 70-161. - Service connections and point of delivery. 
(a)  Generally. Services as used in this section refer to overhead and underground secondary voltage conductors and associated materials that connect to the last aerial structure (typically a pole) or underground terminal (typically a pad-mount transformer) of the town's distribution electric system. The service is the secondary voltage conductor that delivers electric power from the town's system to the applicant's facility. The town's system facility (point of connection to the service) from which the service is installed will be on public or dedicated private right-of-way. Services shall be installed either overhead or underground (as determined by the town) and shall be designed and installed consistent with good engineering practices. Service connections are also sometimes called "service entrances" or "triplex service." The type of conductor used for service entrances will be approved by the town. 
(b)  Aerial service. The applicant will pay for but the town will install, own, and maintain the aerial service to the designated point of connection with the town's distribution system. The applicant will pay all costs related to the service. 
(c)  Underground service. The applicant will install, own, and maintain the underground service to the designated point of connection with the town's distribution system. The secondary voltage conductors shall be installed in conduit. The applicant will pay all costs related to the underground service. 
(d)  Aerial service crossing public roads and rights-of-way. The town will replace aerial services that exist across public roads and rights-of-way. The town will bring the aerial replacement service to the customer's property line. The town will bring the aerial replacement service to the customer's facility. The town will bill all of its costs for replacement of the aerial service across the road or public rights-of-way to the customer. The customer agrees to pay all these costs to the town. 
(e)  Underground service crossing public roads and rights-of-way. The town will replace underground services that exist across public roads and rights-of-way. The town will bring the underground replacement service to the customer's property line. The customer will then extend the underground service on his own property to his facility. The town will bill all of its costs for replacement of the underground service across the road or public rights-of-way to the customer. The customer agrees to pay all these costs to the town. 
(f)  Modification or relocation of existing services. 
(1)  Any modifications or relocations of existing customer-owned services shall be made by written mutual agreement of the town and the customer. In the town's opinion, when such relocation or portion of such relocation is requested by the town and deemed to benefit the town and the customer, the resulting cost may be prorated between the town and the customer accordingly. 
(2)  If the town shall be required by any public authority to place underground or relocate any portion of the town's distribution electric system, the customer shall make the necessary changes in the location of his service facilities to accommodate such changes. The cost to change the customer's service will be borne by the requesting public authority and/or the customer. 
(g)  Right to test and remove equipment. All transformers, meters, and other equipment that are supplied by the town shall remain the town's property unless otherwise agreed to in writing. The town shall have the right to test, repair, remove, and replace any of its property on the customer's premises. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 13, § 10; Ord. No. 006-15, § 1, 6-1-15) 
Sec. 70-162. - Distribution line extensions. 
(a)  General policy. It is the intent of the town to provide electric service to customers as reliably and cost effectively as possible. So that existing customers do not bear the cost of the installations necessary for new customers, certain fees and cost assignments have been developed. These charges are covered in the following sections. Sections 70-161, 70-163, and 70-164 of this article should be reviewed in conjunction with this policy. 
(b)  Responsibilities of the applicant. This policy will cover a new single residence, the development of multiple single-family residences on a subdivided parcel, and all commercial facilities. 
(1)  Connection charges. A connection charge will be instituted for any new accounts. This charge can be found in the schedule of fees and charges in the appendix. This charge is to be paid by the applicant for each dwelling (billing account) at the time the electric service application is submitted to the town. 
Editor's note- The appendix is not published in this volume, but is available in the town offices. 
(2)  Payment, ownership, and installation responsibilities. The applicant will pay for all distribution line extensions including poles, conductors, connectors, insulators, transformer enclosures, transformer pads, lightning arrestors, cutouts, fuses, switches, switch gear, miscellaneous supplies, and all installation costs including labor, vehicles, equipment rentals, etc. After the distribution line extension is constructed and accepted, these items will then be deeded to the town at a nominal charge of $1.00. After the line extension is deeded to the town, it will then be owned and maintained by the town. 
(3)  Design and layout costs inside a residential or commercial development. The developer will pay for the cost of the design, layout, material selection, and inspection of the line extension in the subdivision. The town will provide design, layout, material selection and will provide inspections and will charge the developer for these costs. 
(4)  Street lighting. The developer will pay for and the town will provide the design, procurement, materials and supplies, and labor associated with the installation of street lighting. All materials and equipment will conform to the town's approved equipment list. The street lighting will then be deeded to the town at a nominal charge of $1.00. The street lighting will then be owned and maintained by the town. 
(5)  Rights-of-way and easements. Costs associated with obtaining and recording rights-of-way and easements will be borne by the applicant. The town will assist in, but not be responsible for, obtaining easements in areas of public properties or public easements. The applicant will be solely responsible to obtain and record all rights-of-way and easements on private properties. 
(6)  Payment for equipment, installation, layout, street lighting, easements or right-of-way. The town will require 100-percent payment of the materials, supplies, equipment, cost of design, installation, and cost of rights-of-way or easements. One hundred percent of these costs will be paid by the applicant or developer prior to the town incurring the cost and will be paid prior to commencement of construction. Additional payments, if necessary, will be made at construction milestones as determined by the town. Any final adjustment payment, either positive or negative, must be made prior to connection of permanent service. 
(7)  Service entrances. All new aerial services will be paid for by the customer as stated in subsection 70-161(b). All aerial service entrances will be maintained by the town. All underground service entrances are to be owned and maintained by the customer. The town will be the final judge in determining the type (aerial or underground) and location of the service entrance. All service entrances shall be located underground throughout new subdivisions. 
(8)  Temporary service. A nonrefundable fee for the purpose of providing power during construction of a facility will apply (see appendix for schedule of fees and charges). The builder will provide a service head and drop, meter socket, temporary pole, and all service entrance cable. The town will provide a temporary transformer and an electric meter. The town will provide single-phase or three-phase temporary service upon approval by the town manager or his designee. 
Editor's note- The fee schedule and the appendix are not published in this volume, but are available in the town offices. 
(c)  Responsibilities of the town. Responsibilities of the town under this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  Electric meter. The town will own and maintain the electric meter. 
(2)  Line extensions. Aerial and/or underground distribution line extensions, including but not limited to conductors, poles, switch gear, cutouts, fuses, connectors, lightning arrestors, the cost of materials, equipment, supplies, engineering design, installation labor, and special metering will be paid for by the applicant. Aerial and/or underground distribution line extensions will be conveyed to the town. The town will then own and maintain the distribution line extension. 
(3)  Transformer. The town will own and maintain the transformers for all secondary service customers. 
(4)  Street lighting. After the developer has borne the cost of layout, purchase, and installation of street lighting as outlined in subsection (b)(4) of this section, the developer will deed the street lighting to the town. The town will be responsible for the future maintenance and future relamping of the street lighting and will provide electricity. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 13, § 11; Ord. of 5-2-94, §§ 1-4; Ord. of 11-1-99(1), §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 009-03, §§ 1, 2, 4-7-03; Ord. No. 002-05, § 1, 1-3-05) 
Sec. 70-163. - Town's rights and responsibilities in providing electric service. 
(a)  Continuity of electric service. The town does not guarantee continuous uninterrupted electric service and shall not be liable for any loss, cost, damage or expense occasioned by any change in, interruption, or phase reversal of the town's electric service due to any cause beyond the reasonable control of the town. 
(b)  Right to determine suitability of apparatus or appliances. The town reserves the right, but shall not be required, to determine the suitability of apparatus or appliances to be connected to its lines and to determine whether the operation of such may be detrimental to the general supply of electricity to the applicant or existing customers. 
(c)  Right to refuse or discontinue service. The town reserves the right to refuse to supply or to discontinue the supply of electricity until such time as the applicant shall conform to the town's rules and regulations. 
(d)  Master metering or submetering. Master metering or submetering shall not be allowed. In no circumstances will the customer be allowed to extend electrical facilities across public space to supply electricity to other properties. 
(e)  Multiple occupancy buildings. Multiple occupancy buildings shall not be master metered. 
(f)  Characteristics of service. The service specified and furnished by the town consists of 60 hertz, single-phase or three-phase alternating current at one standard secondary voltage. The type of service (number of phases and voltages) available varies with location and load. 
(g)  Right to inspect. The town shall have the right, but shall not be obliged, to inspect any installation before electricity is introduced or at any later time. The town reserves the right to reject any wiring or appliances not in accordance with the town's standard requirements. This inspection or failure to inspect or reject shall not render the town liable or responsible for any loss or damage resulting from defects in the installation, wiring, or appliances; from violation of the town's rules and regulations; or from accidents which may occur upon the premises of the customer. 
(h)  Prearranged interruption of service. Whenever it is necessary to interrupt service for work on lines or equipment, such work shall be done, as much as possible, at a time that will cause the least inconvenience to the customer. The customer to be affected by such interruptions shall be, if possible, notified in advance. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 13, § 12) 
Sec. 70-164. - Customer's rights and responsibilities in accepting electric service. 
(a)  Customer's responsibility. The electricity furnished is supplied by the town and purchased by the customer upon the express condition that, after it passes the point of delivery, it then becomes the property of the customer to be used only as provided in the rules and regulations. The town shall not be liable for loss or damage to any person or property whatsoever resulting directly or indirectly from the use, misuse, or presence of electricity on the customer's premises or elsewhere after it passes the point of delivery. The town assumes no responsibility for loss or damages resulting from any defect in the wiring, fixtures, or appliances of the customer. If any loss or damage occurs to the property of the town or any accident or injury occurs to persons or property caused by or resulting from the negligence or wrongful act of the customer, his agents, or employees, the cost of the necessary repairs or replacement shall be paid by the customer to the town, and any liability otherwise resulting shall be assumed by the customer. 
(b)  Access to premises. When a customer executes an application for service, it is agreed and service is provided upon condition that the authorized agents or representatives of the town, having proper identification, shall have access at all reasonable times to the premises of the customer. This access will allow for reading town meters (see subsection 70-167(b)), connecting and disconnecting service, operating, testing, inspecting, repairing, removing, and replacing any or all of the town's apparatus used in connection with the supply of electricity. The access may also be for the purpose of trimming, cutting, or removing tree branches or other vegetation which, in the town's judgment threatens to interfere with the safe and efficient operation of its facilities. 
(c)  Sole source of power; limitation of use. The applicant agrees that no electricity other than that supplied by the town shall be used in the operation of the applicant's equipment without previous written consent of the town. An installation for which permission has been granted must be made so that the supply of current from the customer's generator or other sources cannot feed into the town's system, unless agreed to by contract between the town and the customer. See section 70-168 pertaining to cogeneration and on-site generation. 
(d)  Notice of trouble. The customer shall notify the town promptly of any defect in service or of any trouble or irregularity of the electric supply provided by the town. 
(e)  Defective installations. If at any time the wiring, fixtures, or appliances of the customer are found to be defective or dangerous by the town's representative, service may be refused or discontinued until the customer has the condition corrected. The town's responsibility in this is limited to the protection of the town's service equipment at the point of delivery. 
(f)  Fluctuations. Electric service must not be used by the customer in such a manner as to cause unusual fluctuation or disturbances in the town's supply system. If these fluctuations or disturbances are caused by the customer, the town may discontinue service or require the customer to modify his installation to correct the problem. 
(g)  Unbalanced loads. The customer shall at all times take and use electricity in such manner that the load will be balanced equally between phases. If the unbalancing should exceed ten percent of the lesser phase, the town reserves the right to discontinue service until the unbalance is corrected. 
(h)  Transient voltages. Customers are cautioned that certain types of data processing equipment are sensitive to transient voltages which typically occur in commercial power systems in routine operation. The town shall not be liable for transient voltage related damage or loss. It is the customer's responsibility to provide the proper uninterrupted power supply (UPS) and surge protection necessary to protect the customer's operation and equipment. Also see subsection 70-159(i). 
(i)  Electric load growth or modification. The customer shall notify and obtain the consent of the town for increases in the customer's service capacity. 
(j)  Power line carriers. Customers interested in utilizing the town's electrical system as a power line carrier must ask permission and receive the written consent of the town. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 13, § 13) 
Sec. 70-165. - Remote disconnect collar for electric service/remote disconnect collar charge. 
(a)  A remote disconnect collar is required for all residential electric meters under the following circumstances: 
(1)  If a remote disconnect collar has not been installed at any location, it shall be purchased and installed before an application for service is approved. The remote disconnect collar can not be transferred from one location to another. 
(2)  A remote disconnect collar shall be purchased from the town and installed on all newly-constructed units prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  Any new rental unit that does not have a remote disconnect collar shall purchase a collar for installation. 
(4)  Upon the renewal of the rental license, a remote disconnect collar shall be purchased for all rental units that do not already have one installed. 
(5)  Any customer that has been disconnected twice for non-payment in a three year period and whose unit does not have remote disconnect collar attached to the electric meter shall purchase a remote disconnect collar before electric service will be restored. 
(b)  Remote disconnect collar charge (see fee schedule). 
(Ord. No. 012-07, §§ 2, 3, 11-19-07) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 012-07, §§ 2, 3, adopted November 19, 2007, repealed the former § 70-165, and enacted a new § 70-165 as set out herein. The former § 70-165 pertained to termination and reconnection of service and derived from Gen. Ords., Art. III, tit. 13, § 14; Ord. of 9-5-95(2), § 1; Ord. of 11-17-97, §§ 1-3; Ord. of 7-20-98(4); Ord. No. 002-06, §§ 1-3, 2-6-06. 
Sec. 70-166. - Tampering with town equipment. 
(a)  Prohibited. No person except a duly authorized representative of the town shall make any connection or disconnection, either temporary or permanent, between the service load of the customer and service wires of the town. No person except a town representative may set, change, remove, or interfere with or make any connections to the town's meter or other property or any wiring between the town meter and the service wires of the town. The customer shall agree to respect the integrity of the meter seal. 
(b)  Liability for tampering. Any individual convicted of tampering with town equipment, including the town's meter, as prohibited in subsection (a), shall be guilty of a criminal violation and shall be assessed the following: 
(1)  $500.00 tampering penalty; 
(2)  Fee for meter accuracy test (as outlined in fee schedule); 
(3)  Estimated amount due for electric usage that did not register on the meter; and 
(4)  Cost to repair or replace meter or other equipment if meter or other equipment has been damaged or destroyed (as outlined in fee schedule). 
Any individual convicted a second time of tampering with town equipment shall be assessed as outlined above in subsections (1)-(4), with the exception that the tampering penalty outlined in subsection (1) shall be $750.00. Any individual convicted a third time of tampering with town equipment shall be assessed as outlined above in subsections (1)-(4), with the exception that the tampering penalty outlined in subsection (1) shall be $1,000.00. Additionally, electric services may be terminated for two months when an individual is convicted a third time of tampering with town equipment. The town shall estimate the amount due for electric usage that did not register on the meter as the difference between (i) the usage that registered on the meter for the month(s) it is reasonably believed the meter inaccurately registered usage and (ii) the usage registered for that property for the same month(s) in the previous year. If data for the previous year's readings for the month(s) in question is not available or for some other reason is unreliable, usage shall be estimated based on the average usage in town for similar properties for the actual month(s) it is reasonably believed the meter inaccurately registered usage. 
(c)  Removing meter or meter sockets. The town, upon reasonable notice, will remove and reinstall the meter to accommodate construction modification at no charge to the customer. If a meter is removed or a meter seal is broken by other than the town, the town will reseal the meter at a charge to the customer (see fee schedule regarding chargeable service call). The town reserves the right to waive the charges in a bona fide emergency. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 13, § 15; Ord. No. 017-10, § 1, 12-20-10) 
Editor's note- The fee schedule is not published in this volume, but is available in the town offices. 
Sec. 70-167. - Access to premises. 
(a)  Generally. The town shall be granted the right to access of the premises of a customer for purposes of meter reading and to maintain general utility services as outlined in subsection 70-154(a) pertaining to rights-of-way and subsection 70-164(b) pertaining to access to premises. 
(b)  Customer responsibility to provide access. 
(1)  Meter area. 
a.  It shall be the customer's responsibility to keep the meter area clear of debris at all times. The town will have the right to remove any shrubbery or vines which obscure the meter reader's ability to read the meter. The customer will pay any cost related to removal of impediments to the meter reader's ability to read the meter. 
b.  When fencing is installed by a customer, it shall be the customer's responsibility to provide access to the electric meter if inside the confines of the fence. Unlocked gates within the fenced area shall be considered proper access for the town meter reader. In this event, the town shall not be liable for any damages incurred by the customer for gates being left open. Areas with no gates or access to meters will not be acceptable. 
(2)  Transformer area. Shrubbery, trees and other vegetation shall not be planted within ten feet of the town's pad mounted transformer. Failure to follow this procedure could impair the town's right to service the town's transformer and associated property. The town will not be liable for any cost or damage to any plantings with the service area of this ten-foot circumference. 
(c)  Penalty for nonaccessibility of meter. When a customer fails to provide the town with access to read the electric meter, the penalty shall be as follows: 
(1)  First offense. The customer will be notified of the accessibility problem in writing, and the customer must take appropriate steps to correct the problem. 
(2)  Second offense within 12 months. The town will notify the customer in writing of the customer's failure to provide access and a fee for inaccessibility will be assessed (see fee schedule). 
Editor's note- The fee schedule is not published in this volume, but is available in the town offices. 
(3)  Third offense within 12 months. The town will notify the customer in writing of the customer's failure to provide access, and an additional fee for inaccessibility will be assessed. The customer will be given 60 days to rectify the problem or else service will be terminated. 
(d)  Metering pedestals. It shall be the town's right to install metering pedestals at the property line or in the right-of-way. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 13, § 16; Ord. No. 007-03, § 2, 3-3-03) 
Sec. 70-168. - Cogeneration. 
(a)  Generally. A cogeneration facility on the town's system must apply for and be approved by the town in order to operate as a parallel generator. The cogenerator or small power producer must meet federal qualifying facilities (QF) standards. 
(b)  Parallel operations; protective devices. The town will require suitable protective devices and will approve their installation. The town also reserves the right to perform periodic functional tests on the point of connection protective systems. The costs for periodic tests will be borne by the customer. 
(c)  Payments to the customer. Payments for cogeneration will be made in accordance with the cogeneration contract. 
(d)  Metering. The town shall install, own, and maintain all metering equipment and instruments necessary to deliver kilowatt hours of electricity to the town from the QF. The customer will bear all initial costs for this metering and will deed the metering equipment and instruments to the town. 
(e)  Capacity agreements. Capacity agreements may be entered into as a part of the special written agreement in a contract between the customer and the town. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 13, § 17) 
Sec. 70-169. - Load management. 
    Reserved for future use. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 13, § 18) 
Sec. 70-170. - Special service contracts. 
    Reserved for future use. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 13, § 19) 
Sec. 70-171. - Tariff for service classification RS, residential service. 
(a)  Availability. The RS residential service classification electric rate applies throughout the area served by the town and is available to any customer desiring service for household and other related uses in a single, private dwelling or dwelling unit, farmstead, or estate and pertinent detached buildings. 
(b)  Character of service. The service furnished by the town is 60 cycle, single-phase alternating current at standard secondary voltage. 
(c)  Contract term. Residential contracts are on a month-to-month basis until terminated. 
(d)  Monthly rate: 
(1) Customer charge ..... (see fee schedule) (2) Energy charge: a. Summer-June through Sept. ..... (see fee schedule) b. Winter-October through May ..... (see fee schedule) (3) All electric homes ..... (see fee schedule)  
(e)  Purchase power cost adjustment clause. All kilowatt hours billed under this rate shall be subject to the purchase power cost adjustment clause as described in section 70-175. 
(f) All-electric homes and water heater service ..... (see fee schedule)  
(g)  Seasonal service. Where a customer takes service regularly for less than 12 months of the year, the monthly bill will be calculated in accordance with subsection 70-153(g) of this article. 
(h)  Minimum bills: 
(1) Customers who are continuing service ..... (see fee schedule) (2) Customers who are terminating service ..... (see fee schedule)  
The town must make special efforts for the convenience and security of persons who are discontinuing service. Therefore, a higher minimum bill is necessary for a disconnecting customer. When requested to disconnect, the town must send employees to read meters, to make a disconnection, for the customer's protection, and the town must render a hand-calculated bill rather than the normal automatic billing. For these extra services, the town must require the disconnecting customer to use a higher minimum level of electricity to defray these costs. 
(i)  Budget billing plan. (Grandfathered September 1, 1992.) The budget billing plan is no longer available to new service classification RS, residential service customers, effective September 1, 1992. It is grandfathered for those customers on the program as of that date. 
(j)  Taxes. In addition to the rates and charges stated in this section, there shall be added a pro rata share of any new or additional tax imposed upon the town as the seller of the service, subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, by any governmental authority by reason of the service rendered under this rate. 
(k)  Rules and regulations. The general rules and regulations set forth in this article shall govern, where applicable, the supply of service under this service classification. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 13; Ord. of 10-2-95(2), § 2; Ord. of 11-20-95(1), § 2; Ord. of 8-16-99(1), § 1; Ord. of 12-18-00(6), §§ 1-3; Ord. of 7-16-01(1), §§ 1-3; Ord. No. 003-06, §§ 1, 2, 2-6-06; Ord. No. 012-07, §§ 4-6, 11-19-07) 
Sec. 70-172. - Service classification, GS, general service, commercial nondemand and industrial. 
(a)  Availability. The GS, general service classification electric rate applies throughout the area served by the town and is available to any commercial, industrial and institutional customers desiring service, including multiple-family dwelling units, churches, beauty parlors, and other similar establishments where the town supplies the customers' entire requirements for light and power through one meter. 
(b)  Character of service. The service furnished is 60-cycle, single- or three-phase alternating current at one standard secondary or primary voltage. 
(c)  Contract term. Standard contracts are for an initial period of one year with month-to-month extensions until terminated. A contract for an initial period of more than one year may be required if special investment by the town is necessary or for demands greater than 1,000 kilowatts. 
(d)  Monthly rate. The monthly rate shall be as follows: 
(1)  Commercial. Non-demand defined as those customers that do not have a demand meter installed since their monthly energy use has not exceeded 5,000 KWH for two consecutive months during the immediately preceding 12-month period. 
a.  Customer charge: See fee schedule 
b.  Energy charge: ;hg;Summer (June through September): See fee schedule 
Winter (October through May): See fee schedule 
c.  Electric heat/hot water customers on separate meter (October through May only [grandfathered]): See fee schedule 
d.  Minimum bill for each meter, per month: See fee schedule 
(2)  Industrial customers (demand). Low usage industrial customers means those customers whose energy use exceeds 5,000 kwh but does not exceed 50,000 kwh for two consecutive months during the immediately preceding 12-month period. High usage industrial customer means those customers whose energy exceeds 50,000 kwh for two consecutive months during the previous 12-month period. The monthly rates shall be as follows: 
a.  Low usage industrial customer charge: See fee schedule 
b.  High usage industrial customer charge: See fee schedule 
c.  Energy charge, all kwh, per kwh: See fee schedule 
d.  Demand charge (all kw). The demand charge for all kilowatts shall be as follows: 
1.  Summer (June through Sept.) per kw: See fee schedule 
2.  Winter (Oct. through May) per kw: See fee schedule 
e.  Minimum bill for each meter, per month: See fee schedule 
(e)  Purchase power cost adjustment clause. All kilowatt hours billed under this rate shall be subject to the purchase power cost adjustment clause as described in section 70-175. 
(f)  Measured demand. When an existing customer's energy usage exceeds 5,000 kwh for two consecutive months, or when a new customer's usage is expected to exceed 5,000 kwh, the town will install demand metering and the customer will be served on the industrial customer tariff. When a demand meter is installed, the measured demand shall be the greatest demand established by the customer during any 15-minute period of the month as measured by the demand meter (except as modified hereunder). 
(g)  Power factor. For demands of ten kw or more, the average power factor of the customer's installation, expressed in percent, may be determined by power factor metering installed by the town at the town's option, ratcheted to prevent reverse registration. 
(h)  Billing demand. In any month in which the customer's measured demand equals or exceeds ten kilowatts and the customer's average power factor is less than or equal to 90 percent, the billing demand shall be the measured demand multiplied by the ration of 90 percent to the average power factor as determined in this section, taken to the nearest whole kilowatt. In all other cases, the billing demand shall be the measured demand taken to the nearest whole kilowatt. 
(i)  Primary discount. Where service is metered at primary voltage and the customer owns and maintains all transforming, switching and protective equipment, five percent of the total kilowatt hours delivered shall be deducted before calculating the bill. 
(j)  Seasonal service. Where a customer takes service regularly for less than 12 months of the year, the monthly bill will be calculated in accordance with subsection 70-153(g) of this article. 
(k)  Temporary service. Temporary service, as defined in subsection 70-153(h) of this article, will be supplied under the standard rate table of this classification on a shortterm basis. 
(l)  Minimum charge. The minimum charge shall be 25 percent of the current months billing demand as defined above, applied to the current rate schedule, plus 75 percent of the average of the billing demands for the most recent summer billing months of June through September, applied to the current rate schedule. For customers first taking service, the billing demand for each month shall be the actual billing demand as defined in billing demand above applied to the current rate schedule. This provision shall only apply during the customer's initial 12 months of service. The primary discount provisions shall not be applied when calculating the minimum charge. In no event shall the minimum bill be less than $8.50. 
(m)  Taxes. In addition to the rates and charges stated in this section, there shall be added a pro rata share of any new or additional tax imposed upon the town as the seller of the service, subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, by any governmental authority by reason of the service rendered under this rate. 
(n)  Rules and regulations. The general rules and regulations set forth in this article shall govern, where applicable, the supply of service under this service classification. 
(o)  Commercial/industrial rate structure for space heating and water heating. Space heating and water heating service is not available after October, 1976. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 13; Ord. of 8-1-94, § 1; Ord. of 11-7-94, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 4-25-95(2), §§ 1-3; Ord. of 10-2-95(2), §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 6-13-96(2), § 1; Ord. of 4-19-99, § 1; Ord. No. 003-06, §§ 3-5, 2-6-06; Ord. No. 009-09, §§ 1, 2, 2-1-10; Ord. No. 001-14, § 1, 3-10-14) 
Sec. 70-173. - Tariff for service classification PL, private area lighting. 
(a)  Generally. This electric service classification PL, private area lighting, is grandfathered and is also known as "security light." 
(b)  Availability. This grandfathered rate applies throughout the territory served by the town for lighting of a customer's private property. After September 1, 1992, private area lighting will no longer be installed by the town on the customer's private property. 
(c)  Character of service. Service shall be rendered by use of a mercury or high pressure sodium light luminaire as the town may make available. 
(d)  Contract term and billing. Standard contracts shall be for a term of one year and thereafter from year to year and shall be terminated by at least 60 days' notice from either party. Bills will be rendered monthly in accordance with the charges shown in the rate table in subsection (e) of this section. 
(e)  Rate table. The rate table for this service classification shall be as follows: 
Monthly Charge Calculated Monthly kwh Group A, open-bottom, symmetric luminaire with two-foot bracket. Mercury, 8,600 lumen (175 w) #81 $14.10 70 Group B, enclosed asymmetric luminaire with two-, four- or eight-foot bracket. Mercury: 8,600 lumen (175 w) 14.10 70 22,500 lumen (400 w) #13 24.65 155  
(f)  Purchase power cost adjustment clause. All kilowatt hours billed under this rate shall be subject to the purchase power cost adjustment clause as described in section 70-175. 
(g)  Description of equipment. The town will own and maintain the existing standard private area lighting type luminaire and bracket mount on an existing town pole or an approved pole or other approved structure owned by the customer. The town will not supply this service on private property after September 1, 1992. Private area lighting installations on private property after this date are grandfathered. 
(h)  Terms and conditions of service. Terms and conditions of service for this classification shall be as follows: 
(1)  Private lighting service is not available to individual customers after September 1, 1992. 
(2)  The town will maintain and service only equipment which it owns. 
(3)  Lamps shall be lighted from dusk to dawn each night, approximately 4,100 hours per year. 
(4)  The town will supply electric current, relamp when necessary, and maintain the fixture and glassware which it owns. All other maintenance will be at the customer's expense. 
(5)  Lamp renewals and maintenance will be performed during normal working hours within a reasonable period following notification by the customer to the town of the luminaire outage. 
(6)  The town reserves the right to discontinue service where cost of service is excessive because of vandalism or other reasons. 
(i)  Rules and regulations. The general rules and regulations set forth in this article shall govern, where applicable, the supply of service under this service classification. 
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 13; Ord. of 9-21-93, §§ 1-3; Ord. No. 003-06, § 6, 2-6-06) 
Sec. 70-174. - Aggregation of retail customer demand response. 
(a)  Aggregation of retail customer demand response. 
(1)  The Town of Smyrna or its authorized designee is the sole entity permitted to bid demand response on behalf of retail customers served by the Town of Smyrna directly into any commission-approved independent system operator's or regional transmission organization's organized electric markets. Any other demand response aggregation of retail customers is prohibited. Retail customers served by the Town of Smyrna may not bid their demand response into any commission-approved independent system operator's or regional transmission organization's organized electric markets except as part of a program provided by the Town of Smyrna or its authorized designee. The Town of Smyrna is not required to have a retail demand response aggregation program. 
(2)  Retail customers served by the Town of Smyrna wishing to bid their demand response into a commission-approved independent system operator's or regional transmission organization's organized electric markets may do so only by participating in a program established by the Town of Smyrna or its authorized designee. 
(b)  Ancillary services provided by demand response resources. 
(1)  The Town of Smyrna or its authorized designee is the sole entity permitted to bid demand response on behalf of retail customers served by Town of Smyrna directly into any commission-approved independent system operator's or regional transmission organization's organized markets for energy imbalance, spinning reserves, supplemental reserves, reactive power and voltage control, or regulation and frequency response ancillary services (or its functional equivalent in the commission-approved independent system operator's or regional transmission organization's tariff). Retail customers served by the Town of Smyrna may not bid demand response into any commission-approved independent system operator's or regional transmission organization's organized markets for energy imbalance, spinning reserves, supplemental reserves, reactive power and voltage control, or regulation and frequency response ancillary services (or its functional equivalent in the commission-approved independent system operator's or regional transmission organization's tariff) except as part of a program provided by the Town of Smyrna or its authorized designee. 
(2)  Retail customers served by the Town of Smyrna wishing to bid their demand response into a commission-approved independent system operator's or regional transmission organization's organized markets for energy imbalance, spinning reserves, supplemental reserves, reactive power and voltage control, or regulation and frequency response ancillary services (or its functional equivalent in the commission-approved independent system operator's or regional transmission organization's tariff) may only do so by participating in a program, if any, established by the Town of Smyrna or its authorized designee. 
(Ord. No. 009-10, § 1, 2-16-10) 
Sec. 70-175. - Purchased power cost adjustment clause (PPCAC). 
(a)  The purchased power cost adjustment clause (PPCAC) is an amount per KWH to be added to or subtracted from the customer's billing each month so that increases or decreases in the costs of purchased power can be offset. 
(b)  The same PPCAC charge or credit shall be used for each month of the 12-month forecasted period from January to December unless a relevelization is required. A relevelization will be required if: 
(1)  The town's wholesale supplier of purchased power has a rate change that goes into effect during the period. 
(2)  The recovery of purchased power and fuel costs on an actual basis, i.e., as each month of actual costs replace that month's forecasted costs, is not in the range of three percent, plus or minus, of the total 12-month forecasted amount. 
(3)  The forecast should need to be updated for unforeseen circumstances such as dramatic increases in the number of customers which will have a material impact, or if a mistake was made in computing the forecast. 
(c)  At the end of the forecasted 12-month period, or a shorter period if a relevelization is required, the town will incorporate any over- or under-collection of costs in the estimated costs for the new forecasted 12-month period. 
(d)  The town and the town's engineers will monitor the PPCAC collection of revenues on a monthly basis. The town's engineers will book the over- or under-collections, as compared to forecasted amounts, on a monthly basis in a deferral account. 
(e)  Calculation. The PPCAC stated to the nearest $0.0001 per KWH will be determined by utilizing the following formula: 
PP/S - Base = PPCAC 
Where: 
PP = The total forecasted purchased power cost for the year, including purchased power fuel adjustment charges. Base = The total purchased power expense per KWH included in the current retail base rates. Base = $0.05375 effective March 13, 1992. Base = $.05 effective May, 1995. Base = $.045 effective May, 1996. Base = $.075 effective December, 2005. Base = $.0786 effective January, 2008. S Forecasted KWH sold.  
(Gen. Ords., Art. III, Tit. 13, ex. no. 5; Ord. of 4-25-95(3), § 1; Ord. of 5-6-96(4), § 1; Ord. No. 003-06, § 7, 2-6-06; Ord. No. 001-14, § 2, 3-10-14) 
Sec. 70-176. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 005-04, § 2, adopted March 1, 2004, repealed section 70-176 in its entirety. Former section 70-176 pertained to an economic development rider (EDR), and derived from Ord. of March 21, 1994, § 1. 
Sec. 70-177. - Service classification, EIR, industrial/primary rate. 
(a)  Availability . This rate is available to industrial customers, to primary customers and to transmission customers. All provisions of this rate are the same as the principal service rate with the following exceptions: 
Existing and new customers: Open to existing and new industrial customers taking service where the new load results in 100 kw or more of billing demand and; 25 new full time jobs, or more than $1.0M of increased tax base for the Town of Smyrna. 
(b)  Character of service. The service furnished by the town is 60-cycle, three-phase alternating current as secondary or primary voltage. 
(c)  Contract term . Contract for service is required and contract terms will vary depending on the cost of service to the town. 
(d)  Monthly rate . Rates will be provided for by contract for service and will vary depending on the cost of service to the town. This rate may include time-of-day and/or off-peak rate billing provisions. 
(e)  Purchase power cost adjustment clause. All kilowatt hours billed under this rate shall be subject to the purchase power cost adjustment clause as described in section 70-175. 
(f)  Measured demand . Measured demand will be non-coincident measured demand, or if provided for by the contract for service could be negotiated depending upon the customer's peak demand coincident to town's peak demand. 
(g)  Power factor . Measured demand will be provided for by contract for service and will vary depending on the type of service provided by the town. 
(h)  Billing demand . Billing demand will be provided for by contract for service (see measured demand). 
(i)  Minimum charge . Minimum charge will be provided for by contract for service and will vary depending on the type of service provided by the town. 
(j)  Public utilities tax. In addition to the charges provided for in this service classification, a surcharge will apply in accordance with any tax imposed by governmental authority based upon sales of electricity. 
(k)  Rules and regulations. The general rules and regulations of the town for electric service shall apply to service rendered under this classification. 
(Ord. of 5-6-96(3), § 2; Ord. No. 008-12, § 1, 8-20-12) 
Sec. 70-178. - State-mandated green energy fund charge. 
    A state-mandated charge for the municipal green energy fund established under 26 Del. C. § 363(4) and collected from every customer based on energy usage which is used for the development, promotion, and support of energy efficiency programs, renewable or alternative energy technologies, or demand side management programs. The initial rate shall be $0.000178 per KWh effective with the June 2006 usage and shall be adjusted as necessary to reflect the mandated rate as modified in the future by the state. 
(Ord. No. 017-06, § 1, 9-18-06) 
Sec. 70-179. - Voluntary renewable energy subscription program rider. 
(a)  Purpose. To fulfill the requirements of the state's renewable energy portfolio standards and to provide electric service customers on a nondiscriminatory basis the opportunity to voluntarily contributing to the development of renewable energy. 
(b)  Applicability. Available to all retail customer classes for the purchase of all or a portion of a customer's energy requirements. The retail customer must apply for this service by submission of the customer application for voluntary subscription to purchase renewable energy. 
(c)  Service. Service will be provided to those customers who volunteer to receive their energy from renewable energy resources. "Renewable energy" means electrical energy generated by means of a low- or zero-emissions generation technology that has substantial long-term production potential and may include, without limitation, solar, wind, hydropower, ocean energy, geothermal, landfill gas, anaerobically-digested waste biomass or fuel cells that are not fossil fueled, and any other generation technology approved by the state. Renewable energy does not include fossil fuel or nuclear energy. The amount of power subscribed to by the customer shall be set out in an application for voluntary renewable energy rate. 
(d)  Rates and terms. The rates and terms as set out for all other customer rate classes shall apply. Additionally, the renewable energy premium shall apply for all KWh elected by the customer to be served by renewable energy resources as stated in the application for voluntary renewable energy rate. The renewable energy premium is as follows effective July 2006: 
Rate Group Premium per KWh  
Residential service ..... $0.0018 
Commercial service ..... 0.0018 
Industrial service ..... 0.00l8 
The rate shall be adjusted as necessary to reflect the mandated rate as modified in the future by the state. 
(e)  Other terms and conditions. 
(1)  Customers must elect to take service in increments of 100 KWh. 
(2)  Customers will be required to take service under this rate schedule for a minimum term of one year. 
(3)  Service under this tariff will automatically be renewed on an annual basis absent 30 days prior written notification of cancellation. 
(4)  Service will be offered to customers as it is available. 
(5)  If applications exceed available supply, the applicant will be placed on a priority waiting list. 
(f)  Taxes. In addition to the rates and charges stated in this section, there shall be added a pro rata share of any new or additional tax imposed upon the town as the seller of the service, subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, by any governmental authority by reason of the service rendered under this rate. 
(Ord. No. 017-06, § 2, 9-18-06) 
DIVISION 2. - NET METERING 

Sec. 70-180. - Background and purpose. 
(a)  Background. There is an interest by some Town of Smyrna Electric consumers in sources of on-site generation of electricity as a means to reduce pollution (environmentally friendly production of electricity such as solar or wind) and/or to reduce the ever increasing cost of retail electricity. 
Recent increases in the cost of wholesale and retail electricity have provided an increased incentive for consumers to further research alternatives to retail electric supply from their electric utility. Alternatives often sought by consumers include customer-owned renewable resources such as; photovoltaic, wind-power, micro-generators, fuel cells powered by renewable fuels, or gas from the anaerobic digestion of organic materials and other on-site generation or cogeneration. The increase in interest in on-site generation has caused a renewed interest in net-metering. As a customer-owned electric utility the Town of Smyrna is interested in supporting renewable energy and cost reduction for its customer-owners. To facilitate the option of customer owned generation in a safe and reliable fashion, the town has promulgated an interconnection policy, Technical Consideration Covering Parallel Operations of Customer Owned Generation of Less than One (1) Megawatt and Interconnected with the Smyrna Electric System (herein, technical considerations). This net metering policy is intended to work in harmony with, and support, the Technical Considerations, and to provide the administrative and financial terms of this interconnection. 
(b)  Purpose. This net metering policy is primarily intended for customers with renewable-fuel electric generating facilities used to primarily offset all or part of the customer's electricity requirement. Further it is intended to encourage private investment in renewable energy resources, stimulate the economic growth of the state, encourage energy independence and security, and enhance the continued diversification of Delaware's energy resources. 
(Ord. No. 010-07, § I, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 70-181. - Definitions, applicability and terms of applicability. 
(a)  Definitions. 
    Customer. Any adult person, partnership, association, corporation or other entity: (a) in whose name a service account is listed, (b) who occupies or is the ratepayer for a premise, building, structure, etc., and (c) who is primarily responsible for payment of bills. A customer includes anyone taking electric service from the town under one service classification for one account, premises or site. Multiple premises or sites under the same name are considered to be multiple customers. 
    Distributed generation or on-site distributed generation (for purposes of this net metering policy). An electrical generating unit of less than 500 kw which may be connected in parallel operation to the town's system. 
    Generator owner. The owner of the generating system that is interconnected to the town's electric distribution system. 
    Distribution system. The interconnected arrangement of lines and transformers that make up the town's electric power system. 
    IEEE Standard 929. IEEE Standard entitled Recommended Practice for Utility Interface of Photovoltaic (PV) Systems, P929 Draft 11, dated July 1999, or subsequent approved revision thereof. 
    Interconnection. The physical connection of distributed generation to the town's system in accordance with these guidelines so that parallel operation can occur. 
    Interconnection application or application form. The standard form of application which must be submitted by the generation owner to the town for permission to interconnect with the town system. The approved interconnection application sets forth the contractual conditions under which the town and generator owner agree that one or more generating units whose aggregate generation at the point of common coupling is less than 500 kw may be interconnected at 25kV or less with the town's distribution system. 
    Technical considerations. Refers to the Town of Smyrna policy on interconnection requirements titled, Technical Considerations Covering Parallel Operations of Customer Owned Generation of Less than One (1) Megawatt And Interconnected with the Smyrna Electric System. 
    Net metering policy. Refers to this document, the Net Metering Policy For Parallel Operations of Customer Owned Generation. 
    Parallel operation. Any electrical connection between the town's distribution system and the generator owner's generating source. 
    Point of common coupling. The point where the electrical conductors of the town's distribution system are connected to the customer's conductors and where any transfer of electric power between the generator owner and the town's distribution system takes place (such as switchgear near the meter). 
    Pre-approved equipment. Specific generating and protective equipment system or systems that have previously been approved by the town as meeting the applicable parts of this document. 
    Pre-interconnection study. A study or studies which may be undertaken by the town in response to its receipt of a completed application for parallel operation with the town's system. Pre-interconnection studies may include, but are not limited to service studies, coordination studies and facilities impact studies. 
    Town. Town of Smyrna. 
(b)  Applicability. Unless otherwise provided, this policy applies to all customer generation of 500 kw or less which is interconnected at 25kV or below and operated in parallel with the town's power delivery system. 
(c)  Terms of applicability. 
(1)  A proposed generator owner will make a formal application to the town for the interconnection of a generator to the town system. All applications are to be sent to the town's business office. The application will be prepared on an application form provided by the town. Two application forms are available. Generators 25kw or less will use the shorter application form as less technical data is needed for generating units within this size range. Application forms can be found in the Technical Considerations. 
(2)  Upon approval by the town that the customers generator meet the standards set out in the Technical Considerations, such approval shall be made available to the appropriate manufacturer upon written request. For subsequent applications using some or all of the identical generating unit's protective devices and/or systems, the manufacturer may submit a copy of the approval with the application as proof that its equipment has already been approved for use on the town's system. Use of pre-approved equipment will not eliminate any applicable requirement for a pre-interconnection study to determine the suitability of the equipment for each application, given the unique arrangements and characteristics of both the generator owner and town systems at the point of common coupling. 
(3)  The generator owner may connect their generation to the town system only after the interconnection application has been approved and the generation owner has received approval notification. The town will make every effort to provide notification in a timely manner following the receipt of the interconnection application and all required data. 
(4)  The town will install a warning label in a conspicuous place on their electric meter or meter box (and transformer) to notify the town personnel that there is a generator source installed on the load side of the meter. Further, this warning label should not be used in lieu of any additional warnings, notices, or safety devices, to be installed by the customer, or the customer's installing electrician, to protect the customer (or customer's electrician), from dangerous conditions on the customer's side of the meter, due to the customer's installation of on-site generation. The warning label shall not be placed in a location that would interfere with the ability of town personnel to read the electric meter. The town will provide the warning label. The warning label must be in place before the generation can be interconnected. 
(Ord. No. 010-07, § II, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 70-182. - General overview of net metering options. 
(a)  Residential customers with renewable energy generation of 25 kw or less. Full offset (netting) of renewable energy kwh produced by the customer's renewable energy generation will occur at the then current retail rate of the Town of Smyrna. Excess kwh produced by the customer's renewable energy generation is to be credited to the customer for up to 12 months. 
(b)  Nonresidential customers with renewable energy generation of 500 kw or less. Full offset (netting) of renewable energy kwh produced by the customer's renewable energy generation will occur at the then current retail rate of the Town of Smyrna. Excess kwh produced by the customer's renewable energy generation is to be credited to the customer for up to 12 months. 
(c)  Nonresidential customers with renewable energy generation of over 500 kw. For large scale generation of greater than 500 kw the technical and financial implications for both the customer and the town are significantly more complex. In the case where a customer desires to install a large scale generation resource of >500 kw, the parties will separately negotiate and mutually agree on the technical, administrative and financial terms of this interconnection. The net-metering policy, as set forth in this document, does not necessarily include the types of, or sophistication of, the metering that may be necessary for customer owned generation of this magnitude. 
(Ord. No. 010-07, § III, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 70-183. - Technical reference. 
 For technical data and specifications regarding generator information, interconnection specifications, and technical guidelines for parallel operation of on-site distributed generation units, please consult the town's policy, Technical Considerations Covering Parallel Operations of Customer Owned Generation Of Less than One (1) Megawatt and Interconnected with the Town of Smyrna Delivery System, pages 1-17. 
 For the Generator Interconnection Application - Short Form and Long Form, please consult the previously mentioned Technical Considerations on pages 21-24 and 25-30. 
 For Recommended Practices and Requirements for Harmonic Control in Electric Power Systems, please consult the IEEE St. 549-1992, or the previously mentioned Technical Considerations on pages 18-20. 
The Town of Smyrna Net-Metering Policy for renewable energy generation will comply with Title 26 Section 1014 (d) of the Delaware Code relating to Net-Metering as related to any and all requirements that are applicable to municipal electric utilities. 
(Ord. No. 010-07, § IV, 9-4-07) 
DIVISION 3. - TECHNICAL CONSIDERATIONS COVERING PARALLEL OPERATIONS OF CUSTOMER OWNED GENERATION OF LESS THAN ONE (1) MEGAWATT AND INTERCONNECTED WITH THE TOWN OF SMYRNA ELECTRIC SYSTEM[5] 
    Prerequisite. The customer must be first in compliance with the tariff rules and regulations and the applicable tariff classification and rates. The terms and conditions contained herein are in addition to, but do not modify nor negate, the terms of the tariff. 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 009-07, adopted September 4, 2007, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance has been added as division 3, at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 70-184. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this document (relating to interconnection of on-site distributed generation and parallel generation requirements) is to clearly state the terms and conditions that govern the interconnection and parallel operation of on-site distributed generation, in order to: 
(1)  Establish technical requirements which will promote the safe and reliable parallel operation of distributed generation resources; 
(2)  Enhance the reliability of electric service; 
(3)  Facilitate the implementation and use of distributed resources technologies; 
(4)  Enhance economic efficiency in the production and consumption of electricity and other energy; and 
(5)  Promote the use of distributed resources in order to provide electric system benefits during periods of capacity constraint. 
(Ord. No. 009-07, § I, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 70-185. - Applicability. 
    Unless otherwise provided, these guidelines apply to all customer generation operating below one megawatt which is interconnected at 25kV or below and operated in parallel with the town's power delivery system. The technical requirements of section 70-189.8 and subsequent sections of this document do not apply to generators using inverter technology, as requirements for these installations are already covered in the applicable codes, IEEE Standard 929, Recommended Practice for Utility Interface of Photovoltaic (PV) Systems, and UL 1741, Underwriters Laboratories Subject 1741-1999, Standards for Static Inverters and Charge Controllers for use in Photovoltaic Power Systems. (The town, by reference, adopts the above standards and future updates of these standards as appropriate.) 
(Ord. No. 009-07, § II, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 70-186. - Definitions. 
    Account. An account is one metered or un-metered rate or service classification which normally has one electric delivery point of service. A premises may have more than one account. 
    Customer. Any adult person, partnership, association, corporation or other entity: (i) in whose name a service account is listed, (ii) who occupies or is the ratepayer for a premises, building, structure, etc., and (iii) who is primarily responsible for payment of bills. A customer includes anyone taking electric service from the town under one service classification for one account, premises or site. Multiple premises or sites under the same name are considered multiple customers. 
    Distributed generation or on-site distributed generation. An electrical generating unit of less than 1 MW, which may be connected in parallel operation to the town's system. 
    Generator owner. The owner of the generating system that is interconnected to the town. 
    Grid. The interconnected arrangement of lines and transformers that make up the town's electric power system. 
    IEEE Standard 929. IEEE Standard entitled Recommended Practice for Utility Interface of Photovoltaic (PV) Systems, P929 Draft 11, dated July 1999, or subsequent approved revision thereof. 
    Interconnection. The physical connection of distributed generation to the town's system in accordance with these guidelines so that parallel operation can occur. 
    Interconnection application The standard form of application which must be submitted by the generation owner to the town for permission to interconnect with the town system. The approved interconnection application sets forth the contractual conditions under which the town and generator owner agree that one or more generating units whose aggregate generation at the point of common coupling is less than 1 MW may be interconnected at 25 kV or less with the town's system. 
    Inverter. A static power converter with control, protection and filtering functions that converts direct current input to alternating current output. Inverters must be of the non-islanding type. 
    Island. A portion of the utility system which contains both load and distributed generation and is isolated from the remainder of the utility system. 
    Parallel operation. Any electrical connection between the town's system and the generator owner's generating source. 
    Point of common coupling. The point where the electrical conductors of the town system are connected to the customer's conductors and where any transfer of electric power between the generator owner and the town system takes place (such as switchgear near the meter). 
    Pre-approved equipment. Specific generating and protective equipment system or systems that have been approved by the town as meeting the applicable parts of this document. 
    Pre-interconnection study. A study or studies which may be undertaken by the town in response to its receipt of a completed application for parallel operation with the town's system submitted on the interconnected application form prescribed by these guidelines. Pre-interconnection studies may include, but are not limited to service studies, coordination studies and facilities impact studies. 
    Qualifying facility (QF). An electric generation facility which is a qualifying facility under Subpart B, Section 201 of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission's regulations per the Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978. 
    Stabilized. The town's system following a disturbance which returns to the normal range of voltage and frequency for at least five minutes or longer as coordinated with the town. The town may require a longer period upon a reasonable showing that the reconnection after five minutes will adversely affect the safety and reliability of the electric system. 
    Town. Town of Smyrna. 
    Unit. A distributed generation facility. 
    Utility system or electric distribution facility. Town's distribution system operating at 25 kilovolts or below to which the generation equipment is interconnected. 
(Ord. No. 009-07, § III, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 70-187. - Interconnection application. 
    A proposed generator owner will make a formal application to the town for the interconnection of a generator to the town system. All applications are to be sent to the town's business office. The application will be prepared on an application form provided by the town. Two application forms are available. Generators 25 kW or less will use the shorter application form as less technical data is needed for units within this size range. 
(Ord. No. 009-07, § IV, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 70-188. - Designation of town contact persons for technical matters relating to distributed generation interconnection. 
    The town's electrical engineers will be the designated point of contact for all technical matters related to interconnected generation. The town will maintain records concerning applications received for interconnection and parallel operation of distributed generation. Such records will include the date of receipt of each such application, documents generated in the course of processing such applications, correspondence regarding such applications, technical evaluation of the application and the final disposition of such application. 
(Ord. No. 009-07, § V, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 70-189. - Pre-interconnection studies. 
    In many instances, the town will wish to conduct a service study, coordination study, or facilities impact study prior to interconnection of a distributed generation unit. In instances where such studies are deemed necessary the scope of such studies shall be based on the characteristics of the particular distributed generation unit to be interconnected and the proposed point of interconnection. 
(1)  Completion of pre-interconnection study. Upon completion of the interconnection study, the town will notify the generator owner that his application has been approved or indicate in sufficient detail why the application cannot be approved. The conducting of such pre-interconnection studies shall not unduly delay the interconnection of the distributed generation. The Town of Smyrna will make every effort to complete the pre-interconnection study in a timely manner after receipt of signed customer application and complete customer submittal of all required data. 
(2)  Pre-interconnection study fee. For all generators less than 25 kW the town may do a pre-interconnection study without charge up to the typical and customary cost that the town would expend for study work of similar type of customer interconnection. If the cost to the town is expected to exceed this typical and customary amount, or if multiple submittals by the generator owner are necessary, or if the generators are greater in size than 25 kW, the town will advise the generator owner of the expected cost of such study work by the town before such work begins. The generator owner will be responsible for payment of any costs prior to the commencement of the pre-interconnection study. 
(Ord. No. 009-07, § VI, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 70-189.1. - Network interconnection of distributed generation. 
    Where generation is to be connected to a network system and capable of exporting power to the grid, the interconnection study may result in more stringent interconnection requirements. 
(Ord. No. 009-07, § VII, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 70-189.2. - Pre-approval of generation units, devices and systems. 
    Upon approval by the town that certain generating unit's protective devices and/or system(s) meet the standards set out in these guidelines, such approval shall be made available to the appropriate manufacturer upon written request. For subsequent applications using some or all of the identical generating unit's protective devices and/or systems, the manufacturer may submit a copy of the approval with the application as proof that its equipment has already been approved for use on the town's system. Use of pre-approved equipment will not eliminate any applicable requirement for a pre-interconnection study to determine the suitability of the equipment for each application, given the unique arrangements and characteristics of both the generator owner and town systems at the point of the interconnection. 
(Ord. No. 009-07, § VIII, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 70-189.3. - Connection approval. 
    The generator owner can connect their generation to the town system only after the interconnection application has been approved and the generation owner has received approval notification. The town will make every effort to provide notification in a timely manner following the receipt of the interconnection application and all required data. 
(Ord. No. 009-07, § IX, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 70-189.4. - Interconnected generation site warning label. 
    The town will install a warning label in a conspicuous place on their electric meter or meter box to notify the town personnel that there is a generator source installed on the load side of the meter. The warning label shall not be placed in a location that would interfere with the ability of town personnel to read the electric meter. The town will provide the warning label to the generator owner. The warning label must be placed before the generation can be interconnected. 
(Ord. No. 009-07, § X, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 70-189.5. - Disconnection and reconnection. 
    The town may disconnect a distributed generation unit under the following conditions: 
(1)  Application termination. Upon termination of the approved interconnection application. 
(2)  Noncompliance. For noncompliance with the technical guidelines specified in this document or other requirement contained in the applicable customer tariff, provided that the town has given notice to the generator owner and provided the generator owner reasonable time (consistent with the condition) to correct such noncompliance. The town will reconnect the unit only upon receipt of certification from the generator owner and verification by the town that the unit is in compliance. The town will determine at the town's sole judgment if the customer's generation is in compliance. The town will provide verification within a reasonable time period. 
(3)  In case of a system emergency outage of the town's primary electrical sources. The generator owner's generation equipment must be installed and configured so that parallel operation must automatically cease immediately and automatically during outages or loss of the town's electric source in accordance with these guidelines. The generation owner must also cease parallel operation upon notification by the town of a system emergency, abnormal condition or in cases where such operation is determined to be unsafe, interferes with the supply of service to other customers or interferes with the town's system maintenance or operation. In addition, the town may disconnect the generator from the system for system emergencies without notice. However, the town will use reasonable efforts to notify the generation owner prior to disconnecting. 
(4)  For routine maintenance and repairs. The town may disconnect a customer/generation owner for routine maintenance and repairs on the town's system consistent with applicable tariffs and agreements. The town will make reasonable efforts to provide advance notice to the customer/generation owner of service interruptions resulting from routine maintenance. 
The town will reconnect the customer/generation owner as quickly as possible following any such service interruption. 
(Ord. No. 009-07, § XI, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 70-189.6. - Termination. 
    The generation owner may terminate the approved interconnection application at any time upon 30 days of providing written notice to the town. The town may terminate the interconnection application for cause after 30 days written notice to the generator owner of a material violation of the terms of the approved interconnection application and after the generator owner has had a reasonable opportunity to remedy the violation. The generator owner must give the town notice that it intends to permanently shut down its generation. In no respect will notice to terminate preclude the town from taking any and all immediate actions necessary, including temporary or permanent disconnection of customer's generation, if the town is aware of safety, or reliability concerns as a result of interconnection of the customer's generation. 
(Ord. No. 009-07, § XII, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 70-189.7. - Privileged communications concerning proposed distributed generation projects. 
    In the course of processing applications for parallel operation and in the conduct of pre-interconnection studies, the generation owner shall provide the town with detailed information concerning the proposed distributed generation project. The town shall not use such knowledge of proposed distributed generator projects submitted to it for review to prepare competing proposals to the generator owner whereby the town, or others in conjunction with the town, offers either discounted rates in return for not installing the distributed generation, or offers competing distributed generation projects. 
(Ord. No. 009-07, § XIII, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 70-189.8. - Technical guidelines for parallel operation of on-site distributed generation units. 
    This subsection describes minimum requirements and procedures for safe and effective connection and operation of distributed generation. A generator owner may operate 60 Hertz, three phase or single phase generating equipment, whether a QF or non-QF, in parallel with the town's system pursuant to an approved interconnection application provided that the equipment and generator owner meet or exceed the requirements of these guidelines and that the town has approved the generator owner's application to interconnect. This subsection describes typical interconnection requirements. Certain specific interconnection locations and conditions may require the installation of additional protective settings or hardware, especially when exporting power to the system. If the town concludes that an application for parallel operation requires additional protective settings or hardware, the town shall make those requirements known to the generator owner in a timely fashion after all pertinent studies are completed. 
    Approval to connect to the town system indicates only that the minimum requirements for a safe proper interconnection have been satisfied. Such approval does not imply that the generator owner's facility meets all federal, state and local standards or regulations. The town accepts no responsibility for activities or events on the customer's side of the interconnection. 
(1)  General interconnection and protection requirements. 
a.  The generator owner's generation and interconnection installation must meet all applicable national, state and local construction and safety codes. 
b.  The generator owner's generator shall be equipped with protective hardware and software designed to prevent the generator from energizing one of the town's de-energized circuits. The generator owner's generator must automatically disconnect from the town's system if the grid source is lost, irrespectively of connected loads or other generators. 
c.  The generator shall be equipped with the necessary protective hardware and software designed to prevent sustained parallel operation of the generating equipment with the town's system unless the system service voltage and frequency are within acceptable magnitudes as defined in section 70-189.8(2). 
d.  Pre-approved equipment shall be accepted as part of an interconnection proposal without the need to re-review the equipment itself. However, the application, design and setting of pre-approved units and/or equipment must be reviewed and coordinated according to the unique needs of the specific location of the proposed installation. Where a complete unit or system has been pre-approved, only location-specific issues will typically need to be reviewed. 
e.  The generator owner will be responsible for protecting its own generating and interconnection equipment in such a manner so that town system outages, short circuits, single phasing conditions or other disturbances including zero sequence currents and ferroresonant over-voltages do not damage the generator owner's generating equipment. The protective equipment shall also prevent excessive or unnecessary tripping that would adversely affect the town's service reliability or power quality to other generator owners and customers. 
f.  The generator and interface protection schemes shall be continuously monitored and functioning and the generator shall immediately disconnect from the town's system for any condition that would make the protection scheme inoperable. 
g.  The operating power required for the protection and control schemes for the generator and the control power used to disconnect the generator from the town must not be dependent on local town grid power, or must provide a "fail-safe" method to an "open" disconnected position upon loss of grid. 
h.  Where multiple generators are connected to the system through a single point of common coupling, the sum of the ratings of the generators will be used to determine the applicability of these guidelines. Protection scheme performance with one or more units off line will have to be considered. 
i.  Applicable circuit breakers or other interrupting devices at the generator owner's facility must be capable of interrupting the maximum available fault current at the site, including any contribution from the owner's generator(s). 
j.  The generator owner will furnish and install a manual disconnect device which, when opened, will have the effect of isolating the generator from the town's system. The disconnect device shall have a visual break (a disconnect switch, a draw-out breaker, fuse block, etc. as appropriate to the voltage level), and will, at all times, be accessible to the town's personnel, and shall be capable of being locked in the open position via a town padlock. The town shall use reasonable efforts to utilize padlocks of a size consistent with typical manufacture's specifications. The generator owner shall follow the town's switching, clearance and tagging procedures which the town shall provide and attach the Warning Label noted in section 70-189.4. 
On generation installations of 25 kW or less, the generator owner may request, and the Town of Smyrna in its sole judgment and discretion may allow the generation owner to not install a manual disconnect switch provided that the meter can be safely "pulled" by the town to isolate the generation equipment from the town. If the generator owner is permitted by the Town of Smyrna to not install a manual disconnect device, the generator owner assumes all risks and consequences when a meter must be "pulled" to disconnect the generator thereby also interrupting electric service to the customer. 
k.  The design, procurement, installation and maintenance of the equipment at the generator owner's site is the responsibility of the generator owner and at the generator owner's expense. 
l.  Any necessary enhancements or improvements needed within the town's system and/or at the customer sites to accommodate the parallel interconnection of the generator owner's generation will be at the generator owner's expense. 
m.  The generator owner has full responsibility and liability for the safe and proper operation of their equipment and the power originating from their generator. The generator owner is also responsible for synchronizing their generator(s) with the town's system and maintaining a synchronous operation. 
n.  The generator owner must immediately cease parallel operation upon notification by the town if such operation is determined to be unsafe, interferes with the supply of service to other customers or interferes with the town's system maintenance or operation. 
o.  The town reserves the right to specify the type of transformer connection (e.g. delta-delta, wye-delta, wye-wye) that will be employed for all multiphase interface transformers consistent, where reasonable, with the generator owner's power system. 
(2)  Prevention of generator owner generation interference with town system. To eliminate undesirable interference caused by operation of the generator owner's generating equipment, the generator owner's generator shall meet the following criteria: 
a.  Voltage. The generating equipment will be operated in such a manner that the voltage levels on the town's system are in the same range as if the generating equipment were not connected to the town's system. The generator owner shall provide an automatic method of initiating a disconnect sequence of his generating equipment from the town system with set points noted in the table below. 
Generating systems with inverters up to 25 kW Generating systems withinverters greater than 25 kW Non-inverter or rotating machine generating systems  Trip in 0.1 second for V<50% 
Trip in 2 second for 50%lte;V<88% 
Trip in 2 seconds for 106%<V<137% 
Trip in 0.03 second for 137%=V 
(Above times and voltages taken directly from IEEE 929)  Trip in 0.1 second for V<50% 
Trip within 0.1 to 30 seconds for 50%=V<88% 
Trip within 0.1 to 30 seconds for 106%<V<137% 
Trip in 0.03 second for 137%=V 
(Specific voltage and time delay set points will be determined for each installation.) Trip in 0.1 second for V=115% 
Trip within 0.1 to 30 seconds for V>110% or V<90% 
(Specific voltage and time delay set points will be determined for each installation.)  
Note: Trip time refers to the time between when the abnormal voltage condition occurs and the generator being disconnected from the town's electric system. 
On three phase generator installations, full three phase voltage sensing should be employed. Voltages must be sensed on the high side of any interface transformer if the transformer high voltage winding is ungrounded. 
The generator owner may reconnect to the grid when the system voltage returns to normal range and is stabilized as defined in section 70-186, definitions. 
b.  Flicker. The generator owner shall not cause excessive voltage flicker on the town's system. This flicker shall not exceed the "Borderline of Irritation" curve, Fig. 10.3, as defined in IEEE Std 519-1992, Recommended Practices and Requirements for Harmonic Control in Electric Power Systems (See Appendix 1). Lower levels of flicker may be required in areas where equipment such as computers and instrumentation are impacted. 
c.  Frequency. The operating frequency of the generating equipment shall not deviate more than the values noted in the table below. 
Generating systems with inverters up to 25 kW Generating systems with inverters greater than 25 kW Non-inverter or rotating machine generating systems  Trip in 0.1 second for F<59.3 Hz  Trip in 0.1 second for F<59.3 Hz  Trip in 0.1 second for F<59.3 Hz  Trip in 0.1 second for F>60.5 Hz  Trip in 0.1 second for F>60.5 Hz  Trip in 0.1 second for F>60.5 Hz (Set points taken from IEEE 929) (Other frequency and time delay set points may be necessary for a specific installation.) (Other frequency and time delay set points may be necessary for a specific installation.)  
Note: Trip time refers to the time between when the abnormal frequency condition occurs and the generator being disconnected from the town's electric system. 
The generator owner may reconnect when the system frequency returns to normal range and is stabilized as defined in section 70-186, definitions. 
d.  Harmonics. Non-linear circuit elements such as inverters can produce harmonics. Per IEEE Std 519, Recommended Practices and Requirements for Harmonic Control in Electric Power Systems, Table 11.1 (See Appendix 1), the total harmonic distortion (THD) voltage shall not exceed 5% of the fundamental 60 Hz frequency nor 3% of the fundamental for any individual harmonic as measured at the location where the customer interfaces with the town's system (Point of Common Coupling). In addition, the level of harmonic current that the customer is allowed to inject into the town's system shall not exceed that specified in Table 10.3 in IEEE Std 519 (See Appendix 1). Furthermore, any communication notch should be limited as defined by Table 10.2 in IEEE Std 519 (See Appendix 1). The preceding requirements apply to all types of generation systems. 
The generator owner is responsible for the installation of any necessary controls or hardware to limit the voltage and current harmonics generated by his equipment to defined levels. 
e.  Power factor. The generator must not adversely impact the power factor of the generator owner site. Most inverters are designed to operate close to unity power factor. The operating power factor of the generator shall be contained within the limits defined in the table below. 
Generating systems with inverters up to 25 kW Generating systems with inverters greater than 25 kW Non-inverter or rotating machine generating systems 0.85 lagging or leading when output exceeds 10% of inverter rating. 
(From IEEE 929-1999) 0.85 lagging or leading when output exceeds 10% of inverter rating. 0.85 lagging or leading  
However, to the extent that a generator owner's power factor at the point of common coupling falls below 0.9 lagging as a direct result of the installation of the generating unit(s), the generator owner must obtain, install and maintain, at his expense, corrective apparatus that compensates for the drop in power factor caused by the installation of the generator. 
f.  Current. In some cases, directional over-current protection may be required to limit fault current flowing onto the grid in the event of a line fault. DC inverters that are incapable of producing fault current do not require directional over-current protection. 
Inverter systems should not inject DC current greater than 0.5 percent of rated inverter output in the AC interface point under either normal or abnormal conditions. 
g.  Fault and line clearing. The generator owner shall automatically disconnect from the town's system during electrical faults on the town's electrical system and upon loss of the town's electric source. The generator owner may reconnect when the system voltage and frequency return to normal range and is stabilized as defined in section 70-186, definitions. Detection of the loss of the town's primary electric system, where the generator owner is operating in an island with other customer load, becomes increasingly difficult as the level of dispersed generation on a feeder approaches the connected load. For generating units 25 kW and below, the over/under voltage and over/under frequency settings described previously along with the anti-islandizing provisions of IEEE 929/UL 1746 inverters, should be sufficient to satisfy this provision. For units greater than 25 kW the voltage and frequency set-points are to be adjustable, with the actual setting determined by the town based on the electrical characteristics of the generator and the town's electrical system. In addition, additional protection such as power directional or directional overcurrent functions may be required. For units 500 kW or larger, a direct tripping scheme to trip the generator upon loss of the town's feeder may be required by the town. This decision will be based on the saturation of distributed generation on a particular feeder circuit and in those cases where under voltage or under frequency sensing may not adequately detect loss of the town source. 
h.  Automatic reclosing. The generator owner is responsible for protecting his equipment from the effects of switching or automatic reclosing of the town's feeder circuit. The generator owner may request the town to delay high speed reclosing on the town's feeder to allow the interconnected generator sufficient time to remove itself from an islandized or de-energized feeder prior to automatic reclose. Since delaying the automatic reclose time degrades the level of service provided to other customers on the circuit, the town will limit the automatic reclose time delays to a few seconds or less. The generator owner may also request that a direct transfer trip scheme be added to remove the interconnected generator from service prior to automatic reclosing by using communications equipment between the generator site and the town. Similarly, the generation owner may request that a synchronizing check, or reclose blocking scheme be installed on the town's feeder to prevent out of phase reclosing. The generation owner is responsible for all costs associated with the installation and maintenance of these requested modifications. 
(3)  Control, protection and safety equipment requirements specific to generators of 25 kW or less. All generator owners 10 kW or less can be single phase. Customer owned generators greater than 10 kW must be evaluated by the town to determine if it can be single phase. The following table describes necessary control, protection and safety equipment specific to generators of 25 kW or less connected to secondary or primary voltage systems: 
Control, Protection and Safety Equipment for Generators of 25 kW1 or Less Connected to Secondary or Primary System 
Generator Size 25 kW or less Generator Disconnect Device 2 X Over-Current Trip X Over-Voltage Trip X Under Voltage Trip X Over/Under Frequency Trip X Synchronizing Check 3 Manual or Automatic  
Notes: 
1.  Exporting to the town system may require additional operational/protection devices. 
2.  Generator owner may request to have the meter act as the disconnect device. (See section 70-189.8(1)j.) 
3.  For synchronous and other type of generators with stand-alone capability. 
(4)  Control, protection and safety requirement specific to three phase synchronous generators, induction generators and inverter systems. Generators greater than 25 kW must be three phase machines connected to three phase circuits. 
a.  Three phase synchronous generators. Generator circuit breakers shall be three phase devices with electronic or electromechanical control. The generation owner is solely responsible for properly synchronizing his generator with the town's system. For a synchronous generator, the excitation system response ratio shall not be less than 0.5 (five-tenth). The generator's excitation system(s) shall conform, as near as reasonably achievable, to the field voltage vs. time criteria specified in American National Standards Institute Standard C50.13-1989 in order to permit adequate field forcing during transient conditions. 
b.  Three phase induction generators and inverter systems. Induction generation may be connected and brought up to synchronous speed (as an induction motor) if it can be demonstrated that the initial voltage drop measured on the town's side at the point of common coupling is within the visible flicker limits stated in section 70-189.8(2)b. Otherwise, the generator owner may be required to install hardware or other techniques to bring voltage fluctuations to acceptable levels. Line-commutated inverters do not require synchronizing equipment. Self-commutated inverters whether of the utility-interactive type or stand-alone type shall be used in parallel with the town system only with synchronizing equipment. 
Control, Protection and Safety Equipment 1 Less than 1 MW Three Phase Connected to Primary System 
(and greater than 25 kW) Generator Disconnect Device 2 X Over-Voltage Trip X Under Voltage Trip X Over-Current Trip X Over/Under Frequency Trip X Ground Over-Voltage Trip 3 OR X Ground Over-Current Trip 3 Synchronizing Check 4 Manual or Automatic Power Direction 5 X Transfer Trip/Reclose Blocking 6 X  
Notes: 
1.  Exporting to the town's system may require additional operating/protection devices and will require coordination of operations with the town. 
2.  For installations of 25 kW or less, the generation owner may request to have the meter act as the disconnect device (See XIV.A.10). 
3.  Selection depends on grounding system, if required, by the town. 
4.  For synchronous and other types of generators with stand-alone capability. 
5.  Required only if generator size is greater than generator owner's minimum load and thus capable of exporting. The relay will operate if the power flow from the generator into the grid exceeds a predetermined level. A time delay will have to be incorporated into this relay to prevent it from operating during synchronous swings. 
6.  May be required as part of any necessary transfer tripping/reclose blocking protection scheme. 
(5)  Requirements specific to generators paralleling for 0.1 second or less (closed transition switching). The table below shows the protective functions required by this requirement for generators less than 1 MW which parallel with the town's system for 0.1 second or less such as during source or load transfers. 
Control, Protection and Safety Equipment 
Generators Connected to Secondary or Primary System Voltage 
For 0.1 Second or Less 
(Closed Transition Switching) 
Generator Size 
Up to 1 MW 
Over-Voltage Trip X Under Voltage Trip X Synchronizing Check 1 Manual or Automatic Excessive Closed Time Trip 2 X  
Notes: 
1.  For synchronous and other types of generators with stand-alone capability. 
2.  Scheme will trip generator if closed transition parallel mode remains in effect longer than 0.1 second. 
(6)  Inverter type. DC generation installations using inverters for interconnection with the town must use non-islanding type inverters as defined in IEEE 929, IEEE Recommended Practices for Utility Interface of Photovoltaic (PV) Systems (including Annex B, D, E & G) and UL Subject 1741, May 1999, Standard for Static Inverters and Charge Controllers for use in Photovoltaic Power Systems. 
(7)  Inspection and start-up testing. The generator owner shall provide the town with reasonable prior notice at least two weeks before the initial energizing and start-up testing of the generator owner's generating equipment and the town, at its discretion, shall witness the testing of any equipment and protective systems associated with the interconnection. The generator owner shall revise and re-submit the application information for any proposed modification that may affect the safe and reliable operation of the town's system. The generator may be reconnected to the town system only after the modified application has been reviewed, testing has been confirmed and the town has given approval to reconnect. 
(8)  Site testing and commissioning. Testing of protection systems shall include procedures to functionally test all protective elements of the installation up to and including tripping of the generator and interconnection point. Testing and testing intervals should be in accordance with manufacturers' and industry recommendations. Testing will verify all protective set points and relay/breaker trip timing. The town may witness the testing of installed switchgear, protection systems and generator. The generator owner is responsible for all maintenance of the generator, control and protective equipment. The generator owner will maintain records of such maintenance activities which the town may review at reasonable times. For generation systems greater than 500 kW, a log of generator operations may be required in order to determine its output and run times for system planning purposes. 
(9)  Metering. Metering requirements will be reviewed on each specific installation. 
(10)  Dedicated transformer. A dedicated transformer will be required where the generating generator owner is served from the same transformer secondary as another town customer and inverter-based technology not meeting IEEE 929-1999 and IEEE 519-1992 specifications is used. In addition, a dedicated transformer or other current-limiting device is needed for any type of generator installation where the increase in available short circuit current could adversely impact other town customers on the same secondary circuit. 
(11)  Suggested references. The following references can supply technical support and insight into the safe, reliable interconnection of distributed generation with the town's systems. These references should be reviewed by those individuals or firms contemplating parallel operation of generation with the town. 
IEEE C37.95-1989 - IEEE Guide for Protective Relaying of Utility-Consumer Interconnections 
IEEE Std 1001 (1988) - IEEE Guide for Interfacing Dispersed Storage and Generation Facilities with Electric Utility Systems 
IEEE Std 929 - IEEE Recommended Practices for Utility Interface of Photovoltaic (PV) Systems 
IEEE Std 1021 (1988) - IEEE Recommended Practices for Utility Interconnection of Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems 
IEEE Std 519 -1992 - IEEE Recommended Practices and Requirements for Harmonic Control In Electrical Power Systems 
(Ord. No. 009-07, § XIV, 9-4-07) 
Appendix 1 
Selected Tables from IEEE Std. 519-1992 
Recommended Practices and Requirements for Harmonic Control in Electric Power Systems 
Figure 10-3 Maximum Permissible Voltage Fluctuations 

Table 10-2-Low-Voltage System Classification and Distortion Limits 
Special Applications * General System Dedicated System  Notch Depth 10% 20% 50% THD (Voltage) 3% 5% 10% Notch Area (A N )  16 400 22 800 36 500  
NOTE - The value A N for other than 480 V systems should be multiplied by V/480. 
*Special applications include hospitals and airports. 
A dedicated system is exclusively dedicated to the converter load. 
In volt-microseconds at rated voltage and current. 
From IEEE Std 519-1992. Reprinted with permission from IEEE 
Table 10-3-Current Distortion Limits for General Distribution Systems (120 V through 69 000 V) 
Maximum Harmonic Current Distortion in Percent of I l Individual Harmonic Order (Odd Harmonics) I sc /I l <11 11=h<17 17=h<23 23=h<35 35=h TDD <20* 4.0 2.0 1.5 0.6 0.3 5.0 20<50 7.0 3.5 2.5 1.0 0.5 8.0 50<100 10.0 4.5 4.0 1.5 0.7 12.0 100<1000 12.0 5.5 5.0 2.0 1.0 15.0 >1000 15.0 7.0 6.0 2.5 1.4 20.0 Even harmonics are limited to 25% of the odd harmonic limits above. Current distortions that result in a dc offset, eg., half-wave converters, are not allowed. *All power generation equipment is limited to these values of current distortion, regardless of actual I sc /I l . where: 
I sc =maximum short-circuit current at PCC. 
I l =maximum demand load current (fundamental frequency component) at PCC.  
Table 11-1-Voltage Distortion Limits 
Bus Voltage at PCC Individual Voltage Distortion (%) Total Voltage Distortion THD (%) 69 kV and below 3.0 5.0 69.001 kV through 161 kV 1.5 2.5 161.001 kV and above 1.0 1.5  
NOTE - High-voltage systems can have up to 2.0% THD where the cause is an HVDC terminal that will attenuate by the time it is tapped for a user. 
From IEEE Std 519-1992. Reprinted with permission from IEEE 
Appendix 2 
Generator Interconnection Application - Short Form 
(For Use with Generators 25 kW or Less) 
Town of Smyrna 
Generator Interconnection Application-Short Form 
(For Use with Generators 25 kW or Less) 
An applicant (Generator Owner) makes application to Town of Smyrna to install and operate a generating facility of 25 kW or less interconnected with the Smyrna Electric system. 
Section 1 - Applicant Information 
Name: _____ 
Mailing Address: _____ 
City: _____ 
State: _______ Zip Code: _______ 
Facility Location (if different from above): _____ 
Telephone (Daytime): (___)________ 
Telephone (Evening) (___)________ 
Section 2 - Generator Qualifications 
Is Generator powered from a Renewable NEM Qualifying Energy Source: ? Yes ? No 
Type NEM Qualifying Energy Source (if applicable): ? Solar ? Wind ? Hydro 
Generator (or solar collector) Manufacturer, Model Name & Number: _____ 
_____ Output Power Rating in kW: ___________ 
Inverter Manufacturer, Model Name & Number (if used): _____ 
Rating in kW: ___________ 
Will a generator disconnect device, accessible to the local utility be installed? ? Yes ? No 
If the Generator Owner is permitted by the Town of Smyrna to not install a manual disconnect device accessible to the local utility (See Section XIV A.10), the Generator Owner assumes the risks and consequences when a service meter must be "pulled" to disconnect the generator thereby interrupting all utility electric service to the Customer site. 
Town of Smyrna 
Generator Interconnection Application-Short Form 
(For Use with Generators 25 kW or Less) 
Section 3 - Generator/Equipment Certification 
Generating systems that use/utilize inverter technology must be compliant with the IEEE 929 and Underwriter Lab UL 1741 . Generating systems that use a rotating machine must be compliant with the Town of Smyrna's Technical Considerations Covering Parallel Operations of Customer Owned Generation of Less than One (1) MW and Interconnected with the Smyrna Electric System document. By signing below, the Applicant certifies that the installed generating equipment meets the appropriate preceding requirement(s) and can supply documentation that confirms compliance. 
Signed (Applicant): ___________ Date: ________ 
Section 4 - Installation Details 
Generating System will be installed by: ? Owner ? State Licensed Electrician 
Installing Technician: ___________ Firm: ________ License No.: _______ 
Mailing Address: _____ 
City: _____ 
State: ________ Zip Code: ________ 
Telephone Number: (_______)-___________ 
Installation Date: ________ Interconnection Date: ________ 
Supply Certification that the generation system has been installed and inspected in compliance with the local Building /Electrical code. 
Signed (Inspector): _____ 
Date: ________ 
(In lieu of signature of Inspector, a copy of the final inspection certificate may be attached.) 
Section 5 - Application Fee 
Application fee as listed in the Town of Smyrna's Fee Schedule and is to be paid by Applicant when the Application is submitted to the Town of Smyrna Business Office. 
Town of Smyrna 
Generator Interconnection Application-Short Form 
(For Use with Generators 25 kW or Less) 
Section 6 - Applicant Signature 
I hereby certify that, to the best of my knowledge, all the information provided in the Interconnection Application is true and correct. I also agree to install a Warning Label provided by the local utility on or near my service meter location. 
Signature of Applicant: _____ 
Date: ________ 
Send the completed application to The Town of Smyrna, P. O. Box 307, 27 South Market Street Plaza, Smyrna, Delaware 19977, Attention: Business Office. 
Section 7 - Approval or Non-Approval 
The Town of Smyrna: ? Has Approved ? Has Not Approved 
Name: ___________ 
Date: ________ 
Signature: ___________ 
Reason for Non-Approval: _____ 
Approval to connect to the Smyrna Electric system indicates only that the minimum requirements for a safe and proper interconnection have been satisfied. Such approval does not imply that the Generator Owner's facility meets all federal, state and local standard or regulations. 
Section 8 - Internal Notifications 
Send Applicant Warning Label for installing on/near service meter:       ? Yes 
Notify Billing Department of Interconnected Generation:       ? Yes 
Notify Electric Department of Interconnected Generation:       ? Yes 
Application Fee Paid:       ? Yes 
DEMEC Notified       ? Yes 
Copy of Final Inspection Certificate (or Signature)       ? Yes 
Appendix 3 
Generator Interconnection Application - Long Form 
(For Use with Generators Greater than 25 kW and Less than 1 MW) 
Town of Smyrna 
Generator Interconnection Application-Long Form 
(For Use with Generators Greater than 25 kW and Less than 1 MW) 
An applicant (Generator Owner) makes application to Town of Smyrna to install and operate a generating facility greater than 25 kW and less than 1 MW interconnected with the Smyrna Electric system. 
Section 1 - Applicant Information 
Name: _____ 
Mailing Address: _____ 
City: _____ 
State:_______ Zip Code: ________ 
Facility Location (if different from above): _____ 
Telephone (Daytime): Area Code _____ _______ 
(Evening) Area Code _____ _______ 
Town of Smyrna Account No.: _______ 
Energy Service Provider Name: ___________ 
Account No.: _______ 
Section 2 - Generator Qualifications 
Is the generator a Qualifying Facility as defined under Subpart B, Section 201 of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission's regulations per the Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978? ? Yes ? No 
Is Generator powered from a Renewable Qualifying Energy Source: ? Yes ? No 
Type Qualifying Energy Source (if applicable): ? Solar       ? Wind       ? Hydro 
Other generator energy source: ? Natural Gas       ? Fuel Oil       ? Other: ________ 
Will excess power be exported to Town of Smyrna?       ? Yes ? No 
Site Load: ________ kW (Typical) 
Maximum Export: ________ kW. 
Section 3 - Generator Technical Information 
Type of Generator: ? Synchronous ? Induction ? DC Generator or Solar with Inverter 
Generator (or solar collector) Manufacturer, Model Name & Number: ___________ 
(A copy of Generator Nameplate and Manufacturer's Specification Sheet may be substituted) 
_____ Output Power Rating in kW: _____ 
Town of Smyrna 
Generator Interconnection Application-Long Form 
Inverter Manufacturer, Model Name & Number (if used): _____ 
(A copy of Inverter Nameplate and Manufacturer's Specification Sheet may be substituted) 
___________ Rating in kW: _____ 
Generator Characteristic Data (for rotating machines): 
(Not needed if Generator Nameplate and Manufacture's Specification Sheet is provided) 
Direct Axis Synchronous Reactance, X d : _____ P.U. 
Negative Sequence Reactance: _____ P.U. 
Direct Axis Transient Reactance, X'd: _____ P.U. 
Zero Sequence Reactance: _____ P.U. 
Direct Axis Subtransient Reactance, X'd: _____ P.U. 
KVA Base: ___________ 
Section 4 - Interconnecting Equipment Technical Data 
Will an interposing transformer be used between the generator and the point of interconnection? ? Yes ? No 
Transformer Data (if applicable, for Customer Owned Transformer): 
(A copy of transformer Nameplate and Manufacturer's Test Report may be substituted) 
Size: _____ KVA. Transformer Primary: _____ Volts 
? Delta ? Wye ? Wye Grounded 
Secondary: _____ Volts ? Delta ? Wye ? Wye Grounded 
Transformer Impedance: _____% on _____ KVA Base 
Transformer Fuse Data (if applicable, for Customer Owned Fuse): 
(Attach copy of fuse manufacturer's Minimum Melt & Total Clearing Time-Current Curves) 
Manufacturer: ___________ Type: ___________ Size: ___________ Speed: ___________ 
Interconnecting Circuit Breaker (if applicable): 
(A copy of breaker's Nameplate and Specification Sheet may be substituted) 
Manufacturer: _______ Type: _______ Load Rating: _______ Interrupting Rating: _______ Trip Speed: ___ 
(Amps)     (Amps) 
(Cycles) 
Circuit Breaker Protective Relays (if applicable): 
(Enclose copy of any proposed Time-Overcurrent Coordination Curves) 
Manufacturer: _______ Type: _____ 
Style/Catalog No.: _______ Proposed Setting: _______ 
Manufacturer: _______ Type: _____ 
Style/Catalog No.: _______ Proposed Setting: _______ 
Manufacturer: _______ Type: _____ 
Style/Catalog No.: _______ Proposed Setting: _______ 
Manufacturer: _______ Type: _____ 
Style/Catalog No.: _______ Proposed Setting: _______ 
Manufacturer: _______ Type: _____ 
Style/Catalog No.: _______ Proposed Setting: _______ 
Town of Smyrna 
Generator Interconnection Application-Long Form 
Current Transformer Data (if applicable): 
(Enclose copy of Manufacturer's Excitation & Ratio Correction Curves) 
Manufacturer: _______ Type: _____ Accuracy Class: _______ Proposed Ratio Connection: _____/5 
Manufacturer: _______ Type: _______ Accuracy Class: _______ Proposed Ratio Connection: _____/5 
Generator Disconnect Switch: 
A generator disconnect device, accessible to the Town of Smyrna, must be included for all generators greater than 25 kW. 
Manufacturer: _______ Type: _______ Catalog No.: _____ Rated Volts: _______ Rated Amps: _______ 
Single or 3 Phase: _____ 
Mounting Location: ___________ 
Section 5 - General Technical Information 
Enclose copy of site One-Line Diagram showing configuration and interconnection of all equipment, current and potential circuits and protection and control schemes. Is One-Line Diagram Enclosed?       ? Yes 
Enclose copy of any site documentation that describes and details the operation of the protection and control schemes. Is Any Available Documentation Enclosed?       ?Yes 
Enclose copies of schematic drawings for all protection and control circuits, relay current circuits, relay potential circuits, and alarm/monitoring circuits. 
Are Schematic Drawings Enclosed?       ? Yes 
Section 6 - Installation Details 
Generating System will be installed by:       ? Owner ? State Licensed Electrician 
Installing Electrician: ___________ 
Firm: _______ License No.: _____ 
Mailing Address: _____ 
City: _______ State: _______ Zip Code: _______ 
Telephone: Area Code: (_____) Number: _______ 
Installation Date: ________ 
Interconnection Date: ________ 
Supply certification that the generating system has been installed and inspected in compliance with the local Building/Electrical code. 
Signed (Inspector): ___________ 
Date: ________ 
(In lieu of signature of Inspector, a copy of the final inspection certificate may be attached) 
Town of Smyrna 
Generator Interconnection Application -Long Form 
Section 7 - Generator/Equipment Certification 
Generating systems that use/utilize inverter technology must be compliant with IEEE 929 and Underwriters Lab. UL 1741. Generating systems that use a rotating machine must be compliant with Town of Smyrna's Technical Considerations Covering Parallel Operations of Customer Owned Generation of Less than One (1) MW and Interconnected with the Smyrna Electric System document. By signing below, the Applicant certifies that the installed generating equipment meets the appropriate preceding requirement(s) and can supply documentation that confirms compliance. 
Signed (Applicant): ___________ 
Date: ________ 
A Pre-Interconnection Study is normally required for generators greater than 25 kW. However, certain generator types/sizes and the location of the Point of Interconnection with Smyrna Electric System may permit a waiver of the Pre-Interconnection Study. 
Does the Generation Owner request a waiver of the Pre-Interconnection Study?       ? Yes ? No 
A "Yes" response cannot insure that the Pre-Interconnection Study requirement will be waived. Town of Smyrna has the sole authority to grant release from the requirement based on the merits of each individual Interconnection Application. 
Section 8 Application Fee 
Application Fee is listed in the Town of Smyrna's Fee Schedule and is to be paid by Applicant when Application is submitted to the Town of Smyrna Business Office. 
Section 9 - Applicant Signature 
I hereby certify that, to the best of my knowledge, all the information provided in the Interconnection Application is true and correct. I also agree to install a Warning Label provided by Town of Smyrna on or near my service meter location. 
Signature of Applicant: ___________ 
Date: ________ 
Send the completed application to Town of Smyrna, P.O. Box 307, 27 South Market Street Plaza, Smyrna, Delaware 19977, Attention Business Office 
Town of Smyrna 
Generator Interconnection Application-Long Form 
(For Use with Generators Greater than 25 kW and Less than 1 MW) 
This Section for use by Town of Smyrna Only 
Section 10 - Approval or Non-Approval 
Town of Smyrna:       ? Has Approved ? Has Not Approved this Interconnection Application. 
Name: ___________ Date: ________ 
Signature: ___________ 
Reason of Not Approving: _____
_____
_____ 
Approval to connect to the Smyrna Electrical System indicates only that the minimum requirements for a safe proper interconnection have been satisfied. Such approval does not imply that the Generator Owner's facility meets all federal, state and local standards or regulations. 
Section 11 - Internal Notifications 
Send Applicant Warning Label for installing on/near service meter: ? Yes Notify Billing Dept. of Interconnected Generation: ? Yes Notify Electric Department of Interconnected Generation: ? Yes Application Fee Paid: ? Yes DEMEC Notified ? Yes Copy of Final Inspection Certificate (or Signature) ? Yes  
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 008-18, § 1, adopted August 6, 2018, repealed art. IV, §§ 70-190-70-196. Former art. IV pertained to discount of electric utility charges for qualifying projects and derived from Ord. No. 031-03, adopted November 17, 2003. 
Editor's note- The elimination of article IV (discount of electric utility charges for qualifying projects) of chapter 70 (utilities) shall in no way impact or infringe on the ability of the town to waive taxes, charges, and fees as authorized pursuant to chapter 18 (buildings and building regulations), article XII (redevelopment authority), division 4 (waiver of town taxes, charges, and fees), section 18-801 (waiver of town taxes, charges, and fees). 

Secs. 70-190-70-196. - Reserved. 
Secs. 70-197-70-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - UTILITY BUDGET BILLING PLAN FOR RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMERS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 008-04, § 1, adopted May 3, 2004, amended the Code with the addition of a new article IV, section 70-190. In order to avoid the duplication of article and section numbers, the provisions of said ordinance have been included herein as article V, section 70-200, at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 70-200. - Utility budget billing plan for residential customers. 
    Plan description . The utility budget plan may begin anytime during the year, provided that a 12-month billing period is available or the residential customer and the town can agree on a estimated 12-month period history for the purposes of calculating the budget period amounts. The exact budget payment will be determined by averaging the amount of the utility used in the previous 12-month billing period and recalculating the average bill based on an average consumption and the current rates. The residential customer shall be billed for 11 months on the estimated budget amount with the 12th month as the settlement month. The billing for the settlement month (the 12th month) shall consist of the difference between the actual amount due to date and the budget amount paid to date. The town may adjust the budget payment at any time so long as the town provides written notice to the residential customer. 
(Ord. No. 008-04, § 1, 5-3-04; Ord. No. 023-04, §§ 1, 2, 11-1-04) 
Secs. 70-201-70-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - COLLECTIONS 

Sec. 70-301. - Payment plans for delinquent accounts. 
    Upon a customer becoming delinquent on their account (electric, sewer and/or water), the customer may enter into a written payment plan with the town, signed by the customer, wherein the customer shall pay the amount past due in equal consecutive monthly installments with the next three regular monthly bills. Such installment payments shall be treated as if it were a part of the customer's regular monthly bill and failure to pay the installment amounts in full when due shall result in the same late payment penalties and procedures as would apply to regular monthly bills. If the customers pays all the installments when due, any and all late payment penalties shall not be charged on the portion of the account past due during the time covered by the payment plan. A customer shall only be allowed to enter into such a payment plan with the town once every nine months. If a customer's account has been terminated (disconnected or shut-off), the customer must pay in full the costs to re-establish service before entering into a payment plan with the town for the amount past due. 
(Ord. No. 013-05, § 2, 3-7-05) 
Sec. 70-302. - Collection of delinquent accounts by third-party agency. 
    Upon a customer's water, sewer, or electric account being terminated (disconnected or shut-off) or becoming past due, the town billing manager shall forward the collection of such past due amounts (including all authorized penalties and interest) to a third-party collection agency in accordance with section 2-71 ("Use of third-party collection agency"). The cost of the third-party collection agency shall be added to the amount past due, which collection cost shall not exceed 15% of the total amount past due (including all authorized penalties and interest). 
(Ord. No. 013-05, § 2, 3-7-05; Ord. No. 004-15, § 3, 4-20-15) 
Chapter 74 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 54; zoning regulations, app. A; subdivision regulations, app. B. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 74-1-74-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GRASS AND WEEDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of an ordinance adopted November 20, 1995 deleted §§ 74-26-74-29 in their entirety and created new §§ 74-26-74-31. Formerly, such sections pertained to similar provisions and derived from General Ordinances, Art. IV, Tit. 16, §§ 1-4. 

Sec. 74-26. - Violations declared nuisance; penalty. 
    Any person or group of persons, firm, association or corporation found by a code enforcement constable to be violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a civil violation and of maintaining a nuisance, and shall be fined a civil penalty in the amount of $50.00. Any civil penalty not paid within 30 days of the date of the citation/invoice, or if an appeal was filed, within 15 days of the town manager's final decision, shall double and shall be added to the property tax bill as outlined in this article. 
(Ord. of 11-20-95(2), § 1; Ord. of 8-5-02(1), § 33; Ord. No. 007-18, § 1, 8-6-18) 
Sec. 74-27. - Unlawful to allow growth above certain height. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, group of persons, firm, association or corporation to permit any grass or weeds or other vegetation whatsoever other than edible vegetables, trees and flowers to grow higher than ten inches from the ground on any lot or parcel of ground within the corporate limits of the town, owned by such person, group of persons, firm, association or corporation whether the lot or parcel of ground has or has not erected thereon improvements. Yards shall be kept free from trash and debris that interfere with mowing of the area. 
(Ord. of 11-20-95(2), § 1; Ord. of 8-7-00, § 1) 
Sec. 74-28. - Unlawful to allow growth in sidewalks, walkways, other areas. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, group of persons, firm, association or corporation to permit any grass, weeds or other vegetation whatsoever to grow in any sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas. 
(Ord. of 11-20-95(2), § 1) 
Sec. 74-29. - Abatement of nuisance by town upon owner's failure; collection of costs. 
(a)  Courtesy notice. When a code enforcement constable observes a violation of this article on a property that within the past 12 months has not been subject to an abatement action or been issued a courtesy notice or legal notice of violation, the code enforcement constable shall place a courtesy notice of violation on the door of the property requiring abatement of the violation within five calendar days of the posting of the notice. For vacant properties, notice shall be posted in a prominent location on the property. 
(b)  Legal notice. If a violation is not abated as prescribed in a courtesy notice, or if a code enforcement constable observes a violation of this article on a property that does not meet the eligibility requirements prescribed in subsection (a) for a courtesy notice, legal notice shall be issued requiring abatement within seven calendar days of the date of the posting or mailing or hand delivery of the notice, whichever occurs last, or the town will proceed to abate the nuisance and assess the property owner civil penalties and the costs of abatement. Legal notice shall be posted on the property, mailed or hand delivered to the property owner, and mailed or hand delivered to the occupant (if the property owner's mailing address differs from the address of the property). The legal notice shall indicate that for the remainder of the calendar year (January 1 through December 31), the town shall proceed, without further notice, to abate any violations of this article observed on the property and assess the property owner the costs of abatement and civil penalties. After each enforcement action, the town shall mail a citation/invoice to the property owner for the abatement costs and civil penalties. 
(c)  Recovery of abatement costs and civil penalties. The abatement costs, together with any civil penalties, collection costs, and other costs incurred by the town, shall constitute a claim against the property owner and may be collected as any other fine or cost is collected, including forwarding the collection of past due amounts (including all authorized penalties and interest) to a third-party collection agency in accordance with section 2-71 (Use of third-party collection agency). Thirty days after the date of the citation/invoice, or if an appeal was filed, 30 days after the town manager's final decision, as authorized by 25 Del. C. § 2901(a)(1), unpaid civil penalties and abatement costs shall be added to the property tax bill for the property and may be collected in the same manner as property taxes. The legal notice of violation and any citation/invoice sent to the property owner shall include notice of the right to appeal. 
(Ord. of 11-20-95(2), § 1; Ord. No. 004-15, § 4, 4-20-15; Ord. No. 005-15, § 1, 5-6-15; Ord. No. 007-18, § 2, 8-6-18) 
Sec. 74-30. - Charge for mowing by town. 
    When the town is required under this article to mow lots or when the town is requested to mow any private property in the town, the following cost shall be assessed: 
(1)  Mowing and/or weedeating-As set forth in the fee schedule 
(2)  Removal of trash & debris from area (if needed)-As set forth in the fee schedule 
(3)  Administrative charge-As set forth in the fee schedule 
(Ord. of 11-20-95(2), § 1; Ord. of 8-7-00, § 2; Ord. No. 005-13, § 3, 8-19-13) 
Sec. 74-31. - Advertisement. 
    The town manager or his designee shall place a copy of this article in a newspaper of local distribution once each calendar year. Enforcement will not begin until 15 days after publication of the ordinance. 
(Ord. of 11-20-95(2), § 1) 
Sec. 74-32. - Appeals procedures. 
    Any property owner or responsible party seeking to appeal the decision of a code enforcement constable finding the property to be in violation of this article may file an appeal, in writing, to the town manager after receiving a courtesy notice or legal notice, provided the appeal is filed no later than ten business days of the post-marked date of the citation/invoice sent to the property owner for the abatement costs and civil penalties. The town manager shall review the appeal and provide the appellant with an opportunity to present his/her case to the town manager. The town manager shall issue a written determination within 20 business days of receipt of the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 005-15, § 2, 5-6-15; Ord. No. 007-18, § 3, 8-6-18) 
Secs. 74-33-74-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TREES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 006-03, § 1, adopted March 3, 2003, repealed article III, sections 74-51-74-54, in its entirety and replaced it with a new article III, sections 74-51-74-77. In order to avoid duplication of section numbers, the provisions of said ordinance have been included herein as article III, sections 74-41-74-67, at the discretion of the editor. Former article III pertained to similar material and derived from Gen. Ords., Art. IV, Tit. 53, §§ 1-4; Ord. of June 19, 2000, §§ 1, 2. 

Sec. 74-41. - Purpose. 
    To establish authority, policies, regulations and standards necessary to ensure that the town will continue to realize the benefits provided by its urban forest. The provisions of this article are enacted to: 
(1)  Establish responsibility/authority for the management of the town's urban forest, street trees, and new trees proposed as part of subdivisions and other land development site plans. 
(2)  Establish and maintain the maximum amount of tree cover on public property in the town. As defined in section 74-51, spacing of trees. 
(3)  Maintain town trees in a healthy and nonhazardous condition through good arboricultural practices. 
(4)  Establish and maintain diversity in tree species and age classes to provide a stable and sustainable urban forest. 
(Ord. No. 006-03, § 1, 3-3-03; Ord. No. 001-18, § 1, 2-5-18) 
Sec. 74-42. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    ANSI A300: American National Standards Institute, Inc. Standard practices for Tree Care Operations-Tree, Shrub and Other Woody Plant Maintenance. 
    Commission: Town of Smyrna Tree Commission 
    dbh: Diameter of the tree trunk at a height of 4.5 feet from the ground. 
    ISA: International Society of Arboriculture. 
    Park trees: Trees and shrubs in public parks, open spaces and all areas except rights-of-way owned by the town or to which the public has free access. 
    Public property: Any real property in the town which is owned by a governmental body and includes buildings, parking lots, parks, streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, easements and other similar property. 
    Shall: A mandatory term. 
    Street trees: Trees and shrubs on public property lying within the right-of-way of all streets, avenues or alleys within town limits. 
    Topping/pollarding: The severe internodal cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. 
    Urban forest: The trees, lower vegetation, open green spaces, and associated wildlife within a municipality or adjacent to it. 
(Ord. No. 006-03, § 1, 3-3-03) 
Sec. 74-43. - Commission; membership. 
    The town tree commission is the designated "tree authority" for the town. The commission shall consist of the town manager or his/her designee and not more than six members, a majority of whom shall be residents of the town, appointed by the mayor with the approval of town council. 
(Ord. No. 006-03, § 1, 3-3-03) 
Sec. 74-44. - Terms of office. 
    The term of office shall be three years, except, on the initial appointment, three members shall be appointed for three years, three for two years, and two for one year. Appointments shall be made by the mayor during the month of May on a yearly basis. Vacancies occurring other than by expiration of term shall be filled by appointment by the mayor and approved by town council for the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 006-03, § 1, 3-3-03) 
Sec. 74-45. - Operation of commission. 
    The mayor shall designate the chair of the commission. The commission shall choose all other officers, make its own rules and regulations, keep a journal of its proceedings, and appoint a liaison from the membership to work with the public. When a greater level of expertise is needed, the Commission shall request the assistance from the state department of agriculture forestry service and community forest coordinator. 
(Ord. No. 006-03, § 1, 3-3-03) 
Sec. 74-46. - Compensation. 
    Members of the town tree commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 006-03, § 1, 3-3-03) 
Sec. 74-47. - Meetings 
    The town tree commission shall have a minimum of four public meetings annually. At least two weeks before the meeting date, the commission shall deliver the meeting agenda to the town office where it shall be posted ten working days prior to the meeting. Note: Weekends and holidays are not considered working days. 
(Ord. No. 006-03, § 1, 3-3-03) 
Sec. 74-48. - Quorum. 
    Any action taken by the commission at a regularly scheduled meeting shall require a majority vote of the members in attendance. Attendance by three or more members shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business by the commission. Should nature create a hazard that needs immediate attention to protect the public's safety, the town manager shall use his/her discretion to rectify the problem in a timely manner within the bounds of this article. 
(Ord. No. 006-03, § 1, 3-3-03) 
Sec. 74-49. - Duties and responsibilities of the commission. 
    The duties and responsibilities of the commission shall include the following as well as additional responsibilities mandated by action of town council: 
(1)  To complete a street/park tree inventory and review and update the information contained therein on at least an annual basis. 
(2)  To develop and maintain a street /park tree master plan for the town that shall contain a recommended tree species planting list and a planting plan which shall govern the species and size of trees which can be planted in given locations. 
(3)  To study, investigate, develop and/or update, and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. Such plan will be presented to the town council and, upon their acceptance and approval, shall constitute the official comprehensive tree plan for the town. The commission, when requested by town council, shall consider, investigate, make findings, report to recommended upon any special matter of question coming within the scope of its work. 
(4)  To advise the town manager on making application for and receiving grants or contributions of money, technical assistance and labor from any person, organization or agency, and, on the expenditure of such grants or contributions for specific projects relating to the planning, management, care, planting and preservation of trees in the community forest and for the beautification of the town. 
(5)  To educate the public about the benefits of trees and their proper care. 
(Ord. No. 006-03, § 1, 3-3-03) 
Sec. 74-50. - Species to be planted. 
    The commission shall recommend the appropriateness of trees planted on town property within the town. No individual member of the community is allowed to plant a park or street tree on town property without first receiving written permission from the town. The tree master plan and recommended species list shall be the guideline followed. 
(Ord. No. 006-03, § 1, 3-3-03) 
Sec. 74-51. - Spacing of trees. 
(a)  Except in special plants designed or approved by a landscape architect and the town tree commission, the spacing of street trees will be in accordance with three species size classes: 
(1)  Small-Plant no closer than 30 feet apart. 
(2)  Medium-Plant no closer than 40 feet apart 
(3)  Large-Plant no closer than 50 feet apart. 
(b)  No street tree shall be planted closer than 30 feet from a street corner measured from the point of the nearest intersecting curbs or curblines, where it could block view of traffic and signs. 
(c)  No street tree shall be planted closer than ten feet to any fire hydrant, utility pole or pad-mount transformer. 
Note: Specific tree sizes are defined in the master plan developed by the tree commission. 
(Ord. No. 006-03, § 1, 3-3-03) 
Sec. 74-52. - Utilities. 
    No street trees other than those classified as small trees shall be planted under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within ten lateral feet of any underground waterline, sewer line, transmission line, pad mount transformer, fire hydrant or other utility. Planting specifications shall be reviewed by the electric department and public works department supervisors prior to planting to ensure that no utilities or easements will be interfered with. 
(Ord. No. 006-03, § 1, 3-3-03) 
Sec. 74-53. - Planting. 
    All trees planted on town-owned land shall conform to American Association of Nurserymen Standards and be at least one and one-forth to one and one-half inch in diameter at breast height (dbh) and at least eight to ten feet tall when planted unless special conditions exist and the commission approves a deviation. Prior to planting, Miss Utility shall be notified according to state law so all utilities can be marked. 
(Ord. No. 006-03, § 1, 3-3-03) 
Sec. 74-54. - Planting techniques. 
    State department of agriculture forestry service and community forest recommended planting techniques for the type of tree to be planted (balled and burlap (b & b), containerized, bare root) shall be followed. Such specifications are to be given to contractors each time a contract for a tree planting is awarded. 
(Ord. No. 006-03, § 1, 3-3-03) 
Sec. 74-55. - Maintenance. 
(a)  The town shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, parks and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such grounds. It shall be the responsibility of the town, with the guidance of the town tree commission, to provide adequate maintenance for all town park and street trees. 
(b)  The town may remove or order the removal of any tree or part thereof which is in a hazardous condition or which, by reason of its nature, is injurious to sewer and electric power lines, gas lines, waterlines or other public improvements or is infected with disease or infested with pest. 
(c)  No person shall plant, spray, prune, remove, cut above or below ground or otherwise disturb any trees on any street or town owned property without first receiving permission from the town. Any town-owned tree removed by a property owner must be replaced at the property owner's expense unless prior approval for removal was received from the town. 
(d)  Any town tree pruned by a property owner (or hired contractor) using pruning practices other than those defined in ANSI A300 that subsequently succumbs to disease, rot or pest infestation as a result of improper pruning techniques having been used, shall be replaced at the property owner's expense. 
(e)  Any individual or firm contracted by the town or private property owner to provide pruning maintenance on town owned trees is required to follow ANSI A300 standard practices. 
(Ord. No. 006-03, § 1, 3-3-03) 
Sec. 74-56. - Tree topping/pollarding. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, town department or utility company to "top" (see definitions) any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property. No town owned trees are to be exempted from this practice. 
(Ord. No. 006-03, § 1, 3-3-03) 
Sec. 74-57. - Pruning of overhanging trees; costs. 
    Every property owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the town shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection. Trees shall also be pruned to a minimum height of 14 feet to provide a clear space above surface sidewalks and streets to allow for unobstructed passage of pedestrians and vehicles. Said owners shall remove dead, diseased or hazardous trees, or broken or decayed limbs that constitute a hazard to the safety of the public. 
    Upon finding any of the above conditions, the town shall cause the property owner to be notified of the problem(s) by certified mail, with return receipt requested. The property owner shall correct the problem in the specified time frame not to exceed 30 days. After that time period, the town and/or its contracted agent shall have the right to enter onto the property to prune any tree or shrub when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a street light or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign or interferes with the safe passage of pedestrians and vehicles. The property owner shall assume the cost of the maintenance and such charges shall constitute a lien on the property until paid. 
(Ord. No. 006-03, § 1, 3-3-03) 
Sec. 74-58. - Removal/treatment of dead, diseased, pest infested or otherwise hazardous trees; cost. 
(a)  The town shall have the right to cause the immediate removal of any tree(s) on town owned or private property when such tree(s) constitute a hazard to life or property in the public right-of-way. 
(b)  The town shall have the right to notify private property owners by certified mail, with return receipt requested, to have diseased or pest infested trees on their property treated by an ISA certified arborist when said trees are in such close proximity to town trees so as to pose a threat to the health of the town owned trees. If the property owner does not comply with such request within 30 days, the town shall have the right to have such trees treated or removed at the property owner's expense and such charges shall constitute a lien on the property until paid. 
(c)  When the town plants a tree, all future costs involved in removing the tree/stump and/or repairing damage to sidewalks and curbs are the town's responsibility. When a private property owner has planted a tree on town property and it needs to be removed, the town will notify the property owner in writing by certified mail, with return receipt requested, and removal and repair shall be done by the property owner at his/her expense within a specified time period not to exceed 60 days after the date the notice is served. In the event the property owner fails to comply, the town or its agents shall have the authority to remove the trees and make repairs and charge the cost of removal and repairs to the property owner and such charges shall constitute a lien on the property until paid. 
(Ord. No. 006-03, § 1, 3-3-03) 
Sec. 74-59. - Removal of stumps. 
    All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed to at least six inches below grade so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. 
(Ord. No. 006-03, § 1, 3-3-03) 
Sec. 74-60. - Developments; street renovation projects. 
(a)  New developments. Residential and non-residential developments subject to review and approval under the subdivision and land development ordinance shall comply with the requirements found in this article III ("Trees") and section 5.17 ("Tree planting standards and requirements") of the subdivision and land development ordinance. 
(b)  Town street renovation projects shall make provisions for street tree plantings where space is available and shall conform to the tree master plan and recommended species list. 
(Ord. No. 006-03, § 1, 3-3-03; Ord. No. 001-18, § 2, 2-5-18) 
Sec. 74-61. - Interference with town or commission. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the town, the commission, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any street tree, park tree or trees on city-owned or private property, as authorized in this article. 
(Ord. No. 006-03, § 1, 3-3-03) 
Sec. 74-62. - Abuse of public trees. 
    Unless specifically authorized by the town, no person shall intentionally damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree; attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters or other contrivance to any tree; allow gaseous, liquid or solid substances which are harmful to such trees to come in contact with the tree or root zones; or set fire to burn when such fire or heat thereof will injure and portion of any tree on town property. 
(Ord. No. 006-03, § 1, 3-3-03) 
Sec. 74-63. - License required for business of tree pruning, treating, or removal. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business or occupation of pruning, treating or removing street or park trees within the town without first applying for and procuring a state business license and a town contractors license. 
(Ord. No. 006-03, § 1, 3-3-03) 
Sec. 74-64. - Certification; insurance. 
(a)  Any firm contracted by the town to prune or remove a town owned tree must show proof of ISA (international society of arboriculture) certification and must be familiar with and follow ANSI A300 standard pruning practices before a contract for work can be awarded. 
(b)  Any firm contracted by the town, or its agents, to spray for or otherwise treat pest and diseases must show proof that it is an ISA certified arborist and holds a current state pest control operators license. 
(c)  Firms contracted by the town or its agents must provide proof of workman's compensation insurance and adequate liability insurance coverage for bodily damage and for property damage, indemnifying the town or any person injured or damage resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors as described herein to the town manager. 
(Ord. No. 006-03, § 1, 3-3-03) 
Sec. 74-65. - Review of commissioners and town manager. 
    The mayor and town council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions of the town tree commission and the town manager. Any person may appeal any ruling or order of the town manager or town tree commission within 10 business days of the ruling or order to the mayor and council who may hear the matter and make the final decision. All rulings or orders issued by the town manager or town tree commission shall include notice of the right to appeal the ruling or order. 
(Ord. No. 006-03, § 1, 3-3-03; Ord. No. 005-15, § 3, 5-6-15) 
Sec. 74-66. - Penalty. 
    Any individual/business violating any provision of this article shall be, upon conviction, or plea of guilty, subject to fine not to exceed $200.00 per incident. 
(Ord. No. 006-03, § 1, 3-3-03) 
Sec. 74-67. - Town's costs of remedying conditions to be levied against affected property. 
    Any person to whom an order is directed pursuant to this article and who fails to comply within a specified time, and where the town manager or his duly designated agent shall have remedied the condition and shall have assessed the cost against the owner or person responsible, and where such person shall not have paid the amount within the period of 30 days after receipt of such statement, the town manager shall order and direct that such cost shall be levied against the property upon which hazardous or dangerous condition existed, such amount to be considered a lien on the property. 
(Ord. No. 006-03, § 1, 3-3-03) 
Secs. 74-68-74-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BAMBOO[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of Oct. 16, 2000 added a new article IV, sections 74-55-74-60. To allow for the future expansion of article III, the provisions of said ordinance have been included herein as article IV, sections 74-71-74-76, at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 74-71. - Unlawful to plant or grow bamboo without proper barrier/container and setback. 
    Subject to the exemption provided in section 74-72, no person(s) or other legal entity(s) shall plant or cause to grow bamboo on any lot or parcel of ground within the town unless: 
(1)  The root system of such bamboo plant(s) is entirely contained within an above-ground-level planter, barrel, or other vessel of such design, material, and location as to entirely prevent the spread/growth of the bamboo plant'(s) root system beyond the container in which it is planted; or 
(2)  The root system is contained within a barrier, constructed in accordance with the following specifications, and only after a compliance inspection performed, and a permit issued, by the code enforcement constable: 
a.  The barrier itself shall be composed of high density polypropylene or polyethylene, 40 mil or heavier; 
b.  Each portion or sheet of the barrier shall be secured or joined together by the use of stainless steel clamps or stainless steel closure strips designed for such barriers; 
c.  The barrier shall be installed not less than 30 inches deep; 
d.  The barrier shall be circular or oblong shaped; 
e.  Not less than three inches of the barrier shall protrude above ground level around the entire perimeter of the barrier; 
f.  When installed, the barrier shall slant outward from the bottom to the top. 
(3)  Whether planted or growing in a container (under subparagraph (1) above) or contained within a barrier (under subparagraph (2) above), all bamboo plants shall be located, trimmed and maintained so that no part of the plant (including stalks, branches, leaves, and/or roots) shall extend nearer than ten feet from any property line. 
(Ord. of 10-16-00(2); Ord. No. 005-15, § 3, 5-6-15) 
Sec. 74-72. - Exemptions. 
    Section 74-71 shall not apply to any landowner or possessor who, prior to the effective date of this article, has planted or caused to grow any bamboo on any property within the limits of the town unless a code enforcement constable determines, upon complaint from any abutting or nearby property owner, that any portion of such bamboo has been allowed to grow upon, extend roots across, or extend branches, stalks or leaves over any public way or any private property not owned by or in the possession of such landowner or possessor. 
(Ord. of 10-16-00(2); Ord. No. 005-15, § 3, 5-6-15) 
Sec. 74-73. - Complaint/order for removal, repair and compliance; appeals procedures. 
    Whenever a complaint is received by the town that any bamboo plant or root is encroaching on the property of an adjacent or abutting landowner, or public way, it shall, prior to taking any other action to enforce compliance with this article, give written notice (delivered in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested, properly addressed and with sufficient postage, and posted upon the subject property,) to the person(s) or legal entity(s) causing such condition to exist, which notice shall: 
(1)  Specify the nature and location of the violation; 
(2)  Provide notice of the need to remove and/or correct such condition within 30 days from the effective date of such notice; 
(3)  Require that the removal and/or correction of such condition includes: 
a.  The removal and eradication of any bamboo plant or root from any adjoining or nearby lot(s) or public way to which it has spread from its original planting site, and the correction and repair of any property damage sustained to said adjoining or nearby lot(s) or public way, in removing such bamboo; and 
b.  The containment of the bamboo plant causing said encroachment, by mandatory and full compliance with section 74-71(1) and/or section 74-71(2)(a-f); 
(4)  State that upon failure to comply with the notice and order for removal and/or containment, the town may: 
a.  Remove and eradicate such bamboo upon the land of any nearby or abutting property owner, public way and/or upon the property of the person(s) or entity(s) planting or causing such bamboo to grow, as provided in section 74-74; and/or 
b.  Institute proceedings against such person(s) or legal entity(s) to collect a civil penalty for violation of this article. 
(5)  Set forth the criminal penalties for violations. 
(6)  Include notice of the appeals procedures outlined in this section. 
    The effective date of notice under section 74-73(2) shall be the later of: (a) the date of personal delivery, or, if mailed, the date the return receipt is signed, or if not signed, the date the notice is stamped refused, unclaimed, or otherwise undeliverable by the U.S. Postal Service; or (b) the date the property is posted. The fact that such notice was not actually received by the alleged violator shall not be a defense to the town's subsequent enforcement of this article. The property owner or responsible party seeking to appeal the notice of violation shall file a written appeal with the town manager within ten (10) business days of the effective date. The town manager shall review the appeal and provide the appellant with an opportunity to present his/her case to the town manager. The town manager shall issue a written determination within twenty (20) business days of receipt of the appeal. 
(Ord. of 10-16-00(2); Ord. of 8-5-02(1), § 34; Ord. No. 005-15, § 3, 5-6-15) 
Sec. 74-74. - Removal of bamboo. 
(a)  If the violation is not remedied within the time set forth in the notice and order as outlined above, the town is hereby authorized to remove or have removed any encroaching bamboo and to take all reasonable steps to eradicate its re-growth from said adjacent or nearby property or public way, and to restore any such lands to its natural condition prior to such removal and eradication (including fill, grading, and seeding). 
(b)  The town shall also be authorized to remove and eradicate the plant(s) causing the encroachment, upon the responsible party(s)' failure to properly contain the plant in accordance with section 74-71, after complaint and notice. 
The cost of corrective action taken by the town under subparagraphs (a) and (b) above, together with any civil penalties and costs, shall be recoverable from the entity responsible and shall constitute a lien against any lot or parcel of ground belonging to the entity responsible upon which such bamboo had been planted or from which the bamboo had encroached. Such costs and fines may be collected as any other fine or cost is collected. ("Costs" shall include court costs and reasonable attorneys fees, whenever permitted by law). 
(Ord. of 10-16-00(2); Ord. No. 005-15, § 3, 5-6-15) 
Sec. 74-75. - Charges and fees for removal. 
    When the town is required under this article to remove bamboo and to correct any property damage incurred to any adjoining, nearby or public property to which it has spread from it's original planting site, the charge shall be: 
(1)  The town's actual cost if contracted out; or 
(2)  If performed by town personnel, $50.00 per hour, with a minimum charge of $50.00. 
In either event, there shall also be assessed an administrative fee of $25.00. 
(Ord. of 10-16-00(2)) 
Sec. 74-76. - Penalties. 
    Any person determined by any court of competent jurisdiction to have violated this article shall be guilty of a criminal violation and forfeit and pay to the town a criminal penalty in the amount of not less than $25.00 per day, nor more than $100.00 per day, plus costs. Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 10-16-00(2); Ord. of 8-5-02(1), § 35) 
APPENDIX A - ZONING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the town zoning ordinance, adopted by the town council on May 20, 1964, as set out in that certain pamphlet entitled "Smyrna Zoning Ordinance," updated through August, 1990. Amendments to the ordinance adopted subsequent to August, 1990 will be indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note will indicate that the provision remains unchanged from August, 1990. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. Attachment "A," referred to in various sections of this appendix, is not printed herein but is on file in the town office. 
Cross reference- Amusements, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 38; parks and recreation, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; traffic and vehicles, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 70; vegetation, ch. 74. 
State Law reference- Zoning regulations, 22 Del. C. § 301 et seq. 

Section 1. - Establishment of districts; provision for official zoning map. 
1.  Official zoning map. The town is hereby divided into districts as shown on the official zoning map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance. Any area annexed to the town shall be classified as an agricultural district and subject to the regulations thereof, unless the provisions of section 13 of this ordinance have been met. 
The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor attested by the town manager, and shall bear the seal of the town under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in Section 1 of the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Smyrna, Delaware," together with the date of the adoption of this ordinance. 
If, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and 22 Del. C. § 301 et seq., changes are made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the official zoning map, such changes shall be made on the official zoning map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the town council, together with an entry on the official zoning map as follows: "  (date)  , by official action of the Town Council, the following (change) changes were made in the Official Zoning Map:  (Brief description of nature of change)  ," which entry shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the town manager. The amending ordinance shall provide that such changes or amendments shall not become effective until they have been duly entered upon the official zoning map. No amendment to this ordinance which involves matter portrayed on the official zoning map shall become effective until such change and entry has been made on said map. 
No changes of any nature shall be made in the official zoning map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this ordinance. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person or persons shall be considered a violation of this ordinance and punishable as provided under section 17 of this ordinance. 
Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zoning map which may from time to time be made or published, the official zoning map which shall be located in the office of the town manager shall be the final authority as the current zoning status of land and water areas, buildings and other structures in the town. 
2.  Replacement of official zoning map. In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the town council may by resolution adopt a new official zoning map which shall supersede the prior official zoning map. The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original zoning ordinance or any subsequent amendment thereof. The planning commission shall certify as to the accuracy of the new official zoning map prior to its adoption by the town council. The new official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor attested by the town manager, and shall bear the seal of the town under the following words: "This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted  (date of adoption of map being replaced)  as part of the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Smyrna, Delaware." 
Section 2. - Rules for interpretation of district boundaries. 
    Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
1.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
2.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following town or county limits shall be construed as following town or county limits. 
3.  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks. 
4.  Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines, and in the event of change in the shoreline shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline; boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
5.  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections 1 through 5 above shall be so construed. 
6.  Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections 1 through 6 above, the board of adjustment shall interpret the district boundaries. 
7.  In all cases where a district boundary divides a lot in one ownership and more than 50% of the area of such lot lies in the less restricted district, the regulations prescribed by this ordinance for the less restricted district shall apply to such portion of the more restricted portion of said lot which lies within 30 feet of such district boundary. For purposes of this section, the more restricted district shall be deemed that district which is subject to regulations which prohibit the particular use intended to be made of said lot or which regulations require higher standards with respect to setback, coverage, yards, screening, landscaping and similar requirements. 
8.  In all cases where a district boundary is located not farther than 15 feet away from a lot line of record, such boundary line shall be construed to coincide with such lot line. 
9.  In all other cases where dimensions are not shown on the map, the location of boundaries shown on the map shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing thereon. 
Section 3. - Application of district regulations. 
    The regulations set by this ordinance within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, and particularly, except as hereinafter provided: 
1.  No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered (internally or externally) unless in conformity with all the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located; provided, however, anything in this ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding, the town council shall have the authority to allow the creation of lots which do not meet the lot width or depth requirements, but not both, for the district in which that lot is located in accordance with Section VI (E) of the subdivision ordinance. 
2.  No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered: 
a.  To exceed the height; 
b.  To accommodate or house a greater number of families; 
c.  To occupy a greater percentage of lot area; 
d.  To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards or other open spaces; 
than herein required; or in any other manner contrary to the provisions of this ordinance. 
3.  No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required about or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with this ordinance shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building. 
4.  No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 4-21-97(1)) 
Section 4. - Nonconforming lots, nonconforming uses of land, nonconforming structures and nonconforming uses of structures and premises. 
1.  Intent. Within the districts established by this ordinance or amendments that may later be adopted there exist lots, structures, and uses of land and structures which were lawful before this ordinance was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this ordinance or future amendment. 
It is the intent of this ordinance not to encourage the survival of nonconformities and to gradually eliminate those nonconformities which are incompatible with permitted uses within the district in which they are located. It is further the intent of this ordinance that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as a grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of a structure and land shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this ordinance by attachment on a building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises or by the addition of other uses of a nature which would be prohibited in the district involved. 
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance and upon which actual building construction has been diligently carried on. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner; except that where demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be diligently carried on until completion of the building involved. 
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this ordinance will be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance and upon which actual building construction has been diligently carried on. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner; except that where demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be diligently carried on until completion of the building involved. 
2.  Nonconforming lots of record. In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this ordinance, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance. Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other such lots in the same ownership. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Any variance of yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the board of adjustment. If two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this ordinance, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements for lot width and area as established by this ordinance, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this ordinance, and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold which does not meet lot width and area requirements established by this ordinance, nor shall any division of the parcel be made which leaves remaining any lot with width or area below the requirements stated in this ordinance. 
3.  Nonconforming uses of land. Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, lawful use of land exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms of this ordinance as enacted or amended, such use may be continued, subject to the provisions of paragraph 6 of this section, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
a.  No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance; 
b.  No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance; 
c.  If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than 90 days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this ordinance for the district in which such land is located. 
4.  Nonconforming structures. Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of the adoption or amendment of this ordinance that could not be built under the terms of this ordinance by reason of restriction on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may be continued subject to the provisions of paragraph 6 of this section, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provision: 
a.  No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity. 
b.  Any such structure may be reconstructed or restored following its partial or total destruction by any means (including intentional destruction) if the degree of nonconformity is not extended or enlarged in any way and provided that the reconstruction or restoration is substantially consistent with the exterior appearance and design of the structure immediately prior to such destruction. This paragraph shall not be construed to prohibit the use of modern building materials or methods, but such materials or methods shall approximate, as much as reasonably possible, the exterior appearance and design of such structure immediately prior to its destruction. The town building inspector shall make the determination concerning whether or not such reconstruction or restoration is in compliance with this subparagraph and, in so doing, may consider any relevant information pertaining to the building's exterior appearance and design prior to its destruction, including photographs, drawings, witness descriptions, remaining portions of the structure, or other surviving similar structures in the area. 
c.  Should such a structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
5.  Nonconforming uses of structures. If a lawful use of a structure or of structure and premises in combination exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this ordinance, the lawful use may be continued, subject to the provision of paragraph 6 of this section, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
a.  No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this ordinance in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located; 
b.  Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for use at the time of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building; 
c.  If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises, may be changed to another nonconforming use provided that the board of adjustment, either by general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the board of adjustment may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the provisions of this ordinance; 
d.  Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which such structure is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed; 
e.  When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is abandoned for 12 consecutive months or for 18 months during any three-year period, the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located; 
f.  Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. 
6.  Gradual elimination of certain uses. Certain nonconformities shall be terminated in accordance with the following provisions: 
a.  Within not more than three years from the date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance by which a use becomes nonconforming, the right to maintain the following nonconformities shall terminate and such nonconformities shall no longer be operated or maintained: 
(1)  Any junkyard. 
(2)  A nonconforming use operated within a building or structure which contains less than 100 square feet of gross floor area. 
(3)  A nonconformity, no part of which is enclosed within a structure. 
(4)  Off-site signs. 
b.  Within not more than six months from the date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance by which a use becomes nonconforming, the right to maintain the following nonconformities shall terminate and such nonconformities shall no longer be operated or maintained: 
(1)  Dumpsters (trash receptacles or garbage disposal units commonly referred to as "dumpsters") in all zoning districts except A agricultural and R-1 residential unless the location thereof and appropriate screening have been approved by the building inspector under section 6, paragraph 11 [14] ("Screening of dumpsters in all zoning districts other than A agricultural and R-1 residential"). 
7.  Repairs and maintenance. On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding ten percent of the current replacement value of the building, provided that the cubic content of the building, as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of this ordinance, shall not be increased. 
Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. 
Section 5. - District regulations. 
    District regulations shall be as set forth in this section, section 6 of this ordinance, Supplementary District Regulations, and the schedule of district regulations hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this ordinance. 
1.  Agricultural district A. The regulations of this district are intended to accommodate agricultural land uses and related activities including nonfarm residences at a very low density. The agricultural district will also provide a land reserve for future development. 
a.  [Permitted uses.] The following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Farms, provided that no poultry or livestock other than pets shall be housed or confined within 200 feet of any district boundary. Fox, mink and hog farms shall be prohibited. Slaughter houses shall also be prohibited. 
(2)  One-family detached dwellings. 
(3)  Establishments for packing and storing agricultural products. 
(4)  Roadside stands offering for sale products grown on the premises. 
(5)  Laboratory for scientific agricultural research. 
(6)  Veterinary establishments and dog kennels, but not closer than 300 feet from any residential or institutional and recreational district boundary lines. 
(7)  Greenhouses and nurseries. 
(8)  If approved as a special exception by the board of adjustment pursuant to section 9(2) of this ordinance, cemeteries, and institutions of an educational, religious, medical, charitable or philanthropic nature. 
(9)  If approved as a special exception by the board of adjustment pursuant to section 9(2) of this ordinance, public utility rights-of-way and structures. 
(10)  If approved as a special exception by the board of adjustment pursuant to § 9(2) of this ordinance, school bus stop shelters as defined in § 19, definitions. 
(11)  Uses permitted as a conditional use: 
(a)  Crematory provided that: 
(1)  The building lot line upon which a crematory is established shall be located at least 100 feet from any residential zone. 
(2)  Receiving area(s) shall be completely screened from view from the street. 
(12)  Accessory uses and structures: 
(a)  Minor home occupation pursuant to section 6.19 of this ordinance. 
(b)  Other accessory uses and structures clearly incidental and customary to and associated with the permitted use. 
(c)  Major home occupation only if approved as a special exception sections 6.19 of this ordinance. 
b.  [Restriction of uses and structures.] The foregoing uses and structures are subject to the requirements as set forth in the schedule of district regulations and the supplementary district regulations. 
(Ord. of 8-16-93(1), § 1; Ord. No. 021-04, §§ 1-3; Ord. No. 007-07, § 1, 7-16-07; Ord. No. 003-07, § 1, 10-15-07; Ord. No. 004-08, § 1, 5-19-08) 
2.  Residential district R-1. 
A.  Declaration of legislative intent. The regulations of this district are intended to provide for a pleasant, quiet, hazard-free residential environment permitting residential and related uses. Presently developed single-family residential areas are included in this district as well as land which will develop in this manner in the future. These areas are protected from encroachment by incompatible uses. 
B.  [Permitted uses.] The following uses are permitted: No building or premises shall be used and no building or part of a building shall be erected which is arranged, intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for any purpose except the following and in accordance with section 6 of this ordinance and the Smyrna subdivision regulations: 
(1)  One-family detached dwellings which are constructed in accordance with the standards set forth in the Town of Smyrna building code and [such dwelling] is not designed to be transported to the dwelling site on its own chassis. 
EXCEPTION: Mobile offices to be used as temporary real estate offices shall be permitted when approved by special exception pursuant to section 9(2) of this ordinance. Placement and setup shall be approved by the building official. Mobile offices shall be removed upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the first completed permanent structure, not to exceed one year. 
(2)  Public and private parks and playgrounds. 
(3)  Public and private boat landings. 
(4)  Family day care home. 
(5)  Accessory uses and structures: 
(a)  Private noncommercial swimming pools. 
(b)  Other accessory uses and structures clearly incidental and customary to and associated with the permitted use. 
(c)  Minor home occupation pursuant to section 6.19 of this ordinance. 
(d)  Major home occupation only if approved as a special exception sections 6.19 of this ordinance. 
C.  [Uses permitted as special exception.] The following uses are permitted only if approved as a special exception pursuant to section 9(2) of this ordinance: 
(1)  Cemeteries. 
(2)  Institutions of a religious, medical, charitable or philanthropic nature. 
(3)  Temporary real estate offices in developments containing a minimum of ten lots. 
(4)  If approved as a special exception by the board of adjustment pursuant to § 9(2) of this ordinance, school bus stop shelters as defined in § 19, definitions. 
D.  [Uses permitted as conditional use.] The following uses are permitted only if approved as a conditional use pursuant to section 6.16 of this ordinance: 
(1)  Institutions of an educational nature. 
(2)  Public utility uses. 
(3)  Governmental building, structure, facilities and uses including but not limited to, police stations, fire houses, ambulance stations, government offices, library. 
(4)  Planned village community. A planned village community shall be an entire major subdivision of at least four parcels consisting of detached, single-family dwellings that are placed close to the street, have small front yards with landscaping that ensures adequate separation and protection from street activities, and have architectural facade treatments that create an aesthetically pleasing, livable community. The following requirements apply to all dwellings located in a planned village community. 
(a)  The front yard landscaping for each dwelling shall include at least one tree as required per Appendix B, Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, section 5.17, Tree Planting Standards and Requirements, with all grassed areas sodded with a drought-resistant grass and not less than 20 flowering or evergreen shrubs planted. A four-foot-wide walkway constructed of concrete or decorative pavers shall extend from the public sidewalk to the front of the dwelling. 
(b)  Front-loaded garage faces shall have decorative design treatments to minimize their appearance. 
(c)  Facades fronting on streets shall include at least three of the following superior design elements (for corner parcels, both facades must comply with this requirement): 
(1)  An unenclosed porch with a roof that is at least six feet deep and extends across at least one-half the width of the front facade. For purposes herein, a screened porch shall not be considered "enclosed." 
(2)  Distinctive roof forms to include recesses and offsets (such as multiple gables and/or dormers) and ornamented cornices with returns. 
(3)  At least two variations in color and materials used in the treatment of the horizontal facade. 
(4)  Side or rear-entry garage. 
(5)  Decorative window features, such as arched windows, transoms, decorative pediments, and/or window shutters that are sized appropriately and proportionally to the window. For purposes herein, a pediment is low-pitched triangular gable. 
(d)  Minimum requirements. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, planned village communities in this zoning district shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 8,500 sq. ft. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 85 ft. 
(3)  Minimum lot depth: 100 ft. 
(4)  Maximum height: 35 ft. 
(5)  Minimum front yard setback, principal dwelling 10 ft. 
(6)  Maximum front yard setback, principal dwelling 20 ft. 
(7)  Minimum front yard setback, open front porch, steps 6 ft. 
(8)  Minimum side yard setback: 6 ft. 
(9)  Minimum rear yard setback: 20 ft. 
(10)  Maximum lot coverage: N/A 
(11)  Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, the maximum gross density for a planned village community shall be 4.5 units per acre. 
(Ord. No. 005-09, § 1, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 001-13, § 1, 2-4-13; Ord. No. 004-19, § 1, 4-15-19) 
E.  Parking. Parking shall be in accordance with section 6, supplementary district regulations. 
F.  Minimum requirements. 
(1)  Dwelling, one family (per unit): 
a.  Minimum lot area, 11,000 sq. ft. 
b.  Minimum lot width, 85 ft. 
c.  Minimum lot depth, 125 ft. 
d.  Maximum height, 21/2 stories, 35 ft. Institutions, three stories, 45 ft. 
e.  Front yard setback, 30 ft. 
f.  Side yard setback, min. ten ft., with an aggregate of 20 ft. 
g.  Rear yard setback, 40 ft. 
h.  Maximum lot coverage, 25%. 
G.  Accessory buildings. For minimum requirements, see section 6.8, Accessory buildings. 
H.  Maximum gross density. The maximum gross density shall be 3.75 units per acre. 
(Ord. of 5-17-93; Ord. of 4-3-95(1), § 1; Ord. of 8-7-95(1), § 1; Ord. No. 015-04, § 1, 10-18-04; Ord. No. 007-07, § 1, 7-16-07; Ord. No. 003-07, § 1, 10-15-07; Ord. No. 004-08, § 1, 5-19-08; Ord. No. 004-19, § 2, 4-15-19) 
3.  Residential district R-1A. 
A.  Declaration of legislative intent. The regulations of this district are intended to provide for a pleasant, quiet, hazard-free residential environment permitting residential and related uses. Presently developed single-family residential areas are included in this district as well as land which will develop in this manner in the future. These areas are protected from encroachment by incompatible uses while at the same time permitting single-family development on smaller lot sizes. 
B.  [Permitted uses.] The following uses are permitted: No building or premises shall be used and no building or part of a building shall be erected which is arranged, intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for any purpose except the following and in accordance with section 6 of this ordinance and the Smyrna subdivision regulations: 
(1)  One-family detached dwellings which are constructed in accordance with the standards set forth in the Town of Smyrna building code and are not designed to be transported to the dwelling site on its own chassis. 
EXCEPTION: Mobile offices to be used as temporary real estate offices shall be permitted when approved by special exception pursuant to section 9(2) of this ordinance. Placement and setup shall be approved by the building official. Mobile offices shall be removed upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the first completed permanent structure, not to exceed one year. 
(2)  Public and private parks and playgrounds. 
(3)  Public and private boat landings. 
(4)  Family day care home. 
(5)  Accessory uses and structures: 
(a)  Private noncommercial swimming pools. 
(b)  Other accessory uses and structures clearly incidental and customary to and associated with the permitted use. 
(c)  Minor home occupation pursuant to section 6.19 of this ordinance. 
(d)  Major home occupation only if approved as a special exception sections 6.19 of this ordinance. 
C.  [Uses permitted as special exception.] The following uses are permitted only if approved as a special exception pursuant to section 9(2) of this ordinance: 
(1)  Cemeteries. 
(2)  Institutions of a religious, medical, charitable or philanthropic nature. 
(3)  Temporary real estate offices in developments containing a minimum of ten lots. 
(4)  If approved as a special exception by the board of adjustment pursuant to § 9(2) of this ordinance, school bus stop shelters as defined in § 19, definitions. 
D.  [Uses permitted as conditional uses.] The following uses are permitted only if approved as a conditional use pursuant to section 6.16 [6.15] of this ordinance: 
(1)  Institutions of an educational nature. 
(2)  Public utility uses. 
(3)  Governmental building, structure, facilities and uses including, but not limited to, police stations, fire houses, ambulance stations, government offices, library. 
(4)  Planned village community. Planned village communities shall be allowed as a conditional use subject to the same conditions identified for planned village communities in the residential district R-1, except as otherwise indicated herein. 
(a)  Minimum requirements. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, planned village communities in this zoning district shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 7,000 sq. ft. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 70 ft. 
(3)  Minimum lot depth: 100 ft. 
(4)  Maximum height: 35 ft. 
(5)  Minimum front yard setback, principal dwelling 10 ft. 
(6)  Maximum front yard setback, principal dwelling 20 ft. 
(7)  Minimum front yard setback, open front porch, steps 6 ft. 
(8)  Minimum side yard setback: 6 ft. 
(9)  Minimum rear yard setback: 20 ft. 
(10)  Maximum lot coverage: N/A 
(11)  Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, the maximum gross density for a planned village community shall be 5.5 units per acre. 
(Ord. No. 005-09, § 2, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 001-13, § 2, 2-4-13; Ord. No. 004-19, § 3, 4-15-19) 
E.  Parking. Parking shall be in accordance with section 6, Supplementary district regulations. 
F.  Minimum requirements. 
(1)  Dwelling, one family (per unit): 
a.  Minimum lot area, 8,000 sq. ft. 
b.  Minimum lot width, 70 ft. 
c.  Minimum lot depth, 110 ft. 
d.  Maximum height, 21/2 stories, 35 ft. Institutions, three stories, 45 ft. 
e.  Front yard setback, 30 ft. 
f.  Side yard setback, min. ten ft., with an aggregate of 20 ft. 
g.  Rear yard setback, 30 ft. 
h.  Maximum lot coverage, 35%. 
G.  Accessory buildings. For minimum requirements, see section 6.8, Accessory buildings. 
H.  Maximum gross density. The maximum gross density shall be 4 units per acre. 
(Ord. of 5-17-93; Ord. of 4-3-95(1), § 2; Ord. of 8-7-95(1), § 2; Ord. No. 015-04, § 2, 10-18-04; Ord. No. 007-07, § 1, 7-16-07; Ord. No. 003-07, § 1, 10-15-07; Ord. No. 004-08, § 1, 5-19-08; Ord. No. 004-19, § 4, 4-15-19) 
4.  Residential district R-2. 
A.  Declaration of legislative intent. This district is intended to accomplish the same objectives as in the R-1 and R-1A districts while affording a greater variety of dwelling and lot types. 
B.  [Permitted uses.] The following uses are permitted: No building or premises shall be used and no building or part of a building shall be erected which is arranged, intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for any purpose except the following and in accordance with section 6 of this ordinance and the Smyrna subdivision regulations: 
(1)  All uses permitted within the residential districts R-1. 
EXCEPTION: Mobile offices to be used as temporary real estate offices shall be permitted when approved by special exception pursuant to section 9(2) of this ordinance. Placement and setup shall be approved by the building official. Mobile offices shall be removed upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the first completed permanent structure, not to exceed one year. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings which are constructed in accordance with the standards set forth in the Town of Smyrna building code and [the dwelling] is not designed to be transported to the dwelling site on its own chassis. 
(3)  Semidetached dwellings which are constructed in accordance with the standards set forth in the Town of Smyrna building code and [the dwelling] is not designed to be transported to the dwelling site on its own chassis. 
(4)  Accessory uses and structures: 
(a)  Accessory uses as permitted in the residential districts R-1 and R-1A. 
(b)  Minor home occupation pursuant to section 6.19 of this ordinance. 
(c)  The renting of one room to non-transient roomers or boarders. 
(d)  Other accessory uses and structures clearly incidental and customary to and associated with the permitted use. 
(e)  Major home occupation only if approved as a special exception sections 6.19 of this ordinance. 
C.  Uses permitted as special exception. The following uses are permitted only if approved as a special exception pursuant to section 9(2) of this ordinance: 
(1)  Temporary real estate offices in developments containing a minimum of ten lots. 
(2)  Bed and breakfast establishments, provided that (a) for at least three years prior to the application for special exception use, all guest rooms shall have been a part of the primary structure and not constructed, reconstructed, or remodeled to create such guest rooms; (b) not more than one softly-illuminated (not to exceed 100 watts) exterior sign, not exceeding two feet by three feet shall be permitted which shall identify the establishment by name and as a "Bed & Breakfast"; and (c) requirements for bed and breakfast establishments outlined in the central commercial district (CC) are complied with. 
(3)  If approved as a special exception by the board of adjustment pursuant to § 9(2) of this ordinance, school bus stop shelters as defined in § 19, definitions. 
(Ord. of 5-20-02, § 2; Ord. No. 021-14, § 3, 1-20-15) 
(4)  Residential conversions provided the following requirements are met: 
(a)  Structures eligible for residential conversion shall have a gross minimum floor area of 2,000 square feet. Basement areas shall not be included in the minimum floor area calculations. 
(b)  The maximum number of dwelling units created by the residential conversion shall be no more than four dwelling units. 
(c)  Each dwelling unit shall be completely separated by horizontal floors or a combination of horizontal floors and vertical walls with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities and bathroom facilities for each dwelling unit. 
(d)  External alterations shall be consistent with the architectural character of the structure prior to the residential conversion. 
(e)  Two paved off-street parking spaces with direct access to a street or alley shall be required for each dwelling unit. The stacking of motor vehicles whereby one vehicle must be moved to allow another to exit is prohibited. Permeable pavement is encouraged. For purpose of this ordinance, permeable pavement shall be defined as a method of paving that allows stormwater to seep into the ground as it falls rather than running off into storm drains, etc. Examples of permeable pavement include: porous asphalt, pervious concrete, and concrete/brick pervious pavers. 
(f)  Where there is no sidewalk along the frontage of the subject property, a sidewalk shall be constructed prior to a certificate of occupancy being issued. 
(g)  A fire sprinkler system will be required if 1) 50 percent or more of the interior walls and or partitions have been removed during remodeling, rehabilitation or alteration, a fire sprinkler system will be required or 2)the building area for a residential use increases by 50 percent or more from the area of the building (existing as of the date of adoption of this section of the ordinance) through the acquisition of additional property, expansion, remodeling, rehabilitation or alteration, a fire sprinkler system will be required. 
(h)  In addition to the above mentioned requirements, all dwelling units shall comply with all applicable provisions of Chapter 18 - Buildings and Building Regulations of the Smyrna Town Code. 
(Ord. No. 018-14, § 1, 12-1-14) 
D.  [Uses permitted as conditional uses.] The following uses are permitted only if approved as a conditional use pursuant to section 6.16 [6.15] of this ordinance: 
(1)  Institutions of an educational nature. 
(2)  Public utility uses. 
(3)  Governmental buildings, structures, facilities and uses including, but not limited to, police stations, fire houses, ambulance stations, government offices, library. 
(4)  Planned village community. Planned village communities shall be allowed as a conditional use subject to the same conditions identified for planned village communities in the residential district R-1, except as otherwise indicated herein. 
(a)  Minimum requirements. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, planned village communities in this zoning district shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 4,000 sq. ft. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 50 ft. 
(3)  Minimum lot depth: 80 ft. 
(4)  Maximum height: 35 ft. 
(5)  Minimum front yard setback, principal dwelling 10 ft. 
(6)  Maximum front yard setback, principal dwelling 20 ft. 
(7)  Minimum front yard setback, open front porch, steps 6 ft. 
(8)  Minimum side yard setback: 6 ft. 
(9)  Minimum rear yard setback: 20 ft. 
(10)  Maximum lot coverage: N/A 
(11)  Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, the maximum gross density for a planned village community shall be 8 units per acre. 
(Ord. No. 005-09, § 3, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 001-13, § 3, 2-4-13; Ord. No. 004-19, § 5, 4-15-19) 
E.  Parking. Parking shall be in accordance with section 6, Supplementary district regulations. 
F.  Minimum requirements. 
(1)  Dwelling, one family (per unit): 
a.  Minimum lot area, 6,500 sq. ft. 
b.  Minimum lot width, 50 ft. 
c.  Minimum lot depth, 110 ft. 
d.  Maximum height, 21/2 stories, 35 ft. Institutions, three stories, 45 ft. 
e.  Front yard setback, 30 ft. 
f.  Side yard setback, min. six ft., with an aggregate of 15 ft., where access to rear yard is available to all adjoining property owners by a paved alley. If a paved alley is not available, access to rear must be provided by one of the following: 
(1)  Increase the minimum side yard setback on one side to ten ft. 
(2)  Record in the deeds of adjoining property owners' side yards a minimum six-ft. easement on each side of the property line which guarantees access along the side property by the town and either property owner. Fences and plantings are not permitted in this easement area. 
g.  Rear yard setback, 30 ft. 
h.  Maximum lot coverage, 35%. 
(2)  Dwelling, semidetached (per unit): 
a.  Minimum lot area, 6,500 sq. ft. 
b.  Minimum lot width, 50 ft. 
c.  Minimum lot depth, 110 ft. 
d.  Maximum height, 21/2 stories, 35 ft.; three stories, 45 ft. 
e.  Front yard setback, 30 ft. 
f.  Unattached side yard setback, ten ft. 
g.  Attached side yard setback, zero ft. 
h.  Rear yard setback, 30 ft. 
i.  Maximum lot coverage, 35%. 
G.  Accessory buildings. For minimum requirements, see section 6.8, Accessory buildings. 
H.  Maximum gross density. The maximum gross density shall be 6 units per acre. 
(Ord. of 5-17-93; Ord. of 4-3-95(1), § 3; Ord. of 8-7-95(1), § 3; Ord. No. 007-07, § 1, 7-16-07; Ord. No. 003-07, § 1, 10-15-07; Ord. No. 004-08, § 1, 5-19-08; Ord. No. 004-19, § 6, 4-15-19) 
5.  Residential district R-2A. 
A.  Declaration of legislative intent. This district is intended to protect residential development from harmful non-residential uses while affording a wide variety of dwelling types and population densities within the town. 
B.  [Uses permitted.] The following uses are permitted: No building or premises shall be used and no building or part of a building shall be erected which is arranged, intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for any purpose except the following and in accordance with performance standards of section 6 and subject to the site development plan approval as set forth in section 7.5 of the Smyrna zoning ordinance and the Smyrna subdivision regulations: 
(1)  All uses permitted within the residential R-2 district. 
EXCEPTION: Mobile offices to be used as temporary real estate offices shall be permitted when approved by special exception pursuant to Section 9(2) of this ordinance. Placement and setup shall be approved by the building official. Mobile offices shall be removed upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the first completed permanent structure, not to exceed one year. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings which are constructed in accordance with the standards set forth in the Town of Smyrna building code and [the dwelling] is not designed to be transported to the dwelling site on its own chassis. 
EXCEPTION: Mobile offices to be used as temporary real estate offices shall be permitted when approved by special exception pursuant to section 9(2) of this ordinance. Placement and setup shall be approved by the building official. Mobile offices shall be removed upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the first completed permanent structure, not to exceed one year. 
(3)  Townhouse dwellings which are constructed in accordance with the standards set forth in the Town of Smyrna building code and are not designed to be transported to the dwelling site on their own chassis provided that not more than seven such units be in a row. 
(Ord. No. 020-14, § 1, 12-15-14) 
(4)  Accessory uses as permitted in the residential district R-2. 
C.  [Uses permitted as special exception.] The following uses are permitted only if approved as a special exception pursuant to section 9(2) of this ordinance: 
(1)  Apartment dwellings. 
(2)  Cemeteries. 
(3)  Institutions of religious, medical, charitable or philanthropic nature. 
(4)  Medical clinics. 
(5)  Professional offices. 
(6)  Temporary real estate offices in developments containing a minimum of ten lots. 
(7)  If approved as a special exception by the board of adjustment pursuant to § 9(2) of this ordinance, school bus stop shelters as defined in § 19, definitions. 
(8)  Residential conversions provided that the requirements found in subsection 4(C)4 of the Residential R2 district, incorporated herein by reference, are satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 018-14, § 2, 12-1-14) 
D.  [Uses permitted as conditional uses.] The following uses are permitted only if approved as a conditional use pursuant to section 6.16 [6.15] of this ordinance: 
(1)  Institutions of an educational nature. 
(2)  Public utility uses. 
(3)  Governmental buildings, structures, facilities and uses including, but not limited to, police stations, fire houses, ambulance stations, government offices, library. 
(4)  Planned village community. Planned village communities shall be allowed as a conditional use subject to the same conditions identified for planned village communities in the residential district R-1, except as otherwise indicated herein. 
(a)  Minimum requirements. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, planned village communities in this zoning district shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 4,000 sq. ft. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 50 ft. 
(3)  Minimum lot depth: 80 ft. 
(4)  Maximum height: 35 ft. 
(5)  Minimum front yard setback, principal dwelling 10 ft. 
(6)  Maximum front yard setback, principal dwelling 20 ft. 
(7)  Minimum front yard setback, open front porch, steps 6 ft. 
(8)  Minimum side yard setback: 6 ft. 
(9)  Minimum rear yard setback: 20 ft. 
(10)  Maximum lot coverage: N/A 
(11)  Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, the maximum gross density for a planned village community shall be 8 units per acre. 
(Ord. No. 005-09, § 4, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 001-13, § 4, 2-4-13; Ord. No. 004-19, § 7, 4-15-19) 
E.  Parking. Parking shall be in accordance with section 6, Supplementary district regulations. 
F.  Minimum requirements. 
(1)  Dwelling, one family (per unit): 
a.  Minimum lot area, 6,500 sq. ft. 
b.  Minimum lot width, 50 ft. 
c.  Minimum lot depth, 110 ft. 
d.  Maximum height, 21/2 stories, 35 ft. 
Institutions, 3 stories, 45 ft. 
e.  Front yard setback, 20 ft. 
f.  Side yard setback, min. six feet, with an aggregate of 15 ft., where access to rear yard is available to all adjoining property owners by an paved alley. If an paved alley is not available, access to rear must be provided by one of the following: 
(1)  Increase the minimum side yard setback on one side to ten feet. 
(2)  Record in the deeds of adjoining property owners side yards a minimum six feet easement on each side of the property line which guarantees access along the side property by the town and either property owner. Fences and plantings are not permitted in this easement area. 
g.  Rear yard setback, 30 ft. 
h.  Maximum lot coverage, 35% 
(2)  Dwelling, semidetached (per unit): 
a.  Minimum lot area, 3,500 sq. ft. 
b.  Minimum lot width, 30 ft. 
c.  Minimum lot depth, 110 ft. 
d.  Maximum height, 45 ft. 
e.  Front yard setback, 20 ft. 
f.  Unattached side yard setback, ten ft. 
g.  Attached side yard setback, zero ft. 
h.  Rear yard setback, 30 ft. 
i.  Maximum lot coverage, 50%. 
(Ord. No. 020-14, § 2, 12-15-14) 
G.  Accessory buildings. For minimum requirements, see section 6.8, Accessory buildings. 
(Ord. of 5-17-93; Ord. of 4-3-95(1), § 4; Ord. of 8-7-95(1), § 4; Ord. of 12-16-96(2), §§ 1-4; Ord. No. 003-07, § 1, 10-15-07) 
H.  Site and design standards for townhouse and apartment dwellings. 
(1)  Declaration of intent. The Town of Smyrna's historic development patterns reflect several areas of growth and annexation. The residential neighborhoods of the historic town-core are composed of small lots in traditional grid patterns and narrow streets. 
The desired characteristics of townhouse and apartment dwelling developments are intended to do the following: 
(a)  Ensure that townhouse and apartment dwelling developments are designed to be compatible with surrounding neighborhoods and land uses. 
(b)  Encourage townhouse and apartment dwelling developments that residents can take pride in and have a sense of ownership in their neighborhood. 
(c)  Enhance the public interface of townhouse and apartment dwelling developments with attention to structural placement, building orientation, and landscaping treatment along the streetscape and open space areas. 
(d)  Ensure that townhouse and apartment dwelling developments incorporate common open space and amenities that enrich the lives of future residents. 
(e)  Ensure that townhouse and apartment dwelling developments are designed with proper setbacks, landscaping, and massing to address privacy and compatibility with adjacent developments or land. 
(2)  Site planning. Site planning arranges building masses, open space, parking and circulation to create a site design that is orderly, visually pleasing, and that contributes positively to both the surrounding area and the development itself. Historic development patterns in the Town of Smyrna relate to the street, encouraging people to participate more fully in their community. 
These site design guidelines orient and cluster buildings, and design parking, landscaping and open space in ways that connect to surrounding neighborhoods, and compliment view sheds and surrounding natural features. 
(a)  The following requirements shall apply to all townhouse and apartment dwelling developments: 
i.  Appropriate building siting can reduce the perceived density of townhouse and apartment developments, maximize open space areas, provide "eyes on the street" surveillance and enhance community by creating public gathering spaces. Townhouse and apartment dwelling buildings shall be oriented parallel to the street, with direct entrances and windows facing the street. 

Illustration 1 - Example of an undesirable site plan layout 

Illustration 2 - Example of a desirable site plan layout 
ii.  Townhouse and apartment dwelling developments with two or more buildings shall be designed with variation between building setbacks and/or placement to avoid the creation of monotonous streetscapes. Additionally, site plans shall be designed with variation in both the patterns and the siting of structures so the appearance of the streetscape is not repetitive. 
(b)  Minimum requirements. 
i.  Townhouse dwellings: 
a)  Minimum lot width (per unit): 20 feet. 
b)  Minimum lot depth (per unit): 110 feet. 
c)  Maximum height: 45 feet. 
d)  Minimum front yard setback, principal dwelling: 10 feet. 
e)  Maximum front yard setback, principal dwelling: 20 feet. 
f)  Minimum front yard setback, open front porch, steps: 6 feet. 
g)  Minimum side yard setback: 12 feet. 
h)  Minimum side yard setback (corner lot): 20 feet. 
i)  Minimum rear yard setback 20: feet. 
j)  Not more than seven units in a row. 
k)  Easements as required per Appendix B - Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of the Smyrna Town Code. 
l)  Alleys. Townhouse developments shall have access to driveways, garages or off-street parking spaces from a rear alley only. Driveways accessible from an alley shall have a minimum width of 12 feet, not to exceed a maximum width of 14 feet. On-street parking in alleys shall be prohibited. 
Alleys shall be created at the time of subdivision approval and shall be one-way and connected to a street at both ends. 
Alleys shall have a minimum paving width of 16 feet and a minimum right-of-way of 20 feet, not to exceed a maximum right-of-way of 24 feet. 
Alleys shall be installed according to town specifications and shall be dedicated to the town for public use. 
ii.  Apartment dwellings: 
a)  Maximum height: 45 feet. 
b)  Minimum front yard setback, principal dwelling: 10 feet. 
c)  Maximum front yard setback, principal dwelling: 20 feet. 
d)  Minimum front yard setback, open front porch, steps: 6 feet. 
e)  Minimum side yard setback: 15 feet. 
f)  Minimum side yard setback (corner lot): 20 feet. 
g)  Minimum rear yard setback: 20 feet 
h)  The greatest length or depth of an apartment dwelling shall not exceed four times its height. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the length shall be no more than a maximum length of 180 feet. 
i)  Easements as required per Appendix B - Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of the Smyrna Town Code. 
(3)  Parking lot requirements. 
(a)  Parking lots shall be located in the development's interior and not along street frontages. 
(b)  Parking rows shall be no longer than ten consecutive parking spaces without being interrupted by a 15-foot by nine-foot landscaped island to separate adjacent parking spaces. Two trees and two low-lying shrubs shall be required for each landscaped island. 
(c)  All parking rows shall be terminated with a 36-foot by nine-foot landscaped terminal islands to protect parked vehicles and confine thru traffic to aisles and driveways. Two trees and two low-lying shrubs shall be required per terminal island. 
(d)  Clearly defined pedestrian connections shall be provided between parking lots and building entrances. Pedestrian walkways shall be a minimum width of five feet of clear, unobstructed passage and the type and nature of all materials shall be consistent within a development. 
(4)  Open space requirements. 
(a)  In addition to the requirements per Appendix B, Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, Section 5.07, Open Space Requirements, common open space shall be incorporated into the site plan as a primary design feature and not just remnant pieces of land used as open space. The open space should be centrally located and provides opportunities for casual social interaction and safe play areas for children. Open spaces should be sheltered from the noise and traffic of adjacent streets or other incompatible uses. 
(b)  Recreation amenities. All townhouse and apartment dwelling developments shall provide at least three of the following recreation amenities to accommodate a variety of ages and activities to meet the needs of the residents and contribute to the residential quality of life for each development: 
i.  Site furnishings (benches, tables, trashcans). 
ii.  Playground area (tot lot/play structures). 
iii.  Community garden that provides gardening space for the raising of flowers, fruits and vegetables for residents. 
iv.  Walking/biking trails that provide interconnectivity between abutting neighborhoods and pathway systems. 
v.  Covered structure (gazebo, pavilion, etc.). 
vi.  Swimming pool. 
vii.  Sport courts (tennis, basketball, volleyball, etc.). 
viii.  Athletic fields (soccer, football, baseball, etc.). 
(5)  Street tree requirements. 
(a)  Street trees shall be planted in or adjacent to all roadways; one (1) tree for every 30 linear feet of street frontage is required. This includes cul-de-sacs, corner lots, etc. 
(b)  Street trees must be planted at least 20 feet apart but not more than 40 feet apart and shall be planted in accordance with standards and requirements as outlined per Appendix B, Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, Section 5.17, Tree Planting Standards and Requirements. 
(6)  Building scale and character standards. To maintain Smyrna's small-town character through building design guidelines that address the overall appearance of townhouse and apartment dwellings through façade design elements, all exterior design elements shall form an integrated development and ensure that large buildings reduce their apparent mass and bulk on elevations visible from the street or pedestrian routes to ensure that buildings are based on human scale (i.e., the relationship of the size of the building's features to the people that use the building). 
(a)  The following requirements shall apply to all townhouse and apartment dwellings: 
i.  Building length of individual building facades defined as the continuous horizontal distance, measured from end-wall to end-wall, shall not exceed 180 feet. 
ii.  Primary pedestrian entrances shall be facing and visible from the primary street and a porch, covered stoop, or similar entry feature shall be located at the ground floor exterior entrance of each townhouse or apartment dwelling unit to offer overhead protection and provide shelter from inclement weather. Entrance doors are encouraged to include architectural detailing such as contrasting paint color(s) and decorative trim. 
iii.  All townhouse and apartment buildings shall incorporate design elements that will break up large expanses of uninterrupted building surfaces (blank walls). Along the façade of all townhouse and apartment buildings, design elements shall occur at a minimum interval of 20 feet. 
iv.  The following design elements shall be included: 
a)  Varying roof lines and forms: 
i.  Roof lines shall be varied through combinations of roof heights and styles that create variation and visual interest. 
ii.  Guidelines: 
a)  Provide offsets or breaks in roof elevations of two (2) feet or greater in height. 
b)  Incorporate the roof pitch and materials of adjacent buildings into carport or garage roofs. 
b)  Building façade colors and materials: 
i.  At least two variations in color and materials shall be used in the treatment of the building façade. 
ii.  Guidelines: 
a)  Decorative patterns on exterior materials may include scales/shingles, wainscoting, ornamentation, and similar features. 
c)  Bays, porches or balconies. 
i.  Guidelines: 
a)  Incorporate smaller-scale forms such as bays, recessed or projecting balconies or porches and dormers into the design to visually reduce the height and scale of the building and to emphasize the definition of individual units. 
d)  Wall offsets. 
i.  A wall offset is defined as a projection or recess of a façade wall of at least two feet in depth. Wall offsets shall be incorporated onto those building facades having a length of at least 20 feet or greater. Wall offsets shall be a minimum of six feet in length. 
e)  Windows. 
i.  Decorative window features, such as arched windows, transoms, decorative pediments, and/or window shutters that are sized appropriately and proportionally to the window shall be required on those facades fronting on streets. 
ii.  Guidelines: 
a)  Windows of varied shape, size, and placement are encouraged. 
b)  The use of recessed windows, moldings, decorative trim and wood frames to add three-dimensional quality and shadow lines to the façade. 
f)  Front yards. 
i.  Landscaped front yards offer a welcoming and safe transition from public to private space, define property lines, create a unique identity, buffer noise and provide visual screening. A minimum of 50 percent of the front yard shall be landscaped with flowering or evergreens shrubs and shall not exceed a maximum of three feet in height at maturity. All grassed areas shall be sodded with a drought-resistant grass. 
ii.  A four-foot wide walkway constructed of concrete or decorative pavers shall extend from the sidewalk to the exterior entrance of each townhouse or apartment dwelling unit. 




(Ord. No. 020-14, § 3, 12-15-14) 
I.  Density provisions 
(1)  The maximum gross density shall be 6 units per acre. 
(2)  A density bonus of up to three additional units per acre above the maximum gross density per acre may be granted by the town council, after considering the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, if a developer provides improvements in accordance with the standards outlined herein. Planned village communities shall not be eligible for density bonuses under this provision. 
(a)  Open space. For each ten-percent increase in common open space over the minimum 25-percent open space requirement, a gross density bonus of one-half unit per acre may be granted. 
(b)  Recreation amenities. Where the developer provides recreation amenities in excess of the three amenities as required by subsection H(4)(b) of this ordinance, a gross density bonus one-half unit per acre may be granted. 
(c)  Community buildings. The construction of a community building to serve as a meeting hall for various community functions, including, but not limited to, civic meetings, recreational purposes, receptions and special events, may be granted a gross density bonus of one unit per acre. 
(d)  School sites. The donation of a school site as approved by the town council and the Smyrna School District Board of Education may increase the permitted gross density by one (1) unit per acre. 
(e)  Public facilities sites. The donation of a public facilities site to be used by public services such as emergency responders, governmental agencies, etc. may increase the permitted gross density by one unit per acre if the location is approved by the town and the agency to whom the site is to be provided. 
(f)  Preservation easements. The establishment of a permanent easement for the purpose of preserving and protecting a historic resource (any building, structure, object, or other historic use that the Town considers to be important from a historic, architectural, or archaeological aspect in the history of the Town) may be granted a gross density bonus of one-half unit per acre. 
g)  Conservation easements. The establishment of a permanent easement for the purpose of conserving and protecting a woodland area, a wetland area, and/or a stream corridor from removal of existing natural vegetation, and/or encroachment by future development may be granted a gross density bonus of one-half unit per acre. 
(Ord. No. 020-14, § 4, 12-15-14; Ord. No. 004-19, § 8, 4-15-19) 
6.  Residential district R-3. 
A.  Declaration of legislative intent. This district is intended to protect residential development from harmful non-residential uses while affording the widest variety of dwelling types (condominiums, homeowners' associations, and apartment complexes) and the highest population densities. The entire parcel must remain under single ownership in this zoning district. 
B.  [Uses permitted.] The following uses are permitted: No building or premises shall be used and no building or part of a building shall be erected which is arranged, intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for any purpose except the following and in accordance with performance standards of section 6 and subject to the site development plan approval as set forth in section 7.5 of the Smyrna zoning ordinance and the Smyrna subdivision regulations: 
(1)  All uses permitted within the residential district R-2. 
EXCEPTION: Mobile offices to be used as temporary real estate offices shall be permitted when approved by special exception pursuant to section 9(2) of this ordinance. Placement and setup shall be approved by the building official. Mobile offices shall be removed upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the first completed permanent structure, not to exceed one year. 
(2)  Townhouse dwellings which are constructed in accordance with the standards set forth in the Town of Smyrna building code and are not designed to be transported to the dwelling site on their own chassis provided that not more than eight such units be in a row. 
(Ord. No. 020-14, § 5, 12-15-14) 
(3)  Apartment dwellings which are constructed in accordance with the standards set forth in the Town of Smyrna building code and [the dwelling] is not designed to be transported to the dwelling site on its own chassis provided the greatest dimension in length or depth of an apartment house shall not exceed four times its height. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the length shall be no more than a maximum length of 180 feet 
(Ord. No. 020-14, § 6, 12-15-14) 
(4)  Accessory uses as permitted in the residential district R-2A. 
C.  [Uses permitted as special exception.] The following uses are permitted only if approved as a special exception pursuant to section 9(2) of this ordinance: 
(1)  Cemeteries. 
(2)  Institutions of religious, medical, charitable or philanthropic nature. 
(3)  Medical clinics. 
(4)  Professional offices. 
(5)  Temporary real estate offices in developments containing a minimum of ten lots. 
(6)  If approved as a special exception by the board of adjustment pursuant to § 9(2) of this ordinance, school bus stop shelters as defined in § 19, definitions. 
(7)  Residential conversions provided that the requirements found in subsection 4(C)4 of the Residential R2 district, incorporated herein by reference, are satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 018-14, § 3, 12-1-14) 
D.  [Uses permitted as conditional uses.] The following uses are permitted only if approved as a conditional use pursuant to section 6.16 [6.15] of this ordinance: 
(1)  Institutions of an educational nature. 
(2)  Public utility uses. 
(3)  Governmental buildings, structures, facilities and uses including, but not limited to, police stations, fire houses, ambulance stations, government offices, library. 
(4)  Planned village community. Planned village communities shall be allowed as a conditional use subject to the same conditions identified for planned village communities in the residential district R-1, except as otherwise indicated herein. 
(a)  Minimum requirements. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, planned village communities in this zoning district shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 3,000 sq. ft. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 50 ft. 
(3)  Minimum lot depth: 60 ft. 
(4)  Maximum height: 35 ft. 
(5)  Minimum front yard setback, principal dwelling 10 ft. 
(6)  Maximum front yard setback, principal dwelling 20 ft. 
(7)  Minimum front yard setback, open front porch, steps 6 ft. 
(8)  Minimum side yard setback: 6 ft. 
(9)  Minimum rear yard setback: 20 ft. 
(10)  Maximum lot coverage: N/A 
(11)  Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, the maximum gross density for a planned village community shall be 13 units per acre. 
(Ord. No. 005-09, § 5, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 001-13, § 5, 2-4-13; Ord. No. 004-19, § 9, 4-15-19) 
E.  Parking. Parking shall be in accordance with section 6, Supplementary District regulations. 
F.  Minimum requirements. 
(1)  Dwelling, one family (per unit): 
a.  Minimum lot area, 5,500 sq. ft. 
b.  Minimum lot width, 50 ft. 
c.  Minimum lot depth, 110 ft. 
d.  Maximum height, 45 ft. 
e.  Front yard setback, 20 ft. 
f.  Side yard setback, six ft., where access to rear yard is available to all adjoining property owners by a paved alley. If an alley is not available access to rear must be provided by one of the following: 
(1)  Increase the minimum side yard setback on one side to ten ft. 
(2)  Record in the deeds of adjoining property owners' side yards a minimum six-ft. easement on each side of the property line which guarantees access along the side property by the town and either property owner. 
g.  Rear yard setback, 30 ft. 
h.  Maximum lot coverage, 50%. 
(2)  Dwelling, semidetached: 
a.  Minimum lot area (per unit), 2,500 sq. ft. or 21/2 times the total floor area, whichever is greater. 
b.  Minimum lot width (per unit), 30 ft. 
c.  Minimum lot depth (per unit), 110 ft. 
d.  Maximum height, 45 ft. 
e.  Front yard setback, 20 ft. 
f.  Unattached side yard interior unit, ten ft. 
g.  Unattached side yard exterior end unit, 20 ft. 
h.  Attached side yard setback, zero. 
i.  Rear yard setback, 30 ft. 
j.  Maximum lot coverage, 50%. 
(Ord. No. 020-14, § 7, 12-15-14) 
G.  Accessory buildings. For minimum requirements, see section 6.8, Accessory buildings. 
(Ord. of 5-17-93; Ord. of 6-20-94(2), §§ 1-4; Ord. of 4-3-95(1), § 5; Ord. of 8-7-95(1), § 5; Ord. of 3-6-00(1), § 1; Ord. No. 003-07, § 1, 10-15-07) 
H.  Site and design standards for townhouse and apartment dwellings. 
(1)  The site and design standards for townhouse dwellings and apartment dwellings in the Residential R-3 district shall be the same as those found in subsection 5(H) of the Residential R2-A district and are incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 020-14, § 8, 12-15-14) 
I.  Density provisions. 
(1)  The maximum gross density shall be 12 units per acre. 
(a)  The density bonus provisions in the residential R-3 district shall be the same as those found in subsection 5.I(2) of the residential R2-A district and are incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 020-14, § 9, 12-15-14; Ord. No. 004-19, § 10, 4-15-19) 
7.  Institutional and recreational district I & R. 
a.  [Permitted uses.] The following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Hospitals and institutions of an educational, medical, philanthropic, charitable nature which are related thereto. 
(2)  Public, private and commercial recreation beaches, bathhouses, boat landings, and similar outdoor recreation facilities. 
(3)  Cemetery as permitted in the R-1 district. 
(4)  Research establishments properly located near and related to a hospital. 
(5)  Public utility uses as permitted in the R-1 district. 
(6)  Accessory uses and structures: 
(a)  Provisions for housing persons working full time on the premises of a hospital or allied use. 
(b)  Accessory uses and structures clearly incidental and customary to and associated with the operation of the permitted use. 
(7)  Institutions of a religious nature. 
b.  Uses permitted as conditional use. The following uses are permitted only if approved as a conditional use pursuant to the applicable section of this code concerning public hearings: 
(1)  Temporary portable classrooms to be used by institutions of an educational nature. 
c.  [Restriction of uses and structures.] The foregoing uses and structures are subject to the requirements as set forth in the schedule of district regulations and the supplementary district regulations. 
(Ord. of 3-15-99(1), §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 003-07, § 1, 10-15-07; Ord. No. 003-16, § 1, 3-21-16) 
8.  Local commercial district LC. This district is intended to provide areas in which the daily shopping and business needs of nearby residents can be met. This district contains retail and service uses which serve the needs of the neighborhood population. 
a.  [Uses permitted.] The following uses are permitted by right: 
(1)  Convenience stores and shops such as grocery stores and drugstores. 
(2)  Personal service shops dealing directly with customers; beauty parlor, barbershop, clothes cleaning agency, laundromat, and similar establishments. 
(3)  Bank, office, restaurant, bar. 
(4)  Day care center and nursery schools (see section 6). 
(5)  Automobile service station not to include repair garages or junkyards. 
(6)  Public utility uses provided, however, that nonresidential towers shall be permitted only if approved as a conditional use pursuant to section 6.15 of this ordinance. All principal parts of the tower, excluding any guy cables, shall be set back from the street line or any other lot line of the lot on which it is located a distance not less than the height of the tower. 
(7)  If approved as a special exception by the board of adjustment pursuant to section 9(2) of this appendix, private clubs and lodges. 
(8)  Public and/or governmental buildings, structures, facilities and uses including, but not limited to, police stations, fire houses, ambulance stations, government offices, libraries, etc. 
(9)  Specialty store. 
(10)  If approved as a special exception by the board of adjustment pursuant to section 9(2) of this ordinance, any uses permitted in the R-3 district. 
(11)  Accessory uses and structures clearly incidental and customary to and associated with the operation of the permitted use. 
b.  [Restriction of uses and structures.] The foregoing uses and structures are subject to the requirements as set forth in the supplementary district regulations. 
c.  Parking. Shall be in accordance with Section 6. Supplementary District Regulations. 
d.  Minimum requirements. 
(1)  Minimum lot area, none except for dwellings where R-3 applies. 
(2)  Minimum lot width, none except for dwellings where R-3 applies. 
(3)  Minimum lot depth, none except for dwellings where R-3 applies. 
(4)  Maximum height, three stories, 45 feet. 
(5)  Minimum front yard, 35 feet. 
(6)  Minimum side yard, none except 20 feet shall be provided and shall be planted when adjoining a residential district. 
(7)  Minimum rear yard, 20 feet. 
(8)  Maximum lot coverage, 80 percent. 
e.  [Uses permitted as conditional uses.] The following uses are permitted only if approved as a conditional use pursuant to section 6.16 [6.15] of this ordinance: 
(1)  Indoor storage facilities provided that: 
(a)  No structure is located less than 100 feet from the buildable area of any residential or mobile home park zoning districts; 
(b)  All property lines abutting non-commercial zoning districts must be screened and landscaped with materials approved by the building inspector; 
(c)  No entrances or exits may be installed from non-commercial property lines. 
f.  [Uses permitted as special exception.] The following uses are permitted only if approved by the board of adjustment as a special exception: 
(1)  Institutions of a religious nature. 
(Ord. of 3-15-93(2); Ord. of 11-22-95, § 1; Ord. of 11-3-97(2), §§ 1, 4; Ord. of 10-16-00(3), § 1; Ord. of 12-17-01(1), §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 014-04, §§ 1-3, 8-16-04; Ord. No. 003-07, § 1, 10-15-07; Ord. No. 011-14, § 1, 7-7-14; Ord. No. 003-16, § 2, 3-21-16) 
9.  Central commercial district CC. This district is the centralized, historic core of the Town and is intended to provide for establishments offering a mix of retail, office, and residential uses which are consistent with the existing scale and character of the surrounding historic district, in order to promote the economic viability of the community and surrounding area. 
a.  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted: 
(1)  General retail business. 
(2)  Offices (Except those offices located on the first floor of a building fronting on Main Street between Mt. Vernon and South Streets and fronting on Commerce Street between U.S. Route 13 and Union Street, shall require conditional use approval). 
(3)  Financial institutions. 
(4)  Restaurant or café. 
(5)  Restaurant patios and sidewalk cafes provided that: 
(a)  Total size shall not exceed 1,000 square feet. 
(b)  Food and beverages shall be served only to seated patrons. 
(c)  Outdoor cooking facilities are prohibited. 
(d)  No electronically amplified sound shall be permitted except that one person electronically amplified performances intended as accessory or background music or non-electronically amplified performances shall be permitted. 
(e)  No overflow of patrons on sidewalks and/or street right-of-way shall be permitted. 
(f)  A minimum four-foot wide clear pedestrian path between any obstruction and the restaurant patio/sidewalk cafe shall be maintained at all times, but in no case shall the restaurant patio sidewalk cafe encroach into the public right-of-way. 
(g)  Tables, chairs, umbrellas, and any other objects provided in connection with a facility located directly on sidewalks shall be secured in an orderly fashion or removed from the sidewalk area when dining facility is closed to the public. 
(h)  No tables and chairs nor any other parts of restaurant patios or sidewalk cafes shall be attached, chained, or in any manner affixed to any tree, post, sign, or other public fixtures. 
(i)  Tables, chairs, umbrellas, and any other objects provided with a sidewalk cafe shall be maintained in a clean and attractive appearance and shall be in good repair at all times. 
(j)  No vending machines of any kind shall be permitted. 
(k)  For facilities directly on sidewalks, such facilities shall be swept and washed daily by restaurant operator including the adjoining sidewalks to the street curb. Raised decks, porches, and similar structures shall also be swept daily. Debris shall be disposed of properly in owner/manager's containers. 
(6)  Lodging to include hotels and motels. 
(7)  Bed and breakfast establishments offering no more than five bedrooms for lodging purposes and subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  The owner or owner's representative must reside full-time on the premises. 
(b)  Not more than three guests shall be permitted per guest room. All bed and breakfast establishments shall maintain a current guest register including names, permanent addresses, dates of occupancy, and motor vehicle license of all guests. Such register shall be open to inspection by the town's planning and inspections office. 
(c)  No guest shall be permitted to lodge on the premises for more than seven consecutive days. 
(d)  Breakfast and/or light fare may be served to registered guests only, not to include lunch and/or dinner. No food preparation shall be permitted in any guest room. 
(e)  One off-street parking space shall be available on-site for the owner/owner's representative. 
(f)  No construction, remodeling, reconstruction, or other revisions shall be made to the exterior of the premises as would materially change the appearance thereof from that of a single-family dwelling. 
(g)  No bed and breakfast shall offer guest rooms to the general public until a business license to operate such establishment has been obtained from the State of Delaware and an approved certificate of zoning compliance from the Town of Smyrna. 
(h)  No bed and breakfast shall offer guest rooms to the general public until all applicable State and Town permits have been approved and issued. Every bed and breakfast shall be required to meet all governing state and town building, fire, plumbing, electrical, safety, housing, and property maintenance codes as a continuing condition of operation and shall be subject to inspection by the town building inspection office upon not less than ten days' prior notice (except where compelling exigent circumstances involving the public health or safety requires less notice). 
(8)  Restaurant, full-service and brewery-pubs; provided that: 
(a)  Suitable on-site kitchen facilities are provided. 
(b)  The primary use consists of sit-down, full meal service to patrons. 
(c)  Adequate seating arrangements for patrons are provided on the premises. 
(d)  Those facilities serving alcohol shall be licensed by the Delaware Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission as a brewery-pub under 4 Del. C. § 512 512B or as a restaurant authorized to serve alcohol and shall provide sit-down, full meal service to patrons with lunch, dinner and dessert menus during all hours of operation; except that limited late meal service may be substituted beginning 90 minutes before the time alcoholic beverages are no longer served. The limited late mean service shall consist of such foods as sandwiches, salads, pizza, and similar items. 
(e)  Alcoholic beverages served for consumption on the premises shall be ancillary to the primary food service use. "Ancillary" for purposes of this section means subordinate, auxiliary, smaller and less intensive than the primary use. 
(f)  Sale, consumption and closing. There shall be no alcoholic beverages sold on the premises after 1:00 a.m. There shall be no alcoholic beverages consumed on the premises after 2:00 a.m. All facilities which sell alcohol for on-premise consumption must close to the public by 2:00 a.m. 
(9)  Theaters. 
(10)  Personal services (except those personal service establishments which are located within 250 feet of another personal service establishment shall require a conditional use approval). 
(11)  Libraries, museums. 
(12)  Craft distillery and microbrewery establishments, as defined at 4 Del. C. Sections 512(c) and 512(e), provided that: 
(a)  All permits and approvals required by the Delaware Alcoholic Beverage Commission are obtained and remain in full force and effect. 
(b)  All aspects of the distilling or brewing process are completely confined within a building, including storage of all materials and finished products. 
(c)  Such establishment offers the public, on a regular and continuing basis, various activities ancillary to its distilling and/or brewing process, including by way of example: tours of the premises, educational classes, demonstrations, tasting rooms, and retail sales areas limited to the sale of beer, mead, cider, or spirits brewed or distilled on the premises for consumption off-premises and other retail items identified in 4 Del. C. section 512E(c)(5). 
(d)  On-site consumption or tasting associated with a craft distillery or microbrewery establishment shall be permitted. Any area associated with on-site consumption or tasting shall not operate as a stand-alone bar or tavern, shall be located on the premises of the craft distillery or microbrewery establishment, and shall be ancillary to the primary use. "Ancillary" for purposes of this section means subordinate, auxiliary, smaller and less intensive than the primary use. On-site consumption or tasting of alcohol shall be limited to those products brewed or distilled on the premises, except as otherwise permitted by 4 Del. C. §§ 512C or 512E, as the same may be amended, or any other corresponding provision of Delaware law. 
(e)  All food sales shall be limited to prepackaged snack items or those food items prepared by a food establishment licensed by the State of Delaware. If a craft distillery or microbrewery intends to operate on its premises a food establishment that is otherwise a permitted use in this district (i.e. restaurant, café, or full-service restaurant), the town may require the property owner to provide the town with a letter of no objection from the Delaware Alcoholic Beverage Control Commissioner regarding the operation of a food establishment on the premises of a craft distillery or microbrewery. 
(f)  Outdoor seating and gathering areas shall be permitted subject to the following requirements: 
i.  Permanent and temporary outdoor seating and gathering areas shall be subject to building permit application and approval requirements. 
ii.  Outdoor seating and gathering areas and ancillary improvements shall include physical barriers from public rights-of-way and physical and visual barriers from adjoining properties. Physical barriers along public rights-of-way shall restrict access from the public rights-of-way to the outdoor seating and gathering areas and shall not exceed four feet in height. Barriers along adjoining property lines shall create a physical and visual barrier consisting of fencing six feet in height or vegetation at least six feet in height. The regulations herein shall be in addition to any regulations imposed by the State of Delaware. 
iii.  Maximum occupancy and points of ingress/egress shall be clearly marked. Occupancy of outdoor seating and gathering areas shall not exceed one person per 15 square feet of the outdoor seating and gathering areas identified in the building plans or any other occupancy limit established by the office of the state fire marshall. 
iv.  All structures and uses related to outdoor seating and gathering areas and facilities are subject to the Town of Smyrna Building Code and the Performance Standards of the Town of Smyrna Zoning Code Supplementary District Regulations. 
v.  The occupancy of outdoor seating and gathering areas shall be included when calculating the building requirements and minimum amenities required by the Town of Smyrna and State of Delaware. Outdoor seating and gathering areas shall meet all requirements of the Town of Smyrna and the State of Delaware. 
vi.  Tables, chairs, umbrellas, equipment, games, and any other items provided in connection with outdoor seating and gathering areas shall be maintained in good repair and shall be secured during non-business hours in a safe and orderly manner. 
vii.  Vending machines are prohibited and must be immediately removed upon notice from the Town of Smyrna. 
viii.  Any licensing required by the Delaware Alcoholic Beverage Control Commissioner for outdoor seating and gathering areas shall be obtained. 
(13)  Accessory use and structures: 
(a)  Minor home occupations pursuant to section 6.19 of this ordinance. 
(b)  Major home occupations only if approved as a special exception pursuant to section 6.19 of this ordinance. 
(c)  Accessory uses and structures clearly incidental and customary to and associated with the operations of the permitted uses. 
(14)  Uses permitted as a special exception. The following uses are permitted only if approved as a special exception pursuant to section 9(2) of this ordinance: 
(a)  One-family, semidetached, townhouse, and apartment dwellings as permitted in residential district R-3; lot, height, density, and yard requirements shall be the same as in the R-3 district. 
(b)  Dwelling units which are part of a building used commercially; however, 30 percent of the existing structure must be of a commercial rather than a residential nature. The commercial portion must be a useable portion of the first floor of the building that fronts the public right of way. 
(c)  Private clubs and lodges. 
(d)  Light manufacturing and/or processing provided that: 
(i)  At least 30 percent of the building shall be used for the sale of goods produced or processed on the premises; the portion of the first floor of the building that fronts the street shall be used entirely for retail purposes. 
(ii)  Such area devoted to the production or processing of goods shall be fully concealed from any street. 
(iii)  All aspects of the production or processing of goods are completely confined within the building, including storage of all materials and finished products. 
(iv)  Not more than four employees are engaged in such production or processing. 
(e)  Funeral homes, including associated display and sales of monuments, when screened from public view. 
(f)  Institutions of a religious nature. 
(15)  Uses permitted as conditional uses. The following uses are permitted only if approved as a conditional use pursuant to Section 6.14 of this ordinance: 
(a)  Emergency services. 
(b)  Commercial services. 
(c)  Day care center. 
(d)  Parking structures. 
(e)  Public utility uses. 
(f)  Alcoholic beverage establishments provided that: 
1)  The alcoholic beverage establishment and its permittee shall comply with all applicable Delaware Alcoholic Beverage Commission rules and regulations. Suspension of the alcoholic beverage establishment's or its permittee's DABCC license may constitute sufficient cause or basis for review and possible revocation of its conditional use approval. 
2)  Exterior lighting shall be installed as necessary to adequately illuminate the sidewalk or other public right of ways adjacent to the establishment and any parking lots or landscaped areas located on the premises. Lighting shall be hooded or oriented so as to deflect light away from adjacent properties. 
3)  The permittee shall, for the first six months, schedule a monthly meeting with the manager of planning and zoning and the chief of police in order to identify and mitigate any noise/parking/lighting problems and/or neighborhood concerns. 
4)  In conjunction with granting a conditional use approval as authorized herein, mayor and council may impose conditions on the proposed use as deemed necessary by mayor and council to ensure that the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of persons and property will not be adversely affected and to provide for the protection of surrounding property, persons and neighborhood values. 
5)  Failure to comply with any of the conditions of approval may result in mayor and council terminating the conditional use approval. 
b.  Restriction of uses and structures. The foregoing uses and structures are subject to the requirements as set forth in the supplementary district regulations. 
c.  Parking. Shall be in accordance with Section 6, Supplementary district regulations. 
d.  Minimum requirements. 
(1)  Minimum lot area, none except for dwellings where R-3 applies. 
(2)  Minimum Lot width, none except for dwellings where R-3 applies. 
(3)  Minimum Lot depth, none except for dwellings where R-3 applies. 
(4)  Maximum height, 45 feet , R-3 District requirements shall apply to residential uses. 
(5)  Minimum front yard, none. 
(6)  Minimum side yard, none except 20 feet shall be provided and shall be planted when adjoining residential zoning district. 
(7)  Minimum rear yard, none except 20 feet shall be provided and shall be planted when adjoining a residential zoning district. 
(8)  Maximum impervious lot coverage, 90 percent. 
(Ord. of 11-22-95, § 2; Ord. of 11-3-97(2), §§ 2,5; Ord. of 8-5-02(3), § 1; Ord. No. 035-03, § 1, 1-20-04; Ord. No. 018-04, § 1, 11-15-04; Ord. No. 003-05, § 1, 1-18-05; Ord. No. 003-07, § 1, 10-15-07; Ord. No. 012-12, §§ 1-3, 12-3-12; Ord. No. 011-14, § 1, 7-7-14; Ord. No. 021-14, § 1, 1-20-15; Ord. No. 013-15, § 2, 9-21-15; Ord. No. 003-16, § 3, 3-21-16; Ord. No. 003-17, § 1, 3-6-17; Ord. No. 005-17, § 1, 8-21-17; Ord. No. 008-17, § 1, 11-20-17; Ord. No. 011-17, § 1, 12-18-17; Ord. No. 009-18, §§ 1, 2, 7-16-18; Ord. No. 004-19, § 11, 4-15-19) 
10.  Highway commercial district HC. The highway commercial district is intended to meet commercial and service needs which can best be satisfied by establishments located adjacent to a main highway. The requirements of the local and regional population as well as those of travelers will be served within this district. 
a.  [Permitted uses.] The following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Uses as permitted in the central commercial district. All uses in the central commercial district requiring special exception or conditional use approvals shall require the same approvals in this district. 
(2)  Drive-in facilities not to include drive-in theaters. 
(3)  Automobile courts and motels. 
(4)  Automobile, truck, farm and marine equipment repair, sales and service, not to include junkyards. 
(5)  Outdoor recreation facilities. 
(6)  Carwashes. 
(7)  Eating and drinking establishments. 
(8)  Trailer and memorial stone sales. 
(9)  Truck and bus terminals. 
(10)  Household moving and storage facilities. 
(11)  Wholesale, storage and warehouse establishments. 
(12)  Sale and storage of agriculturally oriented products including grain and feed. 
(13)  Roadside produce stands. 
(14)  Building materials sales yard. 
(15)  Building contractor's office and storage of equipment and material, provided that storage areas be screened from public view. 
(16)  Public utility uses provided, however, that nonresidential towers shall be permitted only if approved as a conditional use pursuant to section 6.15 of this ordinance. All principal parts of the tower, excluding any guy cables, shall be set back from the street line or any other lot line of the lot on which it is located a distance not less than the height of the tower. 
(17)  Accessory uses and structures clearly incidental and customary to and associated with the operation of the permitted uses. 
(18)  Any established residence, whether conforming or nonconforming, may be continued to be used as a residence provided that it is not enlarged, increased or altered in any way or moved for any distance. Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50 percent of its replacement cost at the time of the destruction as determined by the building inspector, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(19)  If approved as a special exception by the board of adjustment pursuant to section 9(2) of this ordinance, bulk storage of flammable liquids/gases. 
(20)  If approved as a special exception by the board of adjustment pursuant to § 9(2) of this section, school bus stop shelters as defined in § 19, definitions. 
(21)  Brewery-pub establishments, as defined at 4 Del. C. § 512B, provided that: 
a.  All permits and approvals required by the Delaware Alcoholic Beverage Commissioner to operate a brewery-pub are obtained and remain in full force and effect. 
b.  All aspects of the brewing process are completely confined within a building, including storage of all materials and finished products. 
b.  [Uses permitted as a special exception]. The following uses are permitted only if approved as a Special Exception pursuant to section 9(2) of this ordinance: 
(1)  One off-premises directional sign provided that: 
(i)  Such sign shall not exceed 5.0 square feet in size; 
(ii)  Such sign shall be set back a minimum of 5 feet from the right-of-way/property line of all public streets/roads; 
(iii)  Such sign shall be no higher than 3.0 feet above grade; 
(iv)  Such sign shall not be placed within the 25-foot sight triangle; 
(v)  Such sign shall be no further than 1,000 feet from the property line of the premises of the business it refers to. 
(2)  If approved as a special exception by the Board of Adjustment pursuant to Section 9(2) of this Ordinance, Adult Entertainment Establishments, as defined by 24 Del.C. Chapter 16, and Body Art Establishments as defined by the State of Delaware "Regulations Governing Body Art Establishments," adopted by the Secretary, Delaware Health and Social Services, under authority of 16 Del.C. Chapter 1, §122 (3)(w), effective September 30, 2002, shall be permitted in the Highway Commercial District (HC), only, subject to additional time, place and manner restrictions set forth at Section 9(2) of this Ordinance. 
(a)  Nonconforming uses pre-existing the effective date of this Ordinance shall be governed by Section 4 of the Zoning Code. 
c.  [Uses permitted as a conditional use]. The following uses are permitted only if approved by the board of adjustment as a conditional use pursuant to section 6.14 of this ordinance: 
(1)  Large scale indoor entertainment uses provided that: 
(i)  All large scale indoor entertainment uses shall strictly comply with all provisions of 24 Del. C. Chapter 16, as now in effect or as hereafter amended. Failure to comply with this requirement shall void the conditional use approval. 
(ii)  No more than one large scale indoor entertainment use shall be permitted on any lot or property. 
(iii)  No large scale indoor entertainment use shall be permitted in any building otherwise used in whole or part for residential purposes. 
(iv)  No large scale indoor entertainment use shall be permitted on any lot which is located within 1,000 feet of any other lot on which is located another large scale indoor entertainment use. This distance shall be measured from the nearest property line of such use to the nearest property line of the proposed large scale indoor entertainment use. 
(v)  No large scale indoor entertainment use shall be permitted on any lot which is located within 1,000 feet of any lot in any residential district. This distance shall be measured from the nearest property line of any residential district to the nearest property line of the proposed large scale indoor entertainment use. 
(vi)  No large scale indoor entertainment use shall be permitted on any lot which is located within 1,000 feet of any lot on which is located a church, community center, funeral home, school, day-care center, hospital, alcoholism center or drug treatment center, counseling or psychiatric treatment facility or public park. This distance shall be measured from the nearest property line of such above use to the nearest property line of the proposed large scale indoor entertainment use. 
(vi)  No large scale indoor entertainment use shall be permitted on any lot which is located within 1,000 feet of any school bus stop. This distance shall be measured from the nearest school bus stop to the nearest property line of the proposed large scale indoor entertainment use. 
(vii)  The proposed use shall meet all other requirements of the laws of the Town of Smyrna, including but not limited to district lot and bulk regulations, parking regulations and signage requirements. 
(viii)  Large scale indoor entertainment uses may operate only between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m. All staff must leave the building and the building must be securely locked not later than one hour after closing time. 
(ix)  All large scale indoor entertainment uses shall continuously carry liability insurance with minimum limits of $1,000,000.00 single limit. 
(x)  All large scale indoor entertainment uses shall provide on-site crowd control and security during all operating hours, ensure that designated parking is available and adequate for the expected activity, and operate such that no music or other noise is discernable at a distance of 1,000 feet in all directions from the use. 
(xi)  In the event the large scale indoor entertainment use applicant shall meet all of the above requirements, the conditional use shall be issued subject to forfeiture for a violation of any of the requirements imposed by this ordinance. 
(xi)  Any conditional use issued or granted pursuant to this amendment to the zoning code shall be personal to the applicant only, and shall not be deemed to go with the land or lot upon which the use is located, and shall not be transferable. 
(xii)  All large scale indoor entertainment use conditional use issued or granted pursuant to this amendment to the zoning code shall be of a limited duration of three years, however, any such conditional use applicant may apply to the board of adjustment for renewal of said conditional use within six months of the expiration date of the current conditional use. 
(xiii)  All large scale indoor entertainment use conditional use holders shall permit the State of Delaware, through its designated agents, and the Town of Smyrna, through its designated agents, to enter upon the entirety of the premises upon which the use is conducted during its hours of operation, for the purpose of inspection and testing, and for the purpose of determining whether the terms of applicable state and town laws are being complied with. 
(xiv)  Nonconforming uses preexisting at the effective date of this ordinance shall be governed by section 4 of the zoning code. 
d.  [Restriction of uses and structures.] The foregoing uses and structures are subject to the requirements as set forth in the supplementary district regulations. 
e.  [Residency on business premises.] Owner or caretaker permitted to live on premises of a business. 
f.  Parking. Shall be in accordance with Section 6. Supplementary District Regulations. 
g.  Minimum requirements. 
(1)  Minimum lot area, none. 
(2)  Minimum lot width, none. 
(3)  Minimum lot depth, none. 
(4)  Maximum height, three stories, 45 feet. 
(5)  Minimum front yard, 30 feet. 
(6)  Minimum side yard, none except 20 feet shall be provided and shall be planted when adjoining a residential district. 
(7)  Minimum rear yard, 30 feet. 
(8)  Maximum lot coverage, 80 percent. 
(Ord. of 3-15-93(2); Ord. of 6-5-95(1), § 1; Ord. of 11-22-95, § 3; Ord. of 11-3-97(2), §§ 3, 6; Ord. of 10-21-02, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 004-07, § 1, 7-2-07; Ord. No. 003-07, § 1, 10-15-07; Ord. No. 013-07, § 1, 11-5-07; Ord. No. 001-08, §§ 1, 2, 1-7-08; Ord. No. 011-14, § 1, 7-7-14; Ord. No. 013-15, § 2, 9-21-15) 
11.  Manufacturing district M. 
a.  Declaration of legislative intent. This district is intended to include structures and land located near residential and commercial uses existing and proposed; therefore, the manufacturing uses must be restricted in order to eliminate any adverse effects that they may have upon the surrounding area. 
b.  [Permitted uses.] The following uses are permitted: No building or premises shall be used and no building or part of a building shall be erected which is arranged, intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for any purpose except the following and in accordance with performance standards of section 6 and subject to the site development plan approval as set forth in section 7.5 of the Smyrna zoning ordinance: 
(1)  Research, testing and development laboratories. 
(2)  Printing, publishing, binding, packaging, storage, warehousing and trucking terminals. 
(3)  Storage and processing of farm products. 
(4)  Manufacturing or assembling from prepared materials. 
(5)  Public utility uses provided, however, that nonresidential towers shall be permitted only if approved as a conditional use pursuant to section 6.15 of this ordinance. All principal parts of the tower, excluding any guy cables, shall be set back from the street line or any other lot line of the lot on which it is located a distance not less than the height of the tower. 
(6)  Firms manufacturing textiles, clothing, hosiery, electronic equipment, appliances and mechanical instruments. 
(7)  Contractors' yards for the storage of material and equipment. 
c.  [Uses permitted as special exceptions.] The following uses are permitted only if approved as a special exception pursuant to section 9(2) of this ordinance: 
(1)  Any other industrial uses which would not violate the intent of the "manufacturing district." 
(2)  Retail sale of products manufactured or processed on the premises. 
(3)  Bulk storage of flammable liquids/gases. 
d.  [Uses permitted as conditional uses.] The following uses are permitted only if approved as a conditional use pursuant to section 6.15 of this ordinance: 
(1)  Nonresidential towers. All principal parts of the tower, excluding any guy cables, shall be set back from the street line or any other lot line of the lot on which it is located a distance not less than the height of the tower. 
e.  Parking. Parking shall be in accordance with section 6, Supplementary district regulations. 
f.  Minimum requirements. 
(1)  Minimum lot area, none. 
(2)  Minimum lot width, none. 
(3)  Minimum lot depth, none. 
(4)  Maximum height (except grain elevators), three stories, 45 feet. 
(5)  Front yard setback, 30 feet. 
(6)  Side yard setback, none, except when adjoining a residential district, 100 feet shall be provided and shall be planted. 
(7)  Rear yard setback, none, except when adjoining a residential district, 100 feet shall be provided and shall be planted. 
(8)  Maximum lot coverage, 80%. 
(Ord. of 4-3-95(2), §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 6-5-95(1), § 2; Ord. of 11-6-95(3), § 1; Ord. of 11-22-95, §§ 4, 5; Ord. of 2-5-01, § 1; Ord. No. 003-07, § 1, 10-15-07) 
12.  Environmental protection overlay district. 
a.  Declaration of legislative intent. The intent of this ordinance is to establish standards and criteria for the protection of environmentally sensitive areas of the Town of Smyrna, including floodplains, floodprone soils, areas of mature woodlands, steep slopes, erodible soils, and areas having a seasonal high water table within six inches of the soil surface. More specifically, these provisions are designed to: 
(1)  Preserve natural environmental resources and maintain ecological stability by: 
(a)  Strictly controlling the use of floodplains and alluvial soils; 
(b)  Promoting the proper development of steep, and very steep, slopes with special consideration for those with unstable soils; 
(c)  Protecting the quality of existing surface waters by controlling erosion and sedimentation and developing needed stormwater management systems; 
(d)  Maintaining groundwater resources through the provision of open space areas for groundwater recharge; 
(e)  Avoiding the disruption of woodlands which are highly diverse and biologically rich. 
(2)  Preserve the visual character of the landscape by: 
(a)  Discouraging development in areas which will create significant changes in the visual character of the town. 
(b)  Encouraging the use of buffer areas to preserve existing environmental quality and amenity values. 
(3)  Provide for more efficient allocation and maintenance of open space. 
(4)  Provide for necessary active and passive recreation areas to complement those which exist. 
(5)  Aid in the implementation of the comprehensive plan and the attainment of the aims and objectives contained therein. 
b.  Applicability of the district. Regulations contained in this ordinance shall be applicable to land areas in the town that are zoned environmental protection overlay district (EPOD), delineated on the official zoning map and consist of or contain the natural resources listed as follows: 
(1)  Flood hazard areas and high ground water areas; 
(2)  Steeply sloped-slopes ranging from 15 to 25 percent; and very steep slopes-slopes in excess of 25 percent; 
(3)  Prime woodlands-Areas of forest capability class I as defined by the Delaware department of agriculture; and any woodlands wherein the canopy species are greater than 12 inches in caliper; 
(4)  Visually sensitive areas-Unvegetated lands characterized by slopes in excess of eight percent; and lands situated on any major or minor ridges and hilltops. 
c.  Definitions. 
Base flood. The flood which has been selected to serve as the basis upon which the floodplain management provision of this and other ordinances have been prepared; for purposes of this ordinance, the 100-year flood. 
Basement. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level on all sides). 
Development. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
Flood. A general and temporary inundation of normally dry land areas. 
Floodplain. 
(1)  A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream or watercourse which is subject to partial or complete inundation; 
(2)  An area subject to unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land area that must be reserved to discharge the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot at any point. 
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. 
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this ordinance. 
Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected [to] the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
New construction. Structures for which the start of construction as herein defined commenced on or after the effective date of this ordinance establishing the environmental protection overlay district. 
One-hundred-year flood. A flood that has one chance in 100 or a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Person. Any individual or group of individuals, corporation, cooperative, partnership, association or other entity, including state and local governments and agencies. 
Principally above ground. Where at least 51 percent of the actual cash value of a structure, less land value, is above ground. 
Start of construction. The first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. 
Structure. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Substantial improvement. Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either: 
(a)  Before the improvement or repair is started; or 
(b)  Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places. 
d.  Environmental impact assessment report. 
(1)  In order to more effectively evaluate applications for rezoning of the underlying district, subdivision and/or land development proposals, the applicant shall be required to evaluate the environmental consequences or effects of such proposals through the submission of an environmental impact assessment (EIA) report. An EIA report shall be required for any proposal which includes areas zoned as environmental protection overlay district (EPOD). 
(2)  The EIA report shall contain text, tables, maps and analysis which document the probable impact resulting from the proposed rezoning, subdivision and/or land development. 
(3)  Within the EIA report, specific emphasis shall be directed toward the proposed project's effects on and relationship to applicable site, neighborhood (including areas in adjacent jurisdictions where applicable) and town-wide resources, conditions or characteristics. The EIA report shall include text, tables, maps and analysis for the purpose of describing the project site, proposed use(s), environmental characteristics and the environmental effects of the proposal as follows: 
(a)  An identification of the site location and area through the use of a location map drawn at a scale of not more than 2,000 feet to the inch. The location map shall depict all streets, adjoining properties, zoning district boundaries and municipal boundaries within 3,000 feet of any part of the tract. In the case of development of a section of the entire tract, the location map shall also show the relationship of the section of the entire tract; 
(b)  An identification of the site character and appearance through the presentation of black and white photographs or copies thereof. Such photographs shall provide a representation of what the site looks like from the ground. Photographs should be properly identified or captioned and shall be keyed to a map of the site; 
(c)  An identification of the nature of the proposals through the presentation of the following; 
(1)  A site development plan including notes pertaining to the number and type of lots or units, the square footage and/or acreage of the tract and a depiction of the features which are proposed such as streets, driveways, parking areas, buildings and other structures and all impervious surfaces. The plan shall be drawn at a scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch and may be submitted as an attachment to the report; 
(2)  Plans and elevations depicting the proposed size, square footage, height, number of rooms (where applicable) of any buildings and/or other structures; 
(3)  A statement indicating the existing and proposed ownership of the tract and, where applicable, the type of ownership, operation and maintenance proposed for areas devoted to open space or otherwise not under the control of a single lot owner; 
(4)  A statement indicating the proposed staging or phasing of the project and a map depicting the boundaries of each stage or phase of the project. Such boundaries shall be superimposed on a version of the site development plan. 
(d)  An identification of physical resources associated with the natural environment of the tract including such features as geology, topography, soils, hydrology and the like. The identification of physical resources shall include a narrative description of the qualitative and quantitative aspects of each of the resources mentioned above. In addition, these resources shall be mapped at a scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch as specified below and may be either incorporated into the EIA report or submitted as attachments to the report. These maps shall include: 
(1)  A map depicting the geological characteristics of the tract. Such map shall define the location and boundaries of the rock formations at or influencing the tract and features such as faults and/or fractures; 
(2)  A map depicting the topographical characteristics of the tract. Such map shall contain contours with at least two-foot intervals; and, shall depict slopes from zero to four percent, four to ten percent, 15-25 percent, and greater than 25 percent; 
(3)  A map depicting the soil characteristics of the tract. Such map shall depict all soil types and shall include a table identifying soil characteristics pertinent to the proposed subdivision and/or land development such as depth of bedrock, depth of water table, flood hazard potential, and limitations of septic tank filter fields; 
(4)  A map depicting the hydrological characteristics of the tract. Such shall depict: surface water resources, their drainage characteristics, watersheds and floodplains and groundwater resources. Surface water resources include features such as creeks, runs and other streams, ponds, other natural bodies of water, springs, wetlands and any man-made impoundments. Groundwater resources include features such as aquifers and aquifer recharge areas. 
(e)  An identification of biological resources associated with the natural environment of tract including such features as vegetation and wildlife. The identification of biological resources shall include a narrative description of each of the resources mentioned above. In addition, these resources shall be mapped at a scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch, as specified below; and, may be either incorporated into the EIA report or submitted as attachments to the report. These maps include: 
(1)  A map depicting the vegetation characteristic of the tract. Such map shall define the locations and boundaries of the wooded areas of the tract and shall note the types of vegetation associations which exist in terms of their species types and sizes. In addition, all trees 12 inches in caliper or greater, shall be accurately located on the map either as freestanding trees or as tree masses; 
(2)  A map depicting characteristics associated with wildlife habitats. Such map may draw upon the vegetation, hydrology and soil maps in order to express habitat characteristics associated with terrestrial and aquatic wildlife on the tract and the relationship of the overall habitat(s). 
(f)  An identification of the land use conditions and characteristics associated with the tract such as: current and past use, land cover and encumbrances, and the relationship of these to adjacent tracts. The identification of land use conditions and characteristics shall include a narrative description of the above. In addition, the following maps drawn at a scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch, unless otherwise noted, shall be incorporated into the EIA report or submitted as attachments to it: 
(1)  A map depicting the land cover characteristics of the tract. Such map shall define existing features including: paved or other impervious surfaces, wooded areas, cultivated areas, pasture, old fields, lawns and landscaped areas and the like; 
(2)  A map depicting any encumbrances to the tract. Such map shall define easements and other areas where certain rights of way exist; 
(3)  A map depicting the land uses adjacent to the proposed tract. Such map may be at the same scale as the location map. 
(g)  An identification of the historic resources associated with the tract such as areas, structures and/or routes and trails which are significant. Areas, structures and/or routes and trails included on the National Register of Historic Places, and the Historic American Building Survey, and those identified in the comprehensive plan shall be identified. The identification of historic resources shall include a narrative description of the above. In addition, a map drawn at a scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch depicting historic resources shall be incorporated into the EIA report or submitted as an attachment to the report; 
(h)  An identification of the visual resources associated with the tract such as areas which have a particular amenity value and areas which offer interest in viewing the tract. The identification of visual resources shall include a narrative description of the above. In addition, a map drawn at a scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch depicting visual resources shall be incorporated into the EIA report or submitted as attachment to the report; 
(i)  An identification of characteristics and conditions associated with existing, construction related, and future air and water quality and noise levels, vibration, toxic materials, electrical interference, odor, glare and heat, fire and explosion, smoke, dust, fumes, vapors and gases and/or radioactive materials; 
(j)  The implications of the proposed subdivision and land development in terms of: the type of beneficial or adverse effects which may result from it; and, the duration of these effects in terms of their short-term or long-term nature. To indicate such effects, there shall be a discussion of the implications of the proposed subdivision and/or land development to the resources, conditions and characteristics described in subsections (d) through (h) above. In addition to a narrative presentation of implications, the applicant shall display where the rezoning of the underlying district, subdivision and/or land development adversely affects the tract through use of a map drawn at a scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch, wherein the areas adversely affected from proposed development are highlighted. Such map may be either incorporated into the EIA report or submitted as an attachment to the report, Further, the applicant must demonstrate and specify in the EIA report how and where the findings in EIA report and its attachment are reflected in the subdivision and/or land development plan; 
(k)  Alternatives to the proposed subdivision and/or land development. To indicate such alternatives, the applicant shall submit exhibits or diagrams which will depict the type of alternatives described in narrative form. The applicant shall comment on how alternatives such as: revised location redesign, layout or citing of buildings, roads and other structures, alternate methods for sewage disposal and water supply, reduction in the size of proposed structures or number of structures and the like would preclude, reduce or lessen potential adverse impact or produce beneficial effects; 
(l)  Probable adverse effects which cannot be precluded. In indicating such effects a discussion shall be presented regarding whether they will have direct or indirect influence on a particular resource, condition or characteristic; 
(m)  Measures to mitigate adverse effects. To indicate such measure, the applicant shall submit exhibits or diagrams which will depict the type of remedial, protective and mitigative measures described in narrative form. These resources shall include those required through existing procedures and standards and those unique to a specific project, as follows: 
(1)  Mitigation measures which pertain to existing procedures and standards are those related to current requirements of state, county and/or township for remedial or protective action such as: sedimentation and erosion control, stormwater runoff control, water quality control, air quality control and the like. 
(n)  Any irreversible environmental changes which would occur due to the proposed rezoning of the underlying district, subdivision and/or land development, should it be implemented. To indicate such changes, the use of non-renewable resources during the initial and continued phases of the rezoning of the underlying district, subdivision and/or land development shall be discussed. Further, the loss of environmental resources shall be indicated through a presentation of the quantity of loss and related qualitative effects. 
4.  In making its evaluation, the town council, planning commission and/or the board of adjustment may request any additional information it deems necessary to adequately assess potential environmental impacts. Further, whenever any information requested in subsection (c) above is not applicable to the proposed rezoning of the underlying district, subdivision, site plan, conditional use or special exception, a waiver may be granted as follows: 
The town council may waive any or all of the requirements to address such information upon a finding of such inapplicability for rezoning applications, subdivision applications and conditional use applications. 
The planning commission may waive any or all of the requirements to address such information upon a finding of such inapplicability for site plan applications. 
The board of adjustment may waive any or all of the requirements to address such information upon a finding of such inapplicability for special exception applications. 
A written request for a waiver shall be made by the applicant and shall be submitted at the time an application is made for rezoning of the underlying district, subdivision, site plan, conditional use and/or special exception. 
5.  The EIA report shall be prepared by an engineer, architect, landscape architect or land planner. 
e.  Establishment of the floodplain subdistrict. 
(1)  The floodplain subdistrict shall include all areas subject to inundation by the waters of the 100-year flood. The source of the delineation shall be the current Flood Insurance Study for Smyrna, Delaware, as prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, available for inspection in the town offices. 
(2)  The floodplain subdistrict shall be comprised of three distinct areas as follows: 
(a)  Floodway (F1). That portion of the floodplain subdistrict required to carry and discharge the waters of the 100-year flood without increasing the water surface elevation at any point more than one foot as demonstrated in the flood insurance study as referenced above. 
(b)  Approximated floodplain. Those portions of land within the floodplain subdistrict subject to inundation by the 100-year flood, where a detailed study has not been performed, but where a 100-year floodplain boundary has been approximated. Within the approximated floodplain, zone A, it is required that all new subdivision proposals and other proposed developments (including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions) greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, include within such proposals base flood elevation data. 
(c)  Floodway fringe (F2). Those areas of land within the floodplain subdistrict for which specific 100-year flood elevations have been determined in the FIS but which lie beyond the floodway area. 
(3)  The delineation of the floodplain subdistrict may be revised, amended and modified by the town council in compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program when: 
(a)  There are changes through natural or other causes; 
(b)  Changes are indicated by future detailed hydrologic and hydraulic studies. 
All such changes shall be subject to the review and approval of the Federal Insurance Administrator. 
(4)  Utilization of the floodplain subdistrict. 
(a)  Floodway (F1). In the floodway, no development shall be permitted which would result in any increase in the base flood elevation during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. When a developer proposes to offset the effects of development in the floodway by construction of stream improvements, he shall submit an engineering study prepared by a registered professional engineer which fully evaluates the effects of such construction. The report shall use the base flood as herein defined as the basis of analysis. All adjacent communities, D.N.R.E.C. and budget and planning shall be notified by the developer by certified mail of such intended activities prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and shall submit copies of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administrator. In addition, the developer shall assure the town, in writing, that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse in question will be maintained. 
All uses, activities and other developments shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the floodproofing and related provisions contained herein and in all other applicable codes, ordinances and regulations. 
In the floodway, the placement of any manufactured homes, except in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, shall be prohibited. 
(b)  Floodway fringe (F2) and approximated floodplain (F3). In the floodway fringe and approximated floodplain, any development and/or use of land shall be permitted provided that all such uses, activities and/or development shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the floodproofing and related provisions contained herein and in all other applicable codes or ordinances. In every subdivision within the floodway fringe or approximated floodplain, the owner or operator of the manufactured home park or subdivision shall file with the emergency planning and operations center of Kent County an evacuation plan which indicates alternate vehicular access routes. 
In addition, whenever a developer intends to alter or relocate a watercourse within the floodway fringe or approximated floodplain, the developer shall notify in writing by certified mail all adjacent communities, D.N.R.E.C. and budget and planning of all such intended activities prior to any alteration or relocation of the watercourse, and shall submit copies of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administrator. The developer shall also assure the county in writing that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse in question will be maintained. 
The approximated area shall be those areas identified as an A zone on the FIRM and for which no 100-year flood elevations have been provided. For these areas, elevation and floodway information from other federal, state or other acceptable source shall be used when available. Where other acceptable information is not available, the elevation shall be determined by using the elevation of a point on the boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction site. The Town of Smyrna may require the applicant to determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the Town of Smyrna. 
f.  Regulations. The foregoing is subject to the requirements as set forth in the schedule of supplementary district regulations in section 6-9 and the administration and enforcement provisions in section 7-8 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 4-5-93(1), §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 10-19-98(2), §§ 3, 4) 
13.  Mobile home park district MHP. This district is intended to provide for the placement and arrangement of mobile home residential units in the community. 
a.  [Permitted uses.] The following uses are permitted subject to site development plan approval as set forth in section 7 of the Town of Smyrna subdivision ordinance. No building or premises shall be used and no building shall be erected which is arranged, intended or designed to be used in whole or in part for any purposes, except as a mobile home park for the leasing of mobile home stands for mobile homes designed for single-family occupancy, provided that: 
(1)  The minimum number of mobile home stands completed and ready for occupancy before the first mobile home is permitted on the premises for residential use is 35 mobile home stands; 
(2)  No mobile home stand shall be leased or occupied for residential use of a mobile home, except for periods of 30 consecutive days or more; 
(3)  No mobile home shall be permitted in any mobile home park unless it can be demonstrated that the mobile home meets the requirements of the Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards as set forth in 24 CFR 3280, 3282 and 3283 (42 USC 5401 et seq.) as manufactured in the United States of America or, for manufactured homes built prior to June 15, 1976, to those complying with the Standard for Mobile Homes, NFPA 501B-1974/ANSI A119.1-1975 in effect at the time of manufacture. 
b.  Minimum tract size. The minimum tract size shall be 15 acres; excluding the rights-of-way of existing public roads. 
c.  Maximum density. The gross density in a MHP district shall not exceed 51/2 dwelling units per acre. 
d.  Ownership. The entire land area occupied by a mobile home park shall be maintained in single ownership throughout the entire life of the mobile home park or in multiple ownership under the provisions of the laws of the state dealing with unit properties, provided that multiple ownership shall be permitted only where application is made for multiple ownership at the time the application to establish the mobile home is presented to the town. 
e.  Minimum lot areas. The minimum lot area for a mobile home unit shall be at least 5,500 square feet. 
NOTE: Lot lines must be shown for site plan approval. 
f.  Minimum dimensions. 
(1)  Lot width at building setback line, all units, 50 feet. 
(2)  Lot depth, all units, 110 feet. 
(3)  Front yard, 25 feet. 
(4)  Side yards, six feet on one side, 20 feet combined both sides. 
(5)  Rear yard, seven and one-half feet. 
(6)  Distance between mobile homes. The distance between mobile homes or mobile home stands shall not be less than 20 feet. If structural additions to a mobile home are anticipated in the development program, design distances between mobile homes must be computed on the assumption that the addition is already a part of the mobile home or stand. Unenclosed exterior decks or patios with superstructures less than three feet in height are not considered structural additions to a mobile home for the purposes of these design distance requirements. 
g.  Parking requirements. Parking of vehicles on unpaved surfaces within the front yard of all residential districts shall be prohibited. Exception: Emergency vehicles responding to an emergency, special delivery or moving vehicles which require front door access on a one-time basis. Automobile parking spaces shall be provided in sufficient number to meet the needs of the occupants of the property and their guests without interference with normal movement of traffic. Such facilities shall be provided at the rate of a least 2.2 automobile spaces per mobile home lot. At least one paved off-street parking space shall be provided for each dwelling on the same lot therewith. The other space may be on the same lot or in other common parking facilities located within 150 feet from the mobile home lot for which it is intended. Trucks over 11/2 tons and recreational vehicles such as trailers, motor homes, camping trucks, boats or boat trailers, and similar equipment shall not be stored on individual lots or sites. The park or subdivision shall provide a paved, fenced and adequately sized and lighted area within the development for the parking and storage of such vehicles. 
h.  Common parking areas. 
(1)  Aisle width. Where common parking facilities are to be used, no parking aisle shall be less than 22 feet in width. 
(2)  Required green areas. Ten percent of all common parking areas on each tract shall be devoted to green areas consisting mostly of grass, evergreen trees or other approved vegetation which must be interspersed within the paved parking areas to channel traffic or divide parking areas. The green areas required by this section shall not constitute a portion of any green area or common open spaces otherwise required by this ordinance or any other ordinance or regulation of the town. The exact design and location of the green areas required by this section shall be indicated on a development or subdivision or other similar plan and be permanently maintained as such. 
i.  Management facilities. A permanent management office facility shall be established, limited to the following uses: 
(1)  A management area, with the requisite equipment; 
(2)  Storage space for utility connection supplies in quantity, mobile home accessories and maintenance materials and equipment; 
(3)  Laundry facilities equipped with washing machines and dryers; 
(4)  Community building facilities, including indoor recreation acres; 
(5)  Beauty shops and/or barbershops. 
j.  Buffer zone. 
(1)  There shall be a parcel of ground (a buffer zone) no less than 40 feet between each mobile home lot and the boundary line of the entire tract, including but not limited to the line abutting any public street. 
(2)  No mobile home or other building or structure shall be located within the buffer zone. 
(3)  Planting shall be required within the buffer zone as follows: 
(a)  A planting strip of evergreens or other suitable shrubbery and trees so arranged to provide a suitable screen. Continuous hedges shall not be used. Such planting strip shall be located within the 40-foot buffer zone and shall be a minimum of 15 feet in width and six feet in height. The remainder of the buffer zone shall be planted in grass and kept mowed. 
(b)  Recreation areas. Not less than ten percent of the total area of a mobile home park, exclusive of buffer areas and road rights-of-way, shall be devoted to accessible open space and recreational areas. At least 50 percent of the recreational open space land shall be of character suitable for active recreation, such as playgrounds or ballfields. 
k.  Recreation areas. Not less than ten percent of the total area of a mobile home park, exclusive of buffer areas and road rights-of-way, shall be devoted to accessible open space and recreational areas. At least 100 percent of the recreational open space land shall be of character suitable for active recreation, such as playgrounds or ballfields. 
(1)  The developer shall provide space and install facilities to meet the recreational needs of the projected residents, "such facilities to be approved by town upon installation;" and 
(2)  Demonstrate to the planning commission and town council the manner in which the above-stated performance standard would be met. 
(3)  If the development is completed in phases, the proportion of the total open space and recreation area for the entire tract required to be completed at any point during the phased development period shall be the same as the proportion of mobile home stands occupied to total mobile home stands permitted in the overall development plan. 
(4)  The open space and recreational areas shall be continuously under the complete control of the owner of the mobile home park and maintained by said owner. 
l.  Streets. All mobile home developments shall be provided with safe and convenient vehicular access from abutting public streets or roads to each mobile home lot. Such access shall be provided by streets, driveways or other means. Streets shall be offered for dedication to the town and accepted by ordinance or resolution by the town upon a favorable inspection by the town engineer. 
(1)  Entrance streets. Entrances to mobile home developments shall have direct connections to a public street and shall be designed to allow free movement of traffic on such adjacent public streets. 
(a)  No parking shall be permitted on the entrance for a distance of 100 feet from its point of beginning. 
(b)  Number of lanes, lane widths and turning lanes shall be adequate for the anticipated traffic generated by the development during peak hours. 
(c)  Entrances should be focused on community buildings, facilities or natural features rather than on residential living areas. 
(2)  Circulation. The street system shall provide convenient and safe access to individual lots and community facilities, and ensure pedestrian safety within living areas. 
(a)  A hierarchy of entrance, collector and local streets shall be provided, as specified below. 
(b)  Entrance points shall be well-defined, uncluttered, safe and attractive. 
(c)  The street system should take into account the topographic conditions of the site. 
(d)  Lot frontage on entrance or collector streets should be minimized. 
(e)  Street systems should be developed in consideration of reasonable movement and placement of mobile homes on individual sites. 
(f)  Closed ends of dead-end streets serving more than 12 homes or greater than 300 feet in length shall be provided with an adequate paved vehicular turning circle (cul-de-sac) at least 80 feet in diameter. Cul-de-sac streets shall serve no more than 30 homes or be no greater than 600 feet in length unless there are unusual site conditions or topography. Dead-end streets serving less than 20 mobile homes may utilize parking courts with adequate provision for directional change. 
(3)  Pavement and right-of-way widths. Pavements and right-of-way widths shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
Minimum Paved Width Minimum R.O.W. (a) Entrance streets and other collector streets with parking on both sides 36' 50' (b) Entrance streets and other collector streets with no parking 32' 44' (c) Minor street with parking on one side 32' 44' (d) Minor or cul-de-sac street with no parking 20' 30' (e) One-way minor street with no parking (generally acceptable only if less than 500' total length and serving less than 25 mobile home stands) 14' 20'  
(4)  Street design and construction standards. The street system shall meet all design standards of the Town of Smyrna land subdivision regulations, section II-A to G, with the exception that curbs may be the roll-type curbs. In the case of culs-de-sac and streetlights, the regulations in this article shall take precedence. 
(5)  Streetlights. Lighting shall be designed to produce a minimum of 0.1 footcandle at street level throughout the system. Potentially hazardous locations, such as major street intersections and steps or stepped ramps, shall be individually illuminated with a minimum of 0.3 footcandle. 
(6)  Utilities. All utilities, other than electric power, except for short lateral spurs for connection to individual mobile home units, shall be located within the street right-of-way unless directed otherwise by the town. The location of all electric meters shall be approved by the town. Each mobile home shall have an individual water meter. Said meter shall be in a frost-free area and shall be placed so as to allow easy access and inspection by the town. 
m.  Additional requirements. 
(1)  Mobile home stands. All mobile homes shall be supported by an adequate number of concrete piers (a minimum of 24 inches below finished grade) per the manufacturer's specifications for the support of the maximum anticipated loads. A vapor barrier, either concrete or 4 mil clear poly, shall be secured on the ground under the mobile home. 
(2)  Anchoring. Every mobile home placed within a mobile home development shall be anchored to the mobile home stand where it is located prior to the unit being occupied or used in any other way, or the expiration of seven days, whichever occurs first. The anchoring system shall be designed to resist a minimum wind velocity of 90 miles per hour. 
(3)  Stability. All mobile homes placed within a mobile home development shall, prior to occupancy or other use, be affixed to their mobile home stands in such a way so as to prevent tilting of the unit. No mobile home shall permanently rest on the wheels used to transport the unit. 
(4)  Skirts. All mobile homes placed within a mobile home development shall, prior to occupancy or other use, have skirts installed which are designed to complement the appearance of the mobile home and are coordinated throughout the park. 
(5)  Hitch. The hitch or tow bar attached to a mobile home for transport purposes shall be removed from the mobile home when it is placed on its mobile home stand. 
(6)  Floodplains. Regulations for mobile homes/manufactured homes in floodprone areas are in sections 5-10.e., 6-9 and 7-8 of this ordinance. 
n.  Site development plan approval. Site development plan approval for mobile home park district must be in accordance with section [sic] of the Town of Smyrna subdivision regulations and shall be required prior to the issuance of building permits for the erection of any buildings and mobile home stands and related accessory structures. After initial site development plan approval, reapproval shall not be required prior to the issuance of building permits or the alterations to individual mobile home stands or accessory buildings such as storage areas and patios, which in the judgment of the building inspector do not materially alter the site development plan approval by the town council and are requested as adjustments to the mobile home lot leased by an individual family and designate [designed] for the convenience and comfort of the individual lessee. 
(Ord. of 8-16-93(2), § 4; Ord. of 11-3-97(3), §§ 1-5; Ord. of 7-20-98(5), §§ 1-6; Ord. of 3-6-00(2), § 1; Ord. No. 003-07, § 1, 10-15-07) 
14.  Industrial/office/research park district. 
a.  [Permitted uses.] The following uses are permitted: No building or premises shall be used and no building or part of a building shall be erected, which is arranged, intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for any purpose, except the following, and in accordance with performance standards of section 6 and subject to site development plan approval as set forth in section VII of the Town of Smyrna subdivision ordinance: 
(1)  Manufacturing, assembling, converting, altering, finishing, cleaning, cooking, baking or any other type of manufacturing or industrial processing of any goods, materials, products, instruments, appliances and devices, provided that the fuel used shall be oil, gas or electricity; together with incidental clinics, cafeterias and recreational facilities for the exclusive use of employees of the concern engaged in such undertaking. 
(2)  Research, design, testing and development laboratories. 
(3)  Printing, publishing, binding, packaging, storage, warehousing, transshipment and distribution, and trucking terminals. 
(4)  Business, professional or administrative offices. 
(4.5)  National Guard Readiness Center. 
(5)  Electric substation, distribution and transmission facilities including all appurtenances. 
(5.5)  Solar-powered electric generation parks. 
(6)  Temporary structures or trailers used only in connection with and during construction (any or all of which are hereafter referred to as "construction trailers") provided that such construction trailers are: 
(a)  Located on the property upon which the related construction is taking place, or on a parcel immediately abutting the same, from and to which direct vehicular access is available; 
(b)  Are used only by architects, engineers, surveyors, construction managers, contractors or subcontractors (any or all of which are hereinafter referred to as "contractors') involved in the project; 
(c)  Are used only for temporary construction offices, storage of construction tools, equipment, materials, or similar items, and are at no time used for habitation or sleeping quarters; 
(d)  Are removed from the property upon the first of the following to occur: 
(1)  Upon the expiration of 21 days from the date of final completion of that contractor's work on the project (unless occupancy is assumed by another contractor actively involved in work on the project); 
(2)  Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy; or 
(3)  Upon the expiration of 12 months from the date that the construction trailer was first placed on the property; 
Provided that the town council may, for good cause shown, extend such time for up to an additional 12 months. 
(e)  Are properly anchored to the ground with mobile home anchors and straps or other acceptable anchoring system to safely sustain winds of 125 mph without moving off their anchored location; 
(f)  Are kept in proper repair and condition so as to be secure from the elements or intruders 
(g)  Are subject to such additional site conditions (e.g. placement, screening, lighting and light shielding, fencing, dust abatement, security, fire protection) as reasonably imposed by the Town Manager, subject to appeal to the Board of Adjustment. 
(7)  Temporary open storage (i.e. not within an enclosed structure) of construction materials (including dirt, stone, gravel, and the like), equipment, or vehicles, used only in connection with and during construction; temporary placement of construction-related facilities (e.g. "porta-potties", dumpsters, temporary fuel tanks, security lighting) used only in connection with and during construction; and temporary parking areas for vehicles operated by workers involved in the construction project, provided that such uses/activities are: 
(a)  Located on the property upon which the related construction is taking place, or on a parcel immediately abutting the same, from and to which direct vehicular access is available; 
(b)  Are used only by contractors or workers involved in the project; 
(c)  Removed from the property upon the first of the following to occur: 
(1)  Upon the expiration of 21 days from the date that such storage area, parking area, or facility is no longer reasonably required in the sound judgement of the town manager; 
(2)  Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy; or 
(3)  Upon the expiration of 12 months from the date that such storage area, parking area, or facility was first placed on the property; 
Provided that the town council may, for good cause shown, extend such time for up to an additional 12 months. 
(d)  Are maintained in good order, repair, and condition, and free of all rubbish and debris 
(e)  Are subject to such additional site conditions (e.g. placement, screening, lighting, light-shielding, fencing, dust abatement, security, fire protection) as reasonably imposed by the town manager, subject to appeal to the board of adjustment. 
(8)  Temporary facilities and equipment for the production or manufacture of concrete (a process involving the mixture of Portland cement, sand, gravel, and/or water) (such facilities and equipment hereinafter referred to as a "concrete batch plant") used only in connection with and during construction provided that such temporary concrete batch plant(s) is/are: 
(a)  Located on the property upon which the related construction is taking place; 
(b)  Designed, installed, and operated in full compliance with all governing laws and regulations of the State of Delaware; 
(c)  Sited on the property at a location approved by the town manager as reasonably selected to minimize, as much as reasonably possible, any potential adverse impacts on neighboring residential and/or commercial uses; 
(d)  Subject to such additional site conditions (e.g. screening, lighting, lightshielding, fencing, dust abatement, security, fire protection) as reasonably imposed by the town manager, subject to appeal to the board of adjustment; 
(e)  Removed from the property upon the first of the following to occur: 
(1)  The expiration of 21 days from the completion of all major concrete work involved in the construction; 
(2)  Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy; or 
(3)  Upon the expiration of 12 months from the date that such concrete batch plant was first placed on the property; 
Provided that the town council may, for good cause shown, extend such time for up to an additional 12 months. 
(9)  (Uses permitted as conditional uses.) The following uses are permitted only if approved as a conditional use pursuant to sections 6.15, 6.16 and 6.18 of this ordinance: 
(1)  Public, private or professional schools. 
(2)  Schools for vocational training. 
(3)  Bulk storage of flammable liquids/gases. 
(4)  Crematory, provided that: 
(a)  The building lot line upon which a crematory is established shall be located at least 100 feet from any residential zone. 
(b)  Receiving area(s) shall be completely screened from view from the street. 
(5)  Facilities owned by any municipality of the state or by any municipal electric company formed pursuant to 22 Del. C. Ch. 13 for the production of electricity having a combined net output of no more than 100 megawatts, provided that the fuel burned is natural gas or low-sulphur oil. 
(6)  Contractors equipment, supplies, sales and service establishments, including lumber yards provided that: 
a.  Storage and display. There shall be no outside storage or display of goods which does not meet the following conditions: 
i.  All outside storage of goods shall be within a completely enclosed and secure area appropriately screened from public view 
ii.  No more than 250 square feet or five percent of the lot area shall be used for the display of goods. 
iii.  All display or storage of materials or equipment must be confined to the buildable area of the parcel. 
iv.  No outside storage/display may occur in required setback, parking, or loading areas nor between the principal structure and drive or fire lanes without prior approval of the planning commission and the fire marshal. 
v.  All location of equipment and materials must be approved by the state fire marshal and the Citizens Hose Company. 
b.  Parking. Parking will be calculated as follows: 
i.  A ratio of four parking space for each 1,000 square feet of retail floor area. 
ii.  A ratio of one parking space for each 1,000 square feet of storage area or one space for each two employees on the largest working shift, whichever is greater. 
c.  All other bulk and use requirements of the IORP district shall apply. 
(7)  Hotel and conference center. 
(8)  Reserved. 
(9)  Registered compassion centers and registered safety compliance facilities, as defined in 16 Del. C. Chapter 49A "The Delaware Medical Marijuana Act," provided that: 
a.  All regulations found in 16 Del. C. Chapter 49A and Title 16 of the Delaware Administrative Code, as either may from time to time hereafter be amended or in accordance with any other existing or future corresponding provisions of law, are fully complied with, and all permits and approvals required by the same are obtained and remain in full force and effect. All terms used in this subsection shall have the same definitions as found in 16 Del. C. Chapter 49A and/or Title 16 of the Delaware Administrative Code. 
b.  Registered compassion centers and/or registered safety compliance facilities are not located within 1,000 feet, as measured from the property lines, of a preexisting public or private school. 
c.  No registered compassion center or registered safety compliance facility may operate between 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. 
d.  No registered compassion center or registered safety compliance facility may operate on Saturday or Sunday. 
e.  The disposal of plant material shall be done in a safe and secure manner which does not permit those without the proper permits to access or obtain any disposed plant material. Trash dumpsters shall be enclosed by a screened enclosure so as not to be accessible to the public. 
f.  No marijuana shall be smoked, ingested, or otherwise consumed on the premises of a registered compassion center or registered safety compliance facility. 
g.  Lighting shall be located on the premises to adequately illuminate registered compassion centers and registered safety compliance facilities, including the parking lot and landscaped areas. Lighting shall be hooded or oriented so as to deflect light away from adjacent properties. 
h.  No person under the age of 18 shall be permitted on the premises, including parking lots and landscaped areas, of the registered compassion center or registered safety compliance facility. 
i.  Notice shall be posted at all entrances to registered compassion centers and registered safety compliance facilities indicating that the use of marijuana on the premises, including parking lots and landscaped areas, is prohibited and indicating that individuals under the age of 18 are not permitted on the premises, including parking lots and landscaped areas. 
j.  No area or portion of a registered compassion center or registered safety compliance facility where marijuana is cultivated or stored shall be visible from the street or other public areas. 
(10)  Craft distillery and microbrewery establishments, as defined at 4 Del. C. Sections 512C and 512E, provided that: 
a.  All permits and approvals required by the Delaware Alcoholic Beverage Commissioner to operate a craft distillery or microbrewery are obtained and remain in full force and effect. 
b.  On-site consumption or tasting of alcohol shall be limited to those products brewed or distilled on the premises. All facilities licensed by the Delaware Alcoholic Beverage Control Commissioner for tastings pursuant to 4 Del. C. § 525 or for on-site consumption of alcohol in accordance with a license issue pursuant to 4 Del. C. §§ 512C or 512E shall only operate as follows: (a) between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday; (b) between the hours of 1:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Sundays; and (c) at such other times specifically authorized by the town council for special events (e.g. new product release or promotional events). 
c.  All aspects of the distilling or brewing process are completely confined within a building. 
d.  Such establishment offers the public, on a regular and continuing basis, various activities ancillary to its distilling and/or brewing process, which activities are limited to the following: tours of the premises, educational classes, demonstrations, tasting rooms, and retail sales areas limited to the sale of beer, mead, cider, or spirits brewed or distilled on the premises and other retail items identified in 4 Del. C. § 512E(c)(5). 
e.  All food sales shall be limited to prepackaged snack items or those food items prepared by a food establishment licensed by the State of Delaware. On the same premises as a craft distillery or microbrewery, a restaurant or café may be operated as an ancillary use. If at any time the craft distillery or microbrewery ceases production, the restaurant or café shall be required to close. The town may require the property owner to provide the town with a letter of no objection from the Delaware Alcoholic Beverage Control Commissioner regarding the operation of a restaurant or café on the premises of a craft distillery or microbrewery. 
f.  Outdoor seating and gathering areas shall be permitted subject to the following requirements: 
i.  Permanent and temporary outdoor seating and gathering areas shall be subject to building permit application and approval requirements. 
ii.  Outdoor seating and gathering areas and ancillary improvements shall include physical barriers from public rights-of-way and physical and visual barriers from adjoining properties. Physical barriers along public rights-of-way shall restrict access from the public rights-of-way to the outdoor seating and gathering areas and shall not exceed four feet in height. Barriers along adjoining property lines shall create a physical and visual barrier consisting of fencing six feet in height or vegetation at least six feet in height. The regulations herein shall be in addition to any regulations imposed by the State of Delaware. 
iii.  Maximum occupancy and points of ingress/egress shall be clearly marked. Occupancy of outdoor seating and gathering areas shall not exceed one person per 15 square feet of the outdoor seating and gathering areas identified in the building plans or any other occupancy limit established by the office of the state fire marshall. 
iv.  All structures and uses related to outdoor seating and gathering areas and facilities are subject to the Town of Smyrna Building Code and the Performance Standards of the Town of Smyrna Zoning Code Supplementary District Regulations. 
v.  The occupancy of outdoor seating and gathering areas shall be included when calculating the building requirements and minimum amenities and off-street parking required by the Town of Smyrna and State of Delaware. Outdoor seating and gathering areas shall meet all requirements of the Town of Smyrna and the State of Delaware. 
vi.  Tables, chairs, umbrellas, equipment, games, and any other items provided in connection with outdoor seating and gathering areas shall be maintained in good repair and shall be secured during non-business hours in a safe and orderly manner. 
vii.  Vending machines are prohibited and must be immediately removed upon notice from the Town of Smyrna. 
viii.  Any licensing required by the Delaware Alcoholic Beverage Control Commissioner for outdoor seating and gathering areas shall be obtained. 
(Ord. of 1-16-01(3), § 1; Ord. of 2-20-01(3), §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 12-2-02(3), §§ 1-4; Ord. No. 005-05, § 1, 3-21-05; Ord. No. 004-07, § 1, 7-2-07; Ord. No. 007-11, § 1, 10-3-11; Ord. No. 004-14, § 1, 4-7-14; Ord. No. 005-14, § 1, 6-2-14; Ord. No. 003-16, § 4, 3-21-16; Ord. No. 005-16, § 1, 6-20-16; Ord. No. 003-17, § 2, 3-6-17; Ord. No. 008-17, § 2, 11-20-17) 
b.  Prohibited uses. The following uses are specifically prohibited: 
(1)  Manufacturing uses involving production or stock piling (storage) of the following products: asphalt, "hot mix", bituminous concrete, cement, "ready-mix", concrete, charcoal, and fuel briquettes; provided however, anything in this paragraph to the contrary notwithstanding, temporary uses and activities authorized under subparagraph (8) of paragraph (a) of section 5-14 above shall be permitted in accordance with that subparagraph. Chemicals: aniline dyes, ammonia, carbide, caustic soda, cellulose, chlorine, carbon black and bone black, creosote, hydrogen and oxygen, industrial alcohol, nitrates (manufactured and natural of an explosive nature), potash, plastic materials and synthetic resins, pyroxylin, rayon yarn and hydrochloric, nitric, phosphoric, picric, and sulfuric acids: coal, coke, and tar products including gas manufacturing; explosives, fertilizers, glue, and size (animal). Linoleum and oilcloth; matches, paint, varnishes, and turpentine. Rubber (natural or synthetic); soaps, including fat rendering. 
(Ord. of 12-2-03(3), § 3) 
(2)  The following processes: nitrating of cotton or other materials; magnesium foundry; reduction, refining, smelting, and alloying of metal or metal ores; refining secondary aluminum, refining petroleum products, such as gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, lubricating oil; distillation of wood or bones; reduction including paper mill operations. 
(3)  Operations involving stockyards, slaughterhouses, and slag piles. 
(4)  Storage of explosives, bulk or wholesale storage of gasoline, propane gas, natural gas or other highly flammable or highly combustible gases or liquids above ground; provided however, that the storage of ammunition, gasoline, propane gas, paints, paint thinners, aerosols, and/or other highly flammable or highly combustible gases or liquids above ground shall not be considered "bulk or wholesale storage" whenever such products or commodities have been placed in the individual packages or containers in which they will ultimately be offered for retail sale to individual consumers. That such individually packaged or contained products or commodities are stored on pallets, flats, crates, boxes, or shelves in large quantities for shipment to retail stores shall not render them as "bulk or wholesale storage"; and further provided that the storage of ammunition under the circumstances described in the preceding proviso shall not be considered the "storage of explosives." 
(Ord. of 12-2-03(3), § 4) 
(5)  Dumps. 
(6)  Quarries, stone crushers, screening plants, and storage of quarry screenings, accessory to such uses. 
(7)  Junkyards, automobile dismantling plants or storage of used parts of automobiles or other machines or vehicles or of dismantled or junked automobiles. 
c.  Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size in the IORP district shall be 60,000 square feet. 
d.  Development standards. 
(1)  Minimum lot width: 100 feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(3)  Minimum front yard: 40 feet. 
(4)  Minimum side yards: 20 feet. 
(5)  Minimum rear yard: 20 feet. 
(6)  Minimum side or rear yard which adjoins a residential zone: 50 feet. 
(7)  Minimum number of off-street parking spaces: one per employee. 
(8)  Maximum permitted height: 45 feet. 
(9)  Maximum floor area ratio: 0.5. 
(10)  Maximum impervious coverage: 80%. 
e.  Planned industrial park development. Land in an industrial/office/research park district may be developed on a conventional, individual-lot basis or as planned industrial park development made up of multiple individual lots and containing an internal road system, when the following eligibility requirements are met: 
(1)  The development shall consist of a contiguous area of at least 25 acres in single ownership. 
(2)  The development will be served by public water supply and public sewerage which shall be in place at the time construction of the first stage of the industrial park begins. 
(3)  The frontage of the development shall be on an arterial road and be of sufficient width that safe and efficient access to the industrial park can be adequately spaced from points of access to adjacent properties. 
f.  Design standards for planned industrial park development. 
(1)  The design standards, including dimensional requirements and sign regulations for a planned industrial park, shall be the same as required for conventional individual-lot development for land in an industrial/office/research park district. 
(2)  In a planned industrial park, no structure may be located within 100 feet of the property line of the development tract. 
(3)  There shall be a landscaped buffer area of not less than ten feet wide along all tract property lines. Where adjacent to residential districts, the buffer shall include at installation, and approved by the Town of Smyrna, landscape screen not less than 61/2 feet high. All landscaping shall be properly maintained throughout the life of any use on the lot. 
(4)  Access to state highways and arterial roads shall be controlled by standards set forth by the Delaware department of transportation. The internal circulation system shall be separated from the external public street system, and pedestrian traffic shall be separated from vehicular traffic by means of appropriate site design and traffic control devices. 
(5)  No less than 35 percent of the site area shall consist of grass and landscaped areas. Parking areas shall be approved landscaping, including trees. 
(6)  Permanent facilities shall be provided by the developer to handle increased stormwater runoff which will result from increasing the impervious surface area of the site in accordance with the state Soils Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act. Such provision shall include contributions toward the cost of off-site facilities constructed by the town to the extent that the improvements are necessitated by the construction of the planned industrial park. 
g.  Site development plan approval. Site development plan approval in accordance with section VII of the Town of Smyrna subdivision ordinance shall be required for either conventional individual-lot development or planned industrial park development prior to the issuance of certificates of occupancy for any change of use. In the case of planned industrial parks, the requirement will apply to each individual lot within the development in addition to the requirement to obtain site development plan approval for the development as a whole. The application for site-development plan approval for a planned industrial park shall include, in addition to the usual requirements: 
(1)  Demonstration of the need for the planned industrial park based on the developer's market analysis and expression of tenant or buyer's interest; 
(2)  Nature of the applicant's interest in the development; 
(3)  The proposed uses, height and floor area of all buildings and other structures; 
(4)  Preliminary traffic study and proposed methods for alleviation of adverse impact on adjacent roads, subject to review by the Delaware department of transportation; 
(5)  Approximate size and capacity of all proposed parking areas; 
(6)  Proposed stormwater management plan; 
(7)  Plans of existing natural features showing topography, soils, drainage and vegetation; 
(8)  Site plans showing approximate locations of buildings, roads, parking, landscaping and utility and drainage easements; 
(9)  An outline or a draft text of any proposed protective covenants governing architectural controls, landscaping, lighting, etc., that the developer intends to impose on tenants or property owners within the planned industrial park. 
h.  Performance standards. All uses are subject to performance standards as set forth in section 6. 
(Ord. of 6-5-95(1), § 3; Ord. of 5-6-96(5), §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 6-17-96(3), § 1; Ord. of 7-20-98(6), §§ 1-3; Ord. of 3-15-99(2), § 1; Ord. of 8-16-99(2), §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 10-16-00(4), § 1; Ord. of 2-5-01, § 1; Ord. No. 003-07, § 1, 10-15-07; Ord. No. 002-12, § 1, 2-21-12) 
15.  Central residential overlay district (CRD). 
a.  Declaration of legislative intent. The intent of this ordinance is to preserve and enhance the unique character and value of the older and central portion of the Town of Smyrna in accordance with the recommendations of the town's April 18, 1988 comprehensive plan. These objectives will be achieved through the establishment of standards and criteria for development within the central residential overlay district. 
b.  Applicability of the central residential overlay district. 
(1)  Regulations pertaining to the central residential overlay district shall be applicable to all land areas designated within this district on the central residential overlay district map. The area to be contained within the central residential overlay district as shown on attachment "A." 
(2)  The regulations of the central residential overlay district shall be superimposed over the regulations of the underlying zoning district in which such parcels or lots are located. In the event of conflicting zoning regulations between the various zones in which a lot or parcel is located (e.g., the central residential overlay district regulations district), the regulations for the central residential overlay district shall be controlling. 
c.  Central residential overlay map. 
(1)  The town shall have prepared and keep current a map of the town showing lands consisting of and containing that real property listed in subsection b. of this section. The Town of Smyrna Central Residential Overlay Map shall be made available to the public and shall be utilized by the administrative official in determining whether a lot or parcel lies within the central residential overlay district as described in subparagraph b. of this subsection. 
(2)  The central residential overlay map is intended to illustrate the general location of the central residential overlay district. The lack of an indication on this map as to whether certain property is within or is outside the boundaries of this overlay district shall not be construed as a conclusive determination that said property is within or outside the boundaries of the central residential overlay district. Rather, the controlling factor in making such a determination shall be the description contained in subparagraph (b) of this subsection. 
d.  Uses permitted in CRD. 
(1)  Uses permitted by right. Only those uses permitted in the underlying zoning district; no additional uses shall be permitted as of right by virtue of being in the central residential overlay district. 
(2)  Uses permitted by special exception. If approved as a special exception by the board of adjustment pursuant to section 9(2) of this ordinance, the following uses shall be allowed within the central residential overlay district: 
(a)  A boutique provided that: (i) there exists on that property one off-street parking space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area; and (ii) the property remains primarily residential in nature if said property is primarily residential in nature at the time of application for the special exception permit. 
(b)  A small office provided that: (i) there exists on that property one off-street parking space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area; and, (ii) the property remains primarily residential in nature if said property is primarily residential in nature at the time of application for the special exception permit. 
(Ord. of 2-5-01, § 1; Ord. No. 003-07, § 1, 10-15-07) 
16.  Limited office district L-O. This district is intended to protect the residential character of the area as well as provide office space. 
A.  [Permitted uses.] The following uses are permitted: No building or premises shall be used and no building or part of a building shall be erected, which is arranged, intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for any purpose, except the following, and in accordance with performance standards of section 6 and subject to site development plan approval as set forth in section 7.5 of the Smyrna zoning ordinance: 
(1)  Government offices. 
(2)  Professional offices. 
(3)  Banks. 
(4)  Warehouses. 
(a)  Minimum lot size shall be five acres. 
(b)  In addition to the setbacks listed in D. [E.], Minimum requirements, there shall be an additional 30-foot planted buffer along all lot lines which are adjacent to a residential district. 
B.  [Uses permitted as special exceptions.] The following uses are permitted only if approved as a special exception pursuant to section 9(2) of this ordinance: 
(1)  Office supply business, restaurant, barbershop, beauty shop, travel agency, and professional service offices. 
(2)  Residential uses as permitted in the residential district R-3; height, and yard requirements shall be the same as in the R-3 district. 
(3)  Warehouses. 
(a)  In addition to the setbacks listed in D. [E.], Minimum requirements, there shall be an additional 30-foot planted buffer along all lot lines which are adjacent to a residential district. 
(4)  Day care centers and nursery schools. 
(Ord. of 3-19-01, § 1) 
[C.]  Parking. Shall be in accordance with section 6, Supplementary district regulations. 
[D.]  Minimum requirements. 
[(1)]  Minimum lot area, none. 
[(2)]  Minimum lot width, none. 
[(3)]  Minimum lot depth, none. 
[(4)]  Maximum height, three stories, 45 feet. 
[(5)]  Front yard setback, 30 feet. 
[(6)]  Side yard setback, none except when adjoining a residence district 20 feet shall be provided and shall be planted. 
[(7)]  Rear yard setback, none except when adjoining a residence district 20 feet shall be provided and shall be planted. 
[(8)]  Maximum lot coverage, 80%. 
(Ord. of 10-19-92; Ord. of 2-5-01, § 1; Ord. No. 003-07, § 1, 10-15-07) 
17.  Shopping center (SC). 
A.  [Declaration of legislative intent.] This district is intended to provide for and to encourage grouping of commercial establishments on any lot or parcel (or on any group of two or more substantially contiguous lots or parcels) containing a minimum total lot area of not less than five acres as shown and identified on a proposed site plan (hereinafter "shopping center"; "development"; or "shopping center development") for safer access, greater convenience, and improved aesthetics for shopping areas in the community. The frontage of the development shall be of sufficient width that safe and efficient access to the shopping center can be adequately spaced from accesses to adjacent public streets. 
(Ord. of 7-16-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
B.  [Permitted uses.] The following uses are permitted: No building or premises shall be used and no building or part of a building shall be erected which is arranged, intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for any purpose except the following and in accordance with performance standards of section 6 and subject to the site development plan approval as set forth in section 7.5 of the Smyrna zoning ordinance: 
(1)  Bowling alleys. 
(2)  Theaters and cinemas. 
(3)  Convenience stores and shops such as grocery stores and drugstores. 
(4)  Liquors stores for sale of liquor to be consumed off site. 
(5)  Jewelry stores. 
(6)  Department and variety stores. 
(7)  Business, professional and government offices; banks; restaurants with sale of liquor only associated with meals. 
(8)  Personal service shops such as barbershops, beauty parlors, tailors, laundry and dry cleaning. 
(9)  Day care center/nursery school (see section 6). 
(10)  Outlets and pickup stations for laundries and cleaning establishments. Except in self-service, automatic laundry establishments containing not more than 30 washing machines, washing of wearing apparel on the premises is prohibited. Except for incidental removal of spots with flammable solvent, cleaning of wearing apparel or household effects on the premises is permitted only if nonflammable solvent is used. 
(11)  Manufacturing, assembling, converting, altering, finishing, cleaning or any other processing of products where goods so produced or processed are to be sold at retail exclusively on the premises, provided that: 
(a)  An area fully concealed from any street and equal to not more than 20 percent of the area devoted to retail sales shall be so used; 
(b)  Except in connection with clothes pressing, electrical power not exceeding a total of five rated horsepower and steam pressure not in excess of 60 pounds of pressure per square inch shall be used exclusively; 
(c)  Not more than four employees are engaged in such production or processing. 
C.  [Uses permitted as special exceptions.] The following uses are permitted only if approved as a special exception pursuant to section 9(2) of this ordinance: 
(1)  Automobile repair and service, not to include junkyards. 
(2)  Billiard parlors. 
(3)  Temporary carnivals. 
(4)  Sale of alcoholic beverages as an accessory use with a bowling alley. 
(5)  Institutions of a religious, medical, charitable or philanthropic nature. 
(Ord. of 2-5-01, § 1; Ord. of 7-16-01(2), §§ 3-5; Ord. No. 003-09, § 1, 9-8-09) 
D.  [Uses permitted as a conditional use]. The following uses are permitted only if approved by the board of adjustment as a conditional use pursuant to section 6.14 of this ordinance: 
(1)  Large scale indoor entertainment uses provided that: 
(i)  All large scale indoor entertainment uses shall strictly comply with all provisions of 24 Del. C. Chapter 16, as now in effect or as hereafter amended. Failure to comply with this requirement shall void the conditional use approval. 
(ii)  No more than one large scale indoor entertainment use shall be permitted within any single shopping center zone or property. 
(iii)  No large scale indoor entertainment use shall be permitted in any building otherwise used in whole or part for residential purposes. 
(iv)  No large scale indoor entertainment use shall be permitted on any lot which is located within 1,000 feet of any other lot on which is located another large scale indoor entertainment use. This distance shall be measured from the nearest property line of such use to the nearest property line of the proposed large scale indoor entertainment use. 
(v)  No large scale indoor entertainment use shall be permitted on any lot which is located within 1,000 feet of any lot in any residential district. This distance shall be measured from the nearest property line of any residential district to the nearest property line of the proposed large scale indoor entertainment use. 
(vi)  No large scale indoor entertainment use shall be permitted on any lot which is located within 1,000 feet of any lot on which is located a church, community center, funeral home, school, day-care center, hospital, alcoholism center or drug treatment center, counseling or psychiatric treatment facility or public park. This distance shall be measured from the nearest property line of such above use to the nearest property line of the proposed large scale indoor entertainment use. 
(vi)  No large scale indoor entertainment use shall be permitted on any lot which is located within 1,000 feet of any school bus stop. This distance shall be measured from the nearest school bus stop to the nearest property line of the proposed large scale indoor entertainment use. 
(vii)  The proposed use shall meet all other requirements of the laws of the Town of Smyrna, including but not limited to district lot and bulk regulations, parking regulations and signage requirements. 
(viii)  Large scale indoor entertainment uses may operate only between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m. All staff must leave the building and the building must be securely locked not later than one hour after closing time. 
(ix)  All large scale indoor entertainment uses shall continuously carry liability insurance with minimum limits of $1,000,000.00 single limit. 
(x)  All large scale indoor entertainment uses shall provide on-site crowd control and security during all operating hours, ensure that designated parking is available and adequate for the expected activity, and operate such that no music or other noise is discernable at a distance of 1,000 feet in all directions from the use. 
(xi)  In the event the large scale indoor entertainment use conditional use applicant shall meet all of the above requirements, the conditional use approval shall be issued, subject to forfeiture for a violation of any of the requirements imposed by this ordinance. 
(xi)  Any conditional use issued or granted pursuant to this amendment to the zoning code shall be personal to the applicant only, and shall not be deemed to go with the land or lot upon which the use is located, and shall not be transferable. 
(xii)  All large scale indoor entertainment use conditional use approvals issued or granted pursuant to this Amendment to the zoning code shall be of a limited duration of three years, however, any such conditional use applicant may apply to the board of adjustment for renewal of said conditional use within six months of the expiration date of the current conditional use. 
(xiii)  All large scale indoor entertainment use conditional use holders shall permit the State of Delaware, through its designated agents, and the Town of Smyrna, through its designated agents, to enter upon the entirety of the premises upon which the use is conducted during its hours of operation, for the purpose of inspection and testing, and for the purpose of determining whether the terms of applicable state and town laws are being complied with. 
(xiv)  Nonconforming uses preexisting at the effective date of this ordinance shall be governed by section 4 of the zoning code. 
E.  Parking requirements. All shopping centers shall have not less than 3.5 parking spaces for every 1,000 square feet of gross leasable area, allowing a minimum area of 180 square feet per space plus adequate provision for ingress and egress. 
F.  Access and circulation. The internal circulation system shall be separated from the external public street system, and pedestrian traffic shall be separated from vehicular traffic by means of appropriate site design and traffic control devices. 
G.  Minimum dimensional requirements. 
(1)  Lot area; setback; lot coverage; height. 
(a)  Lot area. No lot or parcel, or group of two or more lots or parcels, shall be zoned SC ("shopping center") unless the total lot area of all substantially contiguous lots or parcels exceeds five acres. 
(b)  Minimum setback from all abutting street rights of way: 50 feet 
(c)  Minimum setback from all non-residential zones: 50 feet 
(d)  Minimum setback from all residential zones: 100 feet 
(e)  Maximum lot coverage: 80 percent of each separately owned or leased parcel or lot within the SC district; 80 percent cumulatively for all lots within the SC district. 
(f)  Maximum height limit for all structures: 45 feet 
H.  Buffering and landscaping. There shall be a landscaped buffer area of not less than ten feet wide along all lot lines of the external perimeter of the shopping center development. Where adjacent to residential zones, the buffers shall include an approved landscape screen not less than six feet high at installation. All landscaping shall be properly maintained throughout the life of any use on the property. Parking shall not be permitted in the buffer area. A buffer shall not be required along any property line abutting a street situated at the front of the parcel, and a corner parcel shall not be required to have buffering on either property line abutting the street. 
I.  Parking; street access. No lot or parcel, or group of two or more lots or parcels, shall be zoned SC ("shopping center") unless all separately occupied, leased, or owned parcels within the shopping center development have recorded cross easements guaranteeing access to shared parking facilities within that shopping center development and have permanent rights of ingress and egress to and from a public street for each and every parcel or lot within that shopping center development. 
(Ord. of 10-19-92; Ord. of 2-5-01, § 1; Ord. of 7-16-01(2), §§ 3-6; Ord. No. 003-07, § 1, 10-15-07; Ord. No. 001-08, §§ 3, 4, 1-7-08; Ord. No. 005-19, § 4, 4-15-19) 
18.  Source water protection area (SWPA). 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of the source water protection area regulations is to ensure the protection of the public drinking water supply from contamination. The Town of Smyrna herein adopts the overlay maps delineating, as source water protection areas: wellhead protection and excellent ground-water recharge potential areas. To ensure the protection of these drinking water supplies, this ordinance establishes a zoning overlay to be known as the source water protection overlay. The purpose of the source water protection overlay is to protect public health and safety by minimizing contamination of aquifers, preserving, and protecting existing and potential sources of drinking water supplies. It is the intent to accomplish this through both public education and public cooperation, as well as by creating appropriate land use regulations that may be imposed in addition to those currently imposed by existing zoning districts or other state and county regulations. 
The source water protection area maps are superimposed on current zoning districts. It shall apply to all new construction, redevelopment, or expansion of existing buildings and new or expanded uses. Applicable activities/uses allowed in a portion of one of the underlying zoning districts that fall within the source water protection overlay must additionally comply with the requirements of this district. Uses prohibited in the underlying zoning districts shall not be permitted in the source water protection overlay district. 
b.  Definitions. This section defines words, terms, and phrases found in this subsection. 
Aboveground storage tank (AST): An AST is a single containment vessel greater than 250 gallons as defined in the Delaware Regulations Governing Aboveground Storage Tanks, dated February 11, 2005. ASTs with a storage capacity greater than 12,499 gallons containing petroleum or hazardous substances, and ASTs with a storage capacity greater than 39,999 gallons containing diesel, heating fuel or kerosene are subject to the design, construction, operation, and maintenance requirements of the Delaware AST regulations. 
Applicant: A person, firm, or government agency that executes the necessary forms to obtain approval or a permit for any zoning, subdivision, land development, building, land disturbance, or other activity regulated. 
Aquifer: A geological formation, group of formations or part of a formation composed of rock, sand, or gravel capable of storing and yielding groundwater to wells. 
CERCLA hazardous substances: Those substances either specifically designated as hazardous under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA), otherwise known as the Superfund law, or those substances identified under other laws. In all, the Superfund law includes references to four other laws to designate more than 800 substances as hazardous, and identify many more as potentially hazardous due to their characteristics and the circumstances of their release. See: http://www.epa.gov/superfund/programs/er/hazsubs/cercsubs.htm 
Contamination: Any physical, chemical, biological, or radiological substance that enters the hydrological cycle through human action and may cause a deleterious effect on ground water resources; it shall include but is not limited to hazardous waste, limiting nutrients, and sanitary sewage. 
Delineation: The process of defining and/or mapping a boundary that approximates the areas that contribute water to a particular water source used as a public water supply. 
Environmental impact assessment report (EIAR): A report required by this ordinance that assesses the environmental characteristics of a source water protection area and determines what effects or impacts will result if the area is altered or disturbed by a proposed action that would increase impervious cover beyond the recommended 20 percent threshold. 
Excellent ground-water recharge potential area: Those areas with high percentages of sand and gravel that have "excellent" potential for recharge as determined through a Stack Unit Mapping Analysis delineated by the Delaware Geological Survey and presented in the Report of Investigations No. 66, Ground-water Recharge Potential Mapping in Kent and Sussex Counties, Delaware, Geological Survey, 2004. 
Geologist: An individual who is registered in the State of Delaware to practice the profession of geology. 
Good ground-water recharge potential area: Those areas with a significant percentage of sand and gravel that have a "good" potential for recharge as determined through a Stack Unit Mapping Analysis delineated by the Delaware Geological Survey and presented in the Report of Investigations No. 66, Ground-water Recharge Potential Mapping in Kent and Sussex Counties, Delaware, Geological Survey, 2004. 
Ground water: The water contained in interconnected pores located below the water table in an unconfined aquifer or located in a confined aquifer. 
Hazardous substance UST system: An underground storage tank system that contains a hazardous substance defined in 101(14) of the CERCLA (but not including any substance regulated as a hazardous waste under RCRA Subtitle C) or any mixture of such substances and petroleum, and which is not a petroleum UST system. 
Hazardous waste: A solid waste, or combination of solid wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating illness, or pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or dispose of, or otherwise managed. Without limitation, included within this definition are those hazardous wastes described in Sections 261.31, 261.32, and 261.33 of the Delaware Regulations Governing Hazardous Waste. 
Impervious cover: Surfaces providing negligible infiltration such as pavement, buildings, recreation facilities (e.g. tennis courts, swimming pools, etc.), and covered driveways. 
Nonconforming use: An existing use of a lot or a building that was legal at the time of its creation that is not permitted by this subsection in the district in which it is located. 
Natural condition: Open space that is essentially unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated, or reserved for public or private use. 
On-site wastewater treatment and disposal system: Conventional or alternative wastewater treatment and disposal systems installed or proposed to be installed on land of the owner or on other land to which the owner has the legal right to install the system. 
Passive recreation: Recreation that involves existing natural resources and has a minimal impact because they do not require the alteration of existing topography. Such passive recreation shall include but not be limited to non-motorized vehicles, hiking, bicycling, picnicking, and bird-watching. 
Public water supply well: Any well from which the water is used to serve a community water system by Section 22.146 (Public Water Systems) in the Delaware State Regulations Governing Public Drinking Water Systems. 
Public drinking water system: A community, non-community, or non-transient noncommunity water system, which provides piped water to the public for human consumption. The system must have at least 15 service connections or regularly serve at least 25 individuals daily for at least 60 days. 
Redevelopment: Any proposed expansion, addition, or major facade change to an existing building, structure, or parking facility. 
Runoff: That portion of precipitation or snow melt that has not evaporated or infiltrated into the soil, but flows on land or impervious surfaces. 
Sanitary landfill: A land site at which solid waste is deposited on or into the land as fill for the purpose of permanent disposal, except that it will not include any facility that has been approved for the disposal of hazardous waste under the Delaware Regulations Governing Hazardous Waste. 
Site plan approval: A process for the review and approval of a development plan prior to the issuance of a development. 
Source water: Any aquifer from which water is drawn either periodically or continuously by a public water system. 
Source water assessment area: The area delineated by DNREC source water assessment and protection program that contributes water to public water supply system. 
Source water assessment plan: The October 1999 U.S. EPA approved plan for evaluating the sources of public drinking water in Delaware for their vulnerability and susceptibility to contamination. 
Source water assessment report (SWAP): The identification and evaluation of the sources of water within the state used by public water systems in an effort to determine the vulnerability and susceptibility to contamination. 
Stormwater: The runoff of water from the surface of the land resulting from precipitation or snow or ice melts. 
Stormwater management: 
(a)  For water quantity control, a system of vegetative, structural, and other measures that may control the volume and rate of stormwater runoff which may be caused by land disturbing activities or activities upon the land; and 
(b)  For water quality control, a system of vegetative, structural, and other measures that control adverse effects on water quality that may be caused by land disturbing activities or activities upon the land. 
Source water protection area: Wellhead protection areas, good and excellent ground-water recharge potential areas. 
Vacant property: Lands or buildings that are not actively used for any purpose as designated in the underlying zoning district/overlay for one year. 
Underground storage tank (UST): An UST is one or a combination of tanks including underground pipes, the volume of which is ten percent or more belowground, as defined in the Delaware Regulations Governing Underground Storage Tank Systems, dated March 12, 1995. The following USTs are not subject to the design, construction, operation, and maintenance requirements of the Delaware UST Regulations: Residential heating fuel, agricultural, and residential motor fuel USTs less than 1,100 gallons and any UST less than 110 gallons. 
Wastewater: Water-carried waste from septic tanks, water closets, residences, building, industrial establishments, or other places, together with such groundwater infiltration, subsurface water, and mixtures of industrial wastes or other wastes as may be present. 
Water quality: Those characteristics of stormwater runoff from an impervious surface or a land disturbing activity that relate to the chemical, physical, biological, or radiological integrity of water. 
Water quantity: 
(a)  Those characteristics of stormwater runoff that relate to the volume of stormwater runoff to downstream-gradient areas resulting from land disturbing activities. 
(b)  Those characteristics of stormwater that relate to the volume of stormwater that infiltrates the land surface and enters the underlying aquifer. 
Wellhead: The upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves, and other attachments. 
Wellhead protection areas (WHPA): Surface and subsurface areas surrounding public water supply wells or well fields where the quantity or quality of ground water moving toward the wells or well fields may be adversely affected by land use activity. 
Wellhead protection plan: The March 1990 U.S. EPA approved plan for protecting the quality of drinking water derived from public water supply wells in Delaware. 
Wellhead protection (WHP) zone 1: The surface area extending to a minimum 150-foot radius around the wellhead. 
Wellhead protection (WHP) zone 2: The remaining surface area of the delineated wellhead protection area outside zone 1. 
Wellhead protection (WHP) zone 3: Where a WHP zone 2 area overlays an excellent ground-water recharge potential area. 
c.  Source water protection areas (SWPA). Source water protection areas are wellhead protection areas and excellent ground water recharge potential areas. All such areas are as depicted on source water protection area maps located in Town Hall as adopted as part of the update and implementation of the 2010 Comprehensive Land Use Plan. These maps are also available in GIS overlays from Delaware Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control, Division of Water Resources, Source Water Assessment and Protection Program. 
These areas shall be managed as required by the following sections to protect public drinking water resources from activities and substances that may harm water quality and subtract from overall water quantity. 
d.  Prohibited uses. Activities shall be subject to the land use restrictions contained within this ordinance that will protect the quality and quantity of ground water supplies. All uses not permitted in the underlying zone district are prohibited. 
Land Use Well Head Protection Area Ground-Water Recharge Potential Area ZONE 1 ZONE 2 ZONE 3* Excellent Aboveground Storage Tanks NO Agricultural uses that are intensive, such as feedlots or chicken houses NO NO NO NO Automobile body/repair shop NO Chemical processing/storage facility NO Dry cleaner NO NO NO Electrical/electronic manufacturing facility NO Equipment maintenance/fueling areas NO Fleet/trucking/bus terminal NO Gas station NO Hazardous Waste: Treatment, Storage, and Disposal Facilities NO NO NO NO # Dry wells/sumps NO # Injection wells NO Junk/scrap/salvage yard NO Land divisions resulting in high density (greater than 1 acre) NO Machine shop NO Manure storage NO Metal plating/finishing/fabricating facility NO Mines/gravel pit NO On-site wastewater treatment and disposal systems NO Sanitary and industrial landfills NO NO NO NO Underground storage tanks NO Vessel storage NO Wood preserving/treating facility NO  
Conditional: 
(*) Impervious cover: Wellhead protection areas within zone 3 shall be preserved in a natural condition. Impervious cover shall not be permitted. 
(#) Dry wells/sumps, except for single-family residences directing gutter downspouts to a drywell. 
(#) Injection wells other than those used in the remediation of ground water contamination that inject oxygen releasing compounds. 
e.  Wellhead protection areas (WHPA). The DNREC source water assessment and protection program delineates wellhead protection areas to ensure the integrity of public drinking water. Deep wells drilled into confined aquifers and low volume wells in unconfined aquifers have at minimum a one hundred and fifty foot radius wellhead protection area. The wellhead protection area surrounding public supply wells in unconfined aquifers that pump more than 50,000 gallons per day are delineated using a thematical model. This type of well draws large quantities of water and can have much larger wellhead protection areas. Zone classifications have been created to manage land use within the wellhead protection area. They are defined as follows: 
Wellhead protection (WHP) zone 1 is the surface area extending in a one-hundred and fifty (150) foot radius around the wellhead. 
Wellhead protection (WHP) zone 2 is the remaining surface area of the wellhead protection area outside of zone 1. Land use restrictions within zone 2 are required to insure adequate protection of public drinking water supply. 
Wellhead protection (WHP) zone 3 exist where a WHP zone 2 area overlays an excellent ground-water recharge potential area. Land use restrictions within zone 3 are required to insure adequate protection of public drinking water supply. 
(1)  WHP zone 1 requirements: 
(a)  Parcels of land within a WHP zone 1 wellhead protection area will be preserved in a natural condition with the exception of impervious surface limited to building and access associated with the well and distribution and treatment facilities and their maintenance. 
(b)  Aboveground storage tanks for materials used in the treatment facility operations are permitted. 
(c)  Underground storage tanks are prohibited. 
(d)  Stormwater runoff will be diverted away from the wellhead. 
(e)  Stormwater infiltration practices designed to handle runoff are prohibited. 
(f)  The minimum lot area for a proposed public water supply well and related facility drawing from a confined aquifer shall be one-half acres, and the minimum lot area for a public well drawing form an unconfined aquifer shall be one-half acres. 
(g)  On-site wastewater and disposal systems shall not be permitted. 
(2)  WHP zone 2 requirements: 
(a)  Impervious cover. 
(1)  Wellhead protection areas within zone 2 shall not exceed 20 percent impervious cover (based on the total site area). New development and redevelopment in this zone may exceed the 20 percent total site area impervious cover threshold within wellhead protection areas but shall be no more than 50 percent impervious cover (based on total site area), provided the applicant submits and receives approval on an environmental impact assessment report. 
(b)  Stormwater. 
(1)  Stormwater shall be treated by an approved stormwater quality management practice in accordance with current requirements of the Delaware Sediment and Stormwater Regulations dated October 11, 2006 or as later revised. 
(2)  For all new construction, all new and redeveloped structures used for residential or business purposes shall be required to discharge roof run off to grassed areas or use a best management practice for water quality treatment prior to directing flow over impervious surfaces. 
(c)  Underground storage tanks. 
(1)  Underground storage tanks with a capacity greater than 100 gallons containing petroleum, and residential and agricultural USTs with a capacity greater than 1,100 gallons containing heating fuel or motor fuel shall be permitted in a designated wellhead area if the USTs are designed, constructed, maintained, and operated in accordance with the Delaware Regulations Governing Underground Storage Tank Systems, dated March 12, 1995 or as later revised. (NOTE: regulated USTs must be constructed with secondary containment of the tanks and piping and must have continuous monitoring for releases.) 
(2)  Underground storage tanks with a capacity greater than 110 gallons containing a hazardous substance as defined in CERCLA 101 (14) shall be permitted in a designated wellhead area if the USTs are designed, constructed, maintained and operated in accordance with the Delaware Regulations Governing Underground Storage Tank Systems, March 12, 1995 or as later revised. (NOTE: Regulated USTs must be constructed with secondary containment of the tanks and piping and must have continuous monitoring for releases.) 
(d)  Aboveground storage tanks. 
(1)  Aboveground storage tanks with a capacity greater than 12,499 gallons containing petroleum or hazardous substances, and ASTs with a storage capacity greater than 39,999 gallons containing diesel, heating fuel or kerosene shall be permitted in a delineated wellhead area if the ASTs are designed, constructed, operated and maintained with the applicable requirements in the Delaware Regulations Governing Aboveground Storage Tanks, dated February 11, 2005 or as later revised. 
(e)  Wastewater treatment and disposal systems. 
(1)  On-site wastewater treatment and disposal systems shall not be permitted. 
(3)  WHP zone 3 requirements: 
(a)  Impervious cover: Wellhead protection areas within zone 3 shall be preserved in a natural condition. Impervious cover shall not be permitted. 
(1)  Permitted uses: passive recreation. 
f.  Excellent ground-water recharge potential areas. 
(1)  Impervious cover. Wellhead protection areas within zone 2 shall not exceed 20 percent impervious cover (based on the total site area). New development and redevelopment in this zone may exceed the 20 percent total site area impervious cover threshold within wellhead protection areas but shall be no more than 50 percent impervious cover (based on total site area), provided the applicant submits and receives approval on an environmental impact assessment report. 
(2)  Stormwater. Stormwater shall be treated by an approved stormwater quality management practice in accordance with current requirements of the Delaware Sediment and Stormwater Regulations dated October 11, 2006 or as later revised. 
(3)  New construction. All structures shall be required to discharge roof drains onto permeable surfaces. 
(4)  Underground storage tanks with a capacity greater than 110 gallons containing petroleum, and residential and agricultural USTs with a capacity greater than 1,100 gallons containing heating fuel or motor fuel shall be permitted in a excellent ground-water recharge potential area if the USTs are designed, constructed, maintained and operated in accordance with the Delaware Regulations Governing Underground Storage Tank Systems, dated March 12, 1995 or as later revised. (NOTE: Regulated USTs must be constructed with secondary containment of the tanks and piping and must have continuous monitoring for releases.) 
(5)  Underground storage tanks with a capacity greater than 110 gallons containing a hazardous substance as defined in CERCLA § 101(14) shall be permitted in a delineated excellent ground-water recharge potential area if the USTs are designed, constructed, maintained and operated in accordance with the Delaware Regulations Governing Underground Storage Tank Systems, dated March 12, 1995 or as later revised. (NOTE: Regulated USTs must be constructed with secondary containment of the tanks and piping and must have continuous monitoring for releases.) 
(6)  Aboveground storage tanks with a capacity greater than 12,499 gallons containing petroleum or hazardous substances, and ASTs with a storage capacity greater than 39,999 gallons containing diesel, heating fuel or kerosene shall be permitted in a delineated excellent ground-water recharge potential area if the ASTs are designed, constructed, operated and maintained with the applicable requirements in of the Delaware Regulations Governing Aboveground Storage Tanks, dated February 11, 2005 or as later revised. 
g.  Boundary determination for SWPA. 
(1)  All subdivision and land development plans depicting development or land disturbance submitted for town review shall be evaluated for the existence of source water protection areas. All such areas are as depicted on source water protection area maps located in Town Hall as adopted as part of the update and implementation of the most current update to the 2010 Comprehensive Land Use Plan. These maps are also available in GIS overlays. Maps/overlays are available from Delaware Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control (DNREC), Division of Water Resources, Source Water Assessment and Protection Program (SWAPP). If a SWPA exists within a proposed development site, the boundaries of these areas shall be delineated on the plan by the applicant's State of Delaware Professional Engineer or Professional Geologist. 
(2)  DNREC SWAPP may, when based on sound science and information, revise and update the overlay maps of wellhead protection areas. 
(3)  The Delaware Geological Survey (DGS) may, when based on sound science and information, revise and update the overlay maps of excellent ground-water recharge potential areas. 
(4)  When there appears to be a conflict between the mapped boundary and actual site conditions, the applicant may engage the services of professional geologist to prepare a report intended to determine more accurately the precise boundary of the source water protection area. The report shall include: 
(a)  A detailed topographic layout of the subdivision and/or area to be developed and prepared by a state-registered professional land surveyor or professional geologist. 
(b)  Evidence derived from a site-specific investigation that may include aquifer testing, test borings, test pits, observation wells, groundwater elevations, and topography surveys as appropriate for the type of source water protection area that clearly demonstrate that the area in question does not meet the definition of a source water protection area as defined. 
(c)  Any challenges to the delineations of the excellent ground-water recharge potential areas must follow the methods used in the Delaware Geological Survey publication: Report of Investigations No. 66, Ground-Water Recharge Potential Mapping in Kent and Sussex Counties, Delaware. The challenge must be approved by DGS and DNREC SWAPP. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other section pertaining to source water protection areas, if an owner initiates a precise boundary delineation pursuant to this section, any and all time review limitations shall be stayed pending the submission of the complete report contemplated by this section. Following submission of the report and all supporting documents, the department shall have 90 days to finally approve or disapprove the exploratory sketch plan submission or such further time as deemed necessary by the department, but not to exceed an additional 90 days. 
h.  Redevelopment. 
(1)  Impervious cover restrictions. 
(a)  Site modifications that require site plan approval must create a 15 percent reduction in the total amount of impervious cover on the site when compared to pre-redevelopment conditions. 
(b)  If the 15 percent reduction in total existing impervious area would require a site to go below the 20 percent maximum impervious cover provisions of source water protection areas, then the maximum impervious surface cover for the site is 20 percent (based on existing total site area). 
(c)  Sites that do not meet the 20 percent impervious cover threshold must employ rooftop infiltration practices. Rooftop runoff shall be treated for quality using best management practices (BMP) in accordance with the current requirements of the Delaware Sediment and Stormwater Regulations dated October 11, 2006 or as later revised. The minimum acceptable BMP for redevelopment is to provide sheet flow for rooftop runoff over a grassed area (minimum) 20 feet in length prior to flow over impervious areas. The slope of the grassed area for rooftop infiltration practices shall be five percent or less. An environmental impact assessment report will be required (see subsection j.). If the grading of the property does not allow for overland flow by gravity or best management practice (prior to directing flow to impervious surfaces), a variance for a reduction in roof area requiring quality treatment can be requested. 
(2)  Abandoned or vacant property. 
(a)  Impervious cover restrictions A, B, and C of this subsection h. ("redevelopment") do not apply to vacant or abandoned property. These properties must comply with the source water protection area zoning district regulations. 
i.  Uniform standards and criteria. 
(1)  Hazardous waste treatment, storage, and disposal facilities, as defined in 7 DE Admin. Code 1302, Delaware Regulations Governing Hazardous Waste, shall not be permitted in source water protection areas. 
(2)  Sanitary and industrial landfills, as defined in 7 DE Admin. Code 1301, Delaware Regulations Governing Solid Waste, shall not be permitted in source water protection areas. 
j.  Environmental impact assessment report. New development in the Town of Smyrna may exceed the 20 percent total site impervious cover (prior to re-subdivision) threshold within excellent ground water recharge potential areas and WHP zone 2, but be no more than 50 percent impervious (total site area prior to re-subdivision) provided the applicant submits an approved environmental assessment report including a climatic water budget and systems to augment recharge that assure water quality as well as water quantity. The environmental impact assessment must document that post development recharge will be no less than predevelopment recharge when computed on an annual basis. 
Commonly, the applicant offsets the loss of recharge due to impervious cover by constructing recharge basins that convey pretreated rooftop runoff for infiltration to ground water. Refer to Supplement 1 entitled Ground-Water Recharge Design Methodology, dated May 2005 or later as revised for the details of how to design recharge facilities in Delaware source water protection areas. 
(1)  Delaware Registered Professional Engineer and/or Professional Geologist prepares an environmental assessment report, usually containing the following elements of planning, design, construction, and maintenance of ground-water recharge facilities: 
(a)  Site description of proposed development within the water resource protection area. 
(b)  Climatic water balance comparing predevelopment and post-development recharge potential. 
(c)  Subsurface exploration including borings, test pits, and infiltration tests. 
(d)  Design of ground-water recharge facilities that assure water quality as well as quantity. 
(e)  Construction and maintenance considerations. 
(f)  Recommended ground-water monitoring plan. 
(g)  Water management agreement between the applicant and the town, city, or county providing for monitoring and maintenance of the recharge system. The applicant will abide by the ground water management agreement as written in DNREC Supplement 1 to the Source Water Protection Guidance Manual for the Local Governments of Delaware: Ground-Water Recharge Design Methodology, dated May 2005 or as later revised. 
k.  Nonconforming uses. Nonconforming uses may continue in wellhead protection areas and excellent ground-water recharge potential areas in the form in which they existed at the time of the adoption of this ordinance, unless they pose a direct hazard to the town's water supply, as determined by the water and waste water department upon advice from the Delaware Division of Public Health, or are causing some foreign substances (oil, salts, chemicals, or other substances) to be introduced into the town's water supply, as determined by the water and waste water department upon advice from DNREC's division of air and waste management and/or division of water resources. In the latter case, the building department shall issue a mandatory cease and desist to stop the offending activity within the area. Nonconforming existing underground or above-ground storage of oil, petroleum, and petroleum products shall require secondary containment pursuant to the State of Delaware regulations governing underground storage tanks or for above-ground storage of petroleum products secondary containment facilities capable of capturing the material stored on the site, for existing facilities that are proposed either to be upgraded or replaced. 
l.  Replacement and new wells. 
(1)  The replacement of any existing public water supply well that was not required to meet this wellhead protection requirement at the date of its original installation and that has failed shall be exempt from meeting this wellhead protection requirement. 
(2)  All public water supply wells within a housing development, subdivision, or strip development recorded on or after the implementation of the Delaware Regulations Governing the Construction and Use of Wells, dated April 6, 1997 or as later revised, shall be located at least 150 feet within the subdivision's or development's outermost property lines. 
(Ord. of 7-20-98(7), § 1; Ord. of 4-15-02(2), § 2; Ord. No. 001-12, § 1, 2-21-12) 
19.  Historic preservation overlay district (HPOD). 
a.  Declaration of legislative intent. The historic preservation overlay district (HPOD) is created for the purpose of safeguarding the heritage of the town, and preserving and protecting structures and areas having historic, architectural, cultural, or aesthetic value. The purpose of the historic preservation overlay district is to preserve and enhance the heritage and historic character of downtown Smyrna as an area of special importance and interest. It is particularly intended that the regulations prevent any change of conditions that would be deemed to lead to a deterioration or degradation of the present visual or architectural qualities, or the integrity of the district. Any provisions adopted hereunder shall be consistent with the policies, purposes, principles and provisions of the Historic Preservation Ordinance (chapter 19). 
b.  Designation of areas within the historic preservation overlay district (HPOD). The historic preservation overlay district (HPOD) shall include the following: 
(1)  The lots fronting on the following streets (whether occupied by a structure or not): 
(a)  East Commerce Street from Main Street to East Street; 
(b)  West Commerce Street from Main Street to Union Street; 
(c)  Market Street Plaza from Commerce Street to South Street; 
(d)  North Main Street from Commerce Street to North Street; 
(e)  South Main Street from Commerce Street to South Street, including, but not limited to, the property known as the Smyrna Opera House & Library. 
(2)  The corner lots located at the intersection of the following streets (whether occupied by a structure or not): 
(a)  East Street and East Commerce Street; 
(b)  Union Street and West Commerce Street; 
(c)  Delaware Street and West Commerce Street; 
(d)  North Street and North Main Street; 
(e)  Mount Vernon Street and North Main Street; 
(f)  Market Street Plaza and West Commerce Street; and 
(g)  South Street and South Main Street. 
(3)  The Historic Preservation Overlay District is expanded to include the following areas by recommendation of the Historic District Review Board (Meeting of 9/23/04): 
(a)  West Mount Vernon Street from North Main Street to North High Street; 
(b)  West Frazier Street from South Main Street to South School Lane; 
(c)  Union Street from West Mount Vernon Street to West Frazier Street; 
(d)  School Lane from West Mount Vernon to West Frazier Street; 
(e)  West South Street from South Main Street to South School Lane; 
(f)  Delaware Street from West North Street to West Frazier Street; 
(g)  North Market Street from West Mount Vernon to West Commerce Street; 
(h)  Houses fronting Cummins Street from South High Street to Market Street Plaza; 
(i)  Houses fronting Mulberry Street from South School Lane to South High Street; 
(j)  West Commerce Street from Union Street to South High Street, and also including the property located at the juncture of West Commerce Street, Smyrna-Clayton Boulevard and South High Street; 
(k)  South Main Street from South Street to Lake Drive, also including those properties located on the east side of South Main Street from Lake Drive to Mill Street; 
(l)  The property located at 215 North Main Street. 
This extension of the district shall also include the corner lots located at the intersections of the following streets (whether occupied by a structure or not) 
(a)  North High Street and West Mount Vernon Street; 
(b)  South High Street and West Commerce Street; 
(c)  North School Lane and West Mount Vernon Street; 
(d)  North School Lane and Peterson Street; 
(e)  South School Lane and West South Street; 
(f)  South School Lane and West Frazier Street; 
(g)  South School Lane and Anthony Lane; 
(h)  South School Lane and West Cummins Street; 
(i)  South School Lane and Mulberry Street; 
(j)  School Lane and West Commerce Street; 
(k)  North Delaware Street and West North Street; 
(l)  North Delaware Street and West Mount Vernon Street; 
(m)  South Delaware Street and West Cummins Street; 
(n)  South Delaware Street and West South Street; 
(o)  South Delaware Street and West Frazier Street; 
(p)  Delaware Street and West Commerce Street; 
(q)  North Union Street and West Mount Vernon Street; 
(r)  Union Street and West Commerce Street; 
(s)  South Union Street and West Cummins Street; 
(t)  South Union Street and West South Street; 
(u)  South Union Street and Anthony Lane; 
(v)  South Union Street and West Frazier Street; 
(w)  North New Street and West Mount Vernon; 
(x)  North New Street and Smyrna-Clayton Boulevard; 
c.  Historic review and certificate. All areas of land and structures located within the historic preservation overlay district shall be subject to review by the historic preservation overlay district review board for any actions requiring review under the Historic Preservation Ordinance (chapter 19 of the Town Code). A historic review certificate shall be issued only after consideration by the board as provided in the Historic Preservation Ordinance. 
d.  Design guidelines. All areas of land and structures located within the historic preservation overlay district shall be subject to the design guidelines adopted by town council under the Historic Preservation Ordinance (chapter 19 of the Town Code). 
e.  The use and bulk requirements shall be those of the underlying zone designation as set forth in the zoning ordinance, except for those aspects of the structure's height, bulk, setback, and appearance as are set forth in the historic review certification criteria of the Historic Preservation Ordinance (chapter 19). 
f.  Photographs of the historic preservation overlay district. A set of digital color photographs meeting the standards of the Federal Emergency Management Agency's Guidelines for photographing historic properties shall be created and maintained by the town for the building and inspections office and the historic preservation overlay district review board for the purpose of documenting physical appearance of structures within the historic preservation overlay district (and shall be updated as changes to the structures occur). The photographs shall be considered definitive as to the structure's physical appearance at the time such photograph was take. The photographs shall be used by the historic preservation overlay district review board to consider any actions requiring review under the Historic Preservation Ordinance (chapter 19 of the Town Code). 
(Ord. No. 015-03, § 2, 6-16-03; Ord. No. 008-05, §§ 1-11, 8-15-05) 
20.  Limited Manufacturing (LM). 
a.  Intent . The Limited Manufacturing (LM) zoning district is composed of land and structures occupied by or suitable for light manufacturing, wholesaling and similar uses. Limited Manufacturing (LM) zoning district regulations are designed to permit a range of light manufacturing activities with few off-site impacts from noise, smoke, waste, odor and other features adversely effecting, adjacent residential, commercial and institutional/recreational districts. 
b.  Permitted uses . The following uses are permitted when the manufacturing, compounding or processing is conducted entirely within a completely enclosed structure. Where adjacent to residential districts, the buffer shall include, at installation and approved by the town of Smyrna, landscape screening not less than six feet high. All landscaping shall be properly maintained throughout the life of any use on the lot. That portion of the land with open storage facilities for materials or equipment used in the manufacturing, compounding, final product storage or processing shall be totally obscured by a six-foot wall and/or barrier of suitable material on those sides abutting any residential, commercial or institutional/recreational district or right-of-way. 
(1)  Industrial establishments: 
(a)  The assembly, fabrication, manufacture, packaging or treatment of such products including but not limited to the following previously prepared materials: bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, felt fiber, glass, horn, leather, paper, plastics, clay, precious or semi-precious metals or stones, sheet metal, shell, textiles, wax, wire, wood (excluding saw and planing mills) and yarns. 
(b)  Metal working machines and equipment; manufacturing of tools, dies, jigs, and fixtures; musical instruments, electrical instruments, appliances; electronics; ceramics. 
(2)  Retail sale of products manufactured or processed on the premises 
(3)  Public utility uses: All uses related to the provision of public utilities including, but not limited to, renewable energy facilities (such as solar power), electric transformer stations and substations, electric transmission towers, municipal buildings and uses, gas regulators, municipal utility pumping stations, and other uses related to sewer and water utility services. 
(4)  Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to the above. 
c.  Performance standards. All uses permitted within this section shall comply with the limitations and requirements including but not limited to the performance standards in section 6(9) of this chapter, including expansion of existing industrial uses. Particularly sensitive to: 
(1)  Vibration. Any industrial operation or activity which shall cause, at any time and at any point along the nearest adjacent lot line, excessive noise or earth borne vibration is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and shall be prohibited in a Limited Manufacturing (LM) zoning district. 
(2)  Air pollution. The emission from any operation of smoke, particulate matter, toxic matter, or noxious and odorous matter, in such manner or quantity as to be detrimental to, or endanger the public health, safety, welfare, or reasonable comfort, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and shall be prohibited in a Limited Manufacturing (LM) zoning district. 
(3)  Humidity, glare, or heat. Any operation producing excessive humidity in the form of steam or moist air, or producing intense glare or heat, shall be performed within an enclosure and in such a manner as not to be perceptible at or beyond any lot line. Exposed sources of light shall be shielded so as not to create a nuisance across lot lines. 
d.  Prohibited uses. All prohibited uses expressly identified in section 5(14), Industrial/Office/Research Park (IORP) zoning district shall apply to the Limited Manufacturing (LM) zoning district. Including but not limited to: 
(1)  Storage of explosives, bulk or wholesale storage of gasoline, propane gas, natural gas or other highly flammable or highly combustible gases or liquids above ground; provided however, that the storage of ammunition, gasoline, propane gas, paints, paint thinners, aerosols, and/or other highly flammable or highly combustible gases or liquids above ground shall not be considered "bulk or wholesale storage" whenever such products or commodities have been placed in the individual packages or containers in which they will ultimately be offered for retail sale to individual consumers. That such individually packaged or contained products or commodities are stored on pallets, flats, crates, boxes, or shelves in large quantities for shipment to retail stores shall not render them as "bulk or wholesale storage"; and further provided that the storage of ammunition under the circumstances described in the preceding proviso shall not be considered the "storage of explosives." 
e.  Parking . Parking shall be in accordance with section 6, Supplementary district regulations. 
f.  Minimum requirements 
(1)  Minimum lot area: none. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: none. 
(3)  Minimum lot depth: none. 
(4)  Maximum height, three stories: 45 ft. 
(5)  Minimum front yard setback: 30 ft. 
(6)  Minimum side yard setback: 30 ft. 
(7)  Minimum rear yard setback: 30 ft. 
(8)  Maximum lot coverage: 80%. 
(9)  There shall be a landscaped buffer area of not less than ten feet wide, included in the setback requirement, along all tract property lines. 
g.  Special exceptions . The following uses are permitted only if approved as a special exception pursuant to section 9(2) of this chapter: 
1)  Retail and service establishments 
2)  Other uses determined by the Board of Adjustment to be compatible with the principal permitted uses and special land uses of the district and would not violate the intent of the Limited Manufacturing (LM) zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 010-12, § 1, 8-6-12) 
21.  North Corridor (NC). 
a.  The North Corridor (NC) Zoning District applies to those parcels fronting U.S. Route 13, from Duck Creek, north to the S.R. 1 interchange. The purpose of the NC Zoning District is to provide regulations and graphic design standards to enhance both the function and appearance of the U.S. Route 13 Corridor through the implementation of strategies outlined in both the Smyrna U.S. 13 Corridor Plan and Design Book and the Town of Smyrna Comprehensive Plan. 
b.  Purpose. 
(1)  Construct buildings close to the roadway that possess an architectural form and theme reflective of the character of Smyrna's Historic District. 
(2)  Provide retail and service establishments that supply commodities or perform services that will meet the needs of adjacent residential neighborhoods as well as the needs of travelers and visitors. 
(3)  Allow greater diversity of housing choices by permitting residential uses located directly above 1st floor retail or office space. 
(4)  Convenient and controlled vehicular access onto U.S. Route 13, reducing the need for additional curb cuts and promoting interconnectivity between lots. 
(5)  Off-street parking located at the rear or side of the buildings, reducing the visual impact of parking lots. 
(6)  Improved pedestrian and multi-modal connectivity and safety by requiring sidewalks, crosswalks, streetlights, walking and bike trails, and bike racks. 
(7)  Promote "complete" site design through various design standards, such as landscaping, decorative elements, interconnectivity and open space requirements. 
(8)  Reduce the visual clutter of various types of existing signage along the corridor and implement consistent standards regulating the height, placement, lighting and materials. 
Illustrations included in this document are examples in which the intent of the required standards can be achieved. 
c.  Applicability. From and after the date of the final adoption of this North Corridor (NC) Zoning District, any building, structure, premise, parcel, sign or other facility located wholly or partially in the North Corridor District (1) being in any manner erected, constructed, built, converted, created, reconstructed, modified, moved, altered, added to or converted; or for any change in the exterior architectural appearance of any structure by additions, alteration, or replacement; and (2) which requires a building permit, demolition permit, or zoning variance, shall conform with the provisions pertaining to this district. 
Anything to the contrary notwithstanding, the provisions contained herein shall not apply to (1) minor projects that do not require a building permit, demolition permit, or zoning variance or (2) ordinary maintenance and repairs to prevent or correct wear or damage to a structure, or any part thereof, including deterioration of exterior walls or siding materials, columns, posts or other vertical supports; roofs, cornices soffits or fascia; exterior chimneys; exterior plaster, mortar, or ornamental trim; doors, windows, shutters, porches, railings or any other exterior features; or exterior paint due to extended lack of maintenance and upkeep. 
(1)  Existing conditions. U.S. Route 13, from Duck Creek north to the S.R. 1 interchange currently functions as a high-speed arterial with a posted speed limit of 55 mph. This area is lined with a mixture of suburban-style commercial buildings, mid-20th century-style houses and vacant land, with the majority of buildings set back from the road. Sidewalks, bike paths and pedestrian scale improvements are not present; signage with no consistent design style appears cluttered and various curb cuts for property access gives the impression that the corridor is built for thru-traffic only and lacks character and purpose. 

Illustration 1 - Existing, undesired conditions
(2)  Required conditions. The corridor will continue to serve as a regional transportation route however it is envisioned to become a more attractive urban-style boulevard. Two to three story buildings will be encouraged, with all buildings required to be constructed close to a ten-foot wide paved sidewalk adjacent to a five-foot wide grass buffer located in the existing right-of-way on both sides of the roadway. Streetlights will be installed at regular intervals to create a more pedestrian-friendly environment. 

Illustration 2 - Preferred Conditions
d.  Building setback standards. 
(1)  Intent. Buildings constructed along U.S. Route 13 are to be located within close proximity to the sidewalk and in general alignment with adjacent buildings in a manner that is reflective of Smyrna's historic downtown to ensure the visibility of retail businesses and encourage active, lively uses. Buildings, along with trees and landscaping shall be predominant rather than parking lots. 

Illustration 3 - Front Yard Setback Example
(2)  Minimum lot requirements. 
(a)  Minimum lot width: 50 feet. 
(b)  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(3)  Setback standards. 
(a)  Front yard setback: 
i.  Minimum: 5 ft. 
ii.  Maximum: 15 ft. 
(b)  Rear yard setback: 
i.  Minimum: 0 feet. 
ii.  Maximum: n/a. 
(c)  Side yard setback: 
i.  Minimum: Zero feet, except a minimum of 20 feet shall be provided to include a ten-foot planted buffer when adjacent to an existing residential district. 
ii.  Maximum: n/a. 
e.  Building height/massing standards. 
(1)  Intent. To reduce the apparent bulk of buildings and to maintain pedestrian scale, a sense of "base" and "top" shall be provided. Building facades shall have a distinct "base" using articulation and materials that reinforce the character of the streetscape by encouraging the greatest amount of visual interest along the ground floor, street facing facades of buildings. The roofline or "top" of a building shall emphasize a distinct profile or outline. The "middle" of the building is encouraged to be made distinct by a change in material or colors, windows, balconies, setbacks and signage. 
The construction of two to three story buildings is strongly encouraged to emulate the traditional character of Smyrna's historic downtown, however single story buildings are permitted, provided that they have a minimum height of 16 feet with a decorative parapet, gabled, hipped, mansard, or gambrel roof. (See definitions) 

(2)  Building height standards. Building height shall be defined as the vertical distance from the finished grade to the top of the highest roof beams on a flat roof, to the deck level on a mansard roof, and the average distance between the eaves and the ridge level for gable, hipped and gambrel roofs. 
(a)  Height: 
i.  Minimum: 16 ft. 
ii.  Maximum: 45 ft. 

Illustration 4 - Building Height - Flat Roof

Illustration 5 - Building Height - Gable, Hipped, or Gambrel Roof

Illustration 6 - Building Height - Mansard Roof
(3)  Facade "base" standards. Ground floor facades facing U.S. Route 13 shall incorporate at least five of the following elements: (Note: Ground floor facades facing a public street other than U.S. Route 13 or common amenity space shall incorporate at least three of the following elements:) 
(a)  Translucent windows. 
(b)  Arcades. 
(c)  Porches, porticos. 
(d)  Marquees. 
(e)  Decorative belt courses. 
(f)  Canopies, awnings. 
(g)  Decorative window lintels. 
(h)  Decorative lighting. 
(i)  Pilasters or columns. 
(j)  Any standard not listed, as approved by the planning and zoning commission. 

(4)  Roofline "top" guidelines. At least two of the following elements are required: 
(a)  Varying roof styles and heights. 
(b)  Dormers. 
(c)  Chimneys. 
(d)  Cupolas. 
(e)  Belfries. 
(f)  Balustrades. 
(g)  Decorative cornices. 
(h)  Any standard not listed, as approved by the planning and zoning commission. 


f.  Facade articulation standards. 
(1)  Intent. Buildings shall provide diversity and variation in facade type, width, and roof heights and types to reinforce the character of the streetscape by encouraging visual interest along the ground level of buildings. 

Illustration 7 - Facade Articulation Standards Example
(2)  Buildings with a length of at least 60 feet or greater shall provide at least three of the following architectural facade treatments: 
(a)  Variation in building materials. 
(b)  Porches, portico, canopies, etc. 
(c)  Translucent windows. 
(d)  Wall offsets. 
(e)  Varying roof types or heights. 
(f)  An architectural element not listed above, as approved by the planning and zoning commission. 

g.  Window standards. 
(1)  Intent. Windows shall be provided on the ground floor facade of all buildings facing U.S. Route 13 
(2)  Standards: 
i.  Forty percent of all ground floor building facades fronting U.S. Route 13 shall consist of windows. 
ii.  Sills of the windows shall be no higher than three feet above grade. 
iii.  Windows on front facades facing a street shall be transparent or translucent glass. 
iv.  The use of opaque glass, such as tinted, smoked, or mirrored glass is not permitted. 

Illustration 8 - Window Standards Example
h.  Streetscape design standards. 
(1)  Intent. Streetscape design shall ensure that the street edge provides a transition between the roadway, the sidewalk and buildings. Buildings, along with sidewalks, trees, and landscaping shall be predominant rather than parking lots. Street wall/buffer standards shall screen parking lots, driveways and service station fuel pumps. Site furnishings such as benches and trash receptacles compliment the streetscape and create a more pedestrian-friendly atmosphere. 
(2)  Sidewalk standards. 
(a)  Sidewalks along U.S. Route 13 shall be concrete and ten feet in width and separated from the shoulder of U.S. Route 13 by a grass area five feet in width. 
(b)  Sidewalks along all other roadways shall be five feet in width and separated from the shoulder of the roadway by a grass area four feet in width. 

Illustration 9 - Sidewalk - U.S. Route 13

Illustration 10 - Sidewalks - All other Roadways
(3)  Street wall/buffer standards. 
(a)  Street wall/buffers consisting of brick piers with black iron, steel, aluminum (or an approved alternative material) fencing and street trees shall be installed and maintained along those lots where a parking lot, driveway, or service station fuel pumps are located adjacent to U.S. Route 13. 
(b)  Street wall/buffers shall not be located in the public right-of-way and shall be located beyond the clear zone as defined by DelDOT. 
(c)  Street wall/buffers shall be permanently maintained by the property owner and/or development association. 
(d)  Brick piers shall be a minimum of two feet square with a maximum height of three and one-half to four feet tall, and constructed at intervals of 20 feet. 

Illustration 11 - Brick Pier Example
(e)  Low-lying shrubs are encouraged to be planted every five feet and shall not exceed a maximum height of three feet at maturity. 
(f)  One street tree shall be planted every 20 linear feet of frontage along U.S. Route 13. Street trees at the time of planting, shall be no less than 3 - 3 1/2 inches in caliper. The following characteristics shall be considered in selecting new trees to plant: size, tolerance to pollution, ability to withstand drought and soil conditions, as well as landscape and ornamental value. It is recommended that individuals contact the Delaware Forest Service for assistance in identifying which tree species would be most appropriate for the area. 
(g)  Black iron, steel, aluminum (or approved alternative) fencing shall be constructed to a maximum height of two and one-half to three feet. 
(h)  Fence openings shall have a spacing between four and eight inches. 

Illustration 12 - Example of Street Wall/Buffer Fence Detail

i.  Building placement (drive-thru buildings and service stations). 
(1)  Intent-Drive-thru buildings. Drive-thru buildings contain a drive-thru as apart of the commercial or service establishment. Typical uses include banks, pharmacies and fast-food establishments. 
(2)  Standards-Drive-thru buildings. 
(a)  Drive-thru buildings shall not locate drive-thru windows on those facades directly facing onto U.S. Route 13. 
(b)  Drive-thru buildings located on a corner lot shall provide a separate entrance along U.S. Route 13 and exit along the side street. 

Illustration 13 - Drive-thru Building, Corner Lot - Example
(c)  Drive-thru buildings shall provide a separate entrance and exit with one-way automobile circulation. 

Illustration 14 - Drive-thru Building, Entrance - Example
(3)  Intent-Service stations. Service stations feature one or more islands of fuel pumps and a convenience store. The intent of this section is to minimize the road frontage visibility of fuel pumps and maximize the visibility of the convenience store. 
(4)  Standards-Service stations. 
(a)  Fuel pumps are encouraged to be located to the rear of the convenience store, shielded from frontage along U.S. Route 13. 

Illustration 15 - Fuel Pumps, Rear Location - Example
(b)  Fuel pumps are permitted to be located to the side of the convenience store. Fuel pumps are prohibited to be located in the front yard of those parcels fronting U.S. Route 13. 

Illustration 16 - Fuel Pumps, Side Yard Location - Example
(c)  Fuel pump canopies shall be constructed utilizing the same building materials used in the construction of the associated convenience store. 

(d)  Fuel pumps shall not be located closer than 25 feet to the public right-of-way along U.S. Route 13. 
j.  Parking lot design. 
(1)  Intent. A streetscape formed by a continuous row of buildings located close to the sidewalk with minimal parking lot frontage along U.S. Route 13 will create an attractive urban-boulevard, reflective of the town's historic downtown. Parking lots shall be landscaped to provide an aesthetically pleasing streetscape. 

(2)  Standards. 
(a)  Parking lots shall be designed to the maximum extent feasible to connect parking lots on adjacent lots by providing cross-property easements to share driveways and reduce the need for additional curb cuts. Future connections for parking lot interconnectivity between adjacent lots shall be required. 
(b)  In the case of a driveway located between parking rows adjacent to buildings, a minimum of 18 feet shall be provided for emergency vehicle access. 
(c)  Access to fire connections shall be provided for. 
(d)  Parking lot speed bumps shall be prohibited. 
(e)  Bicycle racks shall be provided and shall be located in well-lit parking areas, safe from vehicular traffic. A minimum of one rack with five bicycle parking spaces shall be provided in all parking lots containing 20 or more parking spaces. Bicycle racks shall be black in color. 
(f)  Parking is not permitted in the front of a building and shall be located to the side or behind a building rather than in front to reduce the visual impact of the parking lot. 

(g)  Commercial buildings are encouraged to share a common entrance from the roadway to their respective parking lots that are located to the rear of each building. 

(h)  A parallel parking row shall be limited to ten consecutive parking spaces interrupted by a 15-foot by nine foot landscaped island to separate adjacent parking spaces. Two trees and two low-lying shrubs shall be required for each landscaped island. 

(i)  All parking rows shall be terminated with an 36-foot by nine-foot landscaped, terminal island to protect parked vehicles and confine moving traffic to aisles and driveways. Two trees and two low-lying shrubs shall be required per terminal island. 

(j)  Parking lot trees shall be pruned so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection. Trees shall also be pruned to a minimum height of 14 feet to provide a clear space above surface sidewalks, parking lots and driveways to allow for unobstructed passage of pedestrians and vehicles. 
(k)  Parking lot lights shall be installed and maintained in all off-street parking lots to ensure pedestrian lighting and safety. 
(l)  All parking lot lights shall have an acorn shaped luminaire on a fluted, round pole shaft with a round cast base in a black, powder coated finish. 
(m)  A maximum of five consecutive parallel parking rows are permitted prior to a full row length landscaped area a minimum of six feet wide. 

(n)  A minimum six-foot wide, full row length landscaped buffer shall be installed between all parking rows abutting adjacent properties and secondary access roads. One tree shall be planted for every 25 linear feet of frontage and two groundcover plants are required per tree. An exception may be made if the parking lot is designed to create interconnectivity through shared parking for adjacent lots. Landscaping shall be permanently maintained by the property owner and/or development association. 

(o)  Parking lots with more than five parallel parking rows shall construct sidewalks and crosswalks through a landscaped islands bisecting the parking lot at or near the midpoint to increase pedestrian safety and connectivity. Developers may also submit an alternative design subject to Planning and Zoning Commission approval. 
(3)  Modified parking lot design. To minimize the overall footprint of parking lots, the construction of modified parking design is encouraged. 
Property owners, land developers, or land users of any parcels in the NC (North Corridor) zoning district may install off-street spaces with modified designs with planning commission approval. 
Modified parking designs include, but are not limited to: 
(a)  Double stacking residential parking spaces for each residential unit. 

(b)  Placing parking spaces on the ground story of a building, but behind retail uses or a facade wall. 

k.  Common amenity space. 
(1)  Intent. Commercial development in the North Corridor zoning district shall provide a variety of useable common amenity space that is integrated into the overall site design and plan that enhances the character of U.S. Route 13. 
(2)  Standards. 
(a)  Each development site having 20,000 square feet or more shall provide at least one common amenity space area with a size of at least two and one-half percent of its parcel size. This requirement may be reduced in the instance where a development locates its parking area completely behind the primary building(s) and locates the building(s) as close as is practical to the public sidewalk and street frontage. Any reduction in the amount or waiver of common amenity space must be approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
(b)  Development sites with less than 20,000 square feet, though not required, are encouraged to provide common amenity space. 
(c)  Common amenity space shall be visible and accessible from a public sidewalk and should be contiguous and concentrated in one or two locations rather than scattered in small, unusable spaces. It is preferred that such space be in close proximity to the main entrance of a building to take advantage of pedestrian traffic, but other locations may be considered if they are visible and accessible. 
(d)  Common amenity space shall be provided in one or more of the following forms: 
i.  Pocket parks. Pocket parks shall be incorporated into the site design at building entrances, street corners, and/or sidewalks and shall range in size from 500 square feet to 1,000 square feet. 
To enhance the attractiveness of the overall site design and to encourage pedestrian connectivity between buildings, parking lots and adjacent commercial uses; pocket parks shall feature at least two of the following elements: 
(a)  Sitting areas (such as benches, low seating walls). 
(b)  Covered structure (such as a gazebo, pergola or pavilion). 
(c)  Decorative paving (such as colored/stained concrete, brick or other type of paver). 
(d)  Decorative planters. 
(e)  Decorative flowering or evergreen shrubs. 
(f)  Decorative, pedestrian-scale lighting. 
(g)  Public art (such as monuments, sculptures, statuary). 
(h)  Decorative water feature (such as a fountain, rain garden). 


ii.  Public squares or plazas. Public squares and plazas shall be incorporated into the overall site design so that primary building facade(s) front the respective public square or plaza and shall range in size from 1,000 square feet to 5,000 square feet. 
To enhance the attractiveness of the overall site design and to encourage pedestrian connectivity between buildings, parking lots and adjacent commercial uses; public squares or plazas shall feature at least three of the following elements: 
(a)  Sitting areas (such as benches, low seating walls). 
(b)  Covered structure (such as a gazebo, pergola or pavilion). 
(c)  Decorative paving (such as colored/stained concrete, brick or other type of paver). 
(d)  Decorative planters. 
(e)  Decorative flowering or evergreen shrubs. 
(f)  Decorative, pedestrian-scale lighting. 
(g)  Public art (such as monuments, sculptures, statuary). 
(h)  Decorative water feature (such as a fountain, rain garden). 


iii.  Town center greens. Town center greens shall be generally rectangular in shape and shall be allowed on parcels greater than five acres in size; they shall be not be permitted to be located directly on the corner of intersections along U.S. Route 13. 
Town center greens shall range in size from 5,500 square feet to 45,000 square feet. Any design in excess of 45,000 square feet may be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission if it meets the intent of these standards. 
Primary building facades shall directly front onto the town center green on at least three sides and are strongly encouraged to front the green on all four sides. 
To enhance the attractiveness of the overall site design and to encourage pedestrian connectivity between buildings, parking lots and adjacent commercial uses; town center greens shall feature at least four of the following elements: 
(a)  Sitting areas (such as benches, low seating walls). 
(b)  Covered structure (such as a gazebo, pergola or pavilion). 
(c)  Decorative paving (such as colored/stained concrete, brick or other type of paver). 
(d)  Decorative planters. 
(e)  Decorative flowering or evergreen shrubs. 
(f)  Decorative, pedestrian-scale lighting. 
(g)  Public art (such as monuments, sculptures, statuary). 
(h)  Decorative water feature (such as a fountain, rain garden). 

iv.  Developer's option. Other forms of common amenity space which meets the standards of this section may be permitted if approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
v.  Site furniture standards. 
(a)  Benches. Benches installed in common amenity spaces shall be black, six feet wide, Keystone Ridge Lamplighter (Model L16) as pictured below, or an approved alternative. 

(b)  Trash receptacles. Trash receptacles installed in common amenity spaces shall be black, 32 gallon Keystone Ridge Midtown (Model MT3-32) as pictured below, or an approved alternative. 

l.  Sign design. 
(1)  Intent. Signage along the U.S. Route 13 Corridor shall be designed and installed in such a way that it becomes a cohesive part of site design, improving the overall visual quality and pedestrian scale of U.S. Route 13. All signage shall be consistent with and complimentary to the architectural design and materials of the building it serves. 
(2)  Monument sign standards. 
(a)  Monument signs shall mean any stand-alone, self-supporting structure affixed to a base that is equal to or wider than the sign itself. 
(b)  The height of the monument sign is to be measured from the finished grade to the top of the sign and shall be no taller than eight feet in height. 
(c)  The minimum monument sign setback is five feet from the existing right-of-way. 
(d)  Monument signs shall be designed and constructed utilizing the same building materials used in the construction of the associated building and/or site. 
(e)  Monument signs may be externally or internally illuminated; external illumination must be directed downward. 

(3)  Wall signs. 
(a)  Wall signs shall not project above the roof, parapet or exterior wall. 
(b)  Wall signs shall be appropriately scaled to the building. Signable area for wall signs shall be limited to 25 percent of the building or occupant's facade. *An increase may be granted for those wall signs that are painted onto the building and is incorporated as a major element of the facade. 
(c)  In multi-occupant, multi-story buildings, walls signs for first floor occupants shall not extend above the window sill of the second floor windows. 
(d)  Wall signs are encouraged to compliment the architectural style of the building. 

(4)  Window signs. 
(a)  Window signs shall not cover more than 50 percent of the window area on the frontage of a building or tenant space and shall be comprised of individual letters, logos or design elements that are not encompassed by a solid opaque background so as not to obscure the view through the window. 
(b)  Window signs are permitted on the first floor of a building only. 

(5)  Projecting signs. 
(a)  Projecting signs shall project no more than 18 inches from a building face or wall. 
(b)  Projecting signs shall not exceed 30 square feet for all faces. 
(c)  Projecting signs shall have a minimum of eight feet of clearance from the ground, a maximum height of 25 feet, measured to the top of the sign and shall not extend beyond the roofline. 
(d)  Projecting signs shall not extend more than five feet from the building face nor extend beyond the curb line of any street or parking area. 
(e)  Multi-tenant buildings are permitted one projecting sign per tenant. Only those tenants with ground floor occupancy are permitted to install a projecting sign. 
(f)  Projecting signs are encouraged to compliment the architectural style of the building. 

(6)  Awning signs. 
(a)  Awning signs are permitted on the ground floor of a building only. 
(b)  Awning signs shall have a minimum of eight feet clearance from the ground. 

(7)  Prohibited signs. 
(a)  Temporary or portable signs with changeable letter and numbers and portable trailer signs with changeable text panels. 
(b)  Digital electronic signs of any kind, except for time, temperature and fuel price signs. 
(c)  Flashing signs. 
(d)  Animated or revolving signs. 
(e)  Signs that produce noise, sounds, emit smoke or vapor, particles or odors. 
(f)  Signs with intermittent lights resembling or seeming to resemble the flashing lights customarily associated with emergency responder vehicles. 
(g)  Vehicles and trailers used primarily as a sign. 
(h)  Neon signs. 
m.  Definitions. 
Arcade: A continuous covered passageway parallel to and open to a street, open space or building and accessible and open to the public. 
Awning: A roof-like cover that is temporary in nature and projects from the wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window from the elements; also called a canopy 
Balustrade: An entire railing system, including a top rail and its balusters and often a bottom rail, found along the edge of a porch, balcony or roof deck. 
Belfry: That part of a steeple or top of a tower in which one or more bells are hung; also called a bell tower. 
Belt course: A horizontal band of masonry extending horizontally across the facade of a building and occasionally encircling the entire perimeter; usually projects beyond the face of the building. 
Cornice: Any molded horizontal projection that crowns or finishes the top of a wall where it meets the edge of a roof; the exterior trim of a structure where the wall and roof meet. 
Cupola: A small roof tower, usually rising from the roof ridge. 
Decorative window lintel: A decorative horizontal beam that spans the top of a window opening. 
Dormer: A projection from a sloping roof that contains a window. 
Marquee: A permanent canopy, usually of metal and glass, that projects over an entrance to a building, especially that of a theater or hotel; may include lettering or signs indicating current attractions. 
Parapet: A decorative low wall or similar barrier at the edge of a roof, balcony, or terrace. 
Pergola: A structure of open construction supported by regularly spaced posts or columns, often latticed and covered by climbing plants such as vines or roses. 
Pilaster: A column partially embedded in a wall and usually non-structural. 
Porch: A roofed, open area, attached to or part of a building, and with direct access to or from it, providing shelter to a building entrance. 
Portico: A covered entrance having a roof supported by a series of columns or piers, commonly at the front entrance to a building. 
Turret: A cylindrical tower that is usually corbelled from one corner of the structure. 
Wall offset: A projection or recess of at least two feet in depth. Wall offsets that are incorporated onto buildings having a length of at least 60 feet or greater shall be integrated at a minimum of every 40 feet, each offset shall have a minimum length of 20 feet. 

n.  Land use. Land uses permitted in the North Corridor (NC) Zoning District shall be those uses authorized for the North Corridor (NC) Zoning District as outlined in the land use table located in subsection N of section 22 ("South Corridor (SCZ)") of this Appendix A ("Zoning"). 
(Ord. No. 008-14, § 1, 5-7-14; Ord. No. 021-14, § 4, 1-20-15; Ord. No. 003-16, § 5, 3-21-16) 
22.  South Corridor (SCZ). 
A.  The South Corridor (SCZ) zoning district applies to those parcels fronting U.S. Route 13, from Lake Como, south to the intersection of Carter Road. The purpose of the SCZ zoning district is to provide regulations and graphic design standards to enhance both the function and appearance of the U.S. Route 13 Corridor through the implementation of strategies outlined in both the Smyrna U.S. 13 Corridor Plan and Design Book and the Town of Smyrna Comprehensive Plan. 
B.  Purpose: 
(1)  Construct buildings close to the roadway that possess an architectural form and theme reflective of the character of Smyrna's historic district. 
(2)  Provide retail and service establishments that supply commodities or perform services that will meet the needs of adjacent residential neighborhoods as well as the needs of travelers and visitors. 
(3)  Allow greater diversity of housing choices by permitting residential uses located directly above 1st floor retail or office space. 
(4)  Convenient and controlled vehicular access onto U.S. Route 13, reducing the need for additional curb cuts and promoting interconnectivity between lots. 
(5)  Off-street parking located at the rear or side of the buildings, reducing the visual impact of parking lots. 
(6)  Improved pedestrian and multi-modal connectivity and safety by requiring sidewalks, crosswalks, streetlights, walking and bike trails, and bike racks. 
(7)  Promote "complete" site design through various design standards, such as landscaping, decorative elements, interconnectivity and open space requirements. 
(8)  Reduce the visual clutter of various types of existing signage along the corridor and implement consistent standards regulating the height, placement, lighting and materials. 
Illustrations included in this document are examples in which the intent of the required standards can be achieved. 
C.  Applicability. From and after the date of the final adoption of this South Corridor (SCZ) zoning district, any building, structure, premise, parcel, sign or other facility located wholly or partially in the South Corridor District (1) being in any manner erected, constructed, built, converted, created, reconstructed, modified, moved, altered, added to or converted; or for any change in the exterior architectural appearance of any structure by additions, alteration, or replacement; and (2) which requires a building permit, demolition permit, or zoning variance, shall conform with the provisions pertaining to this district. 
Anything to the contrary notwithstanding, the provisions contained herein shall not apply to (1) minor projects that do not require a building permit, demolition permit, or zoning variance or (2) ordinary maintenance and repairs to prevent or correct wear or damage to a structure, or any part thereof, including deterioration of exterior walls or siding materials, columns, posts or other vertical supports; roofs, cornices soffits or fascia; exterior chimneys; exterior plaster, mortar, or ornamental trim; doors, windows, shutters, porches, railings or any other exterior features; or exterior paint due to extended lack of maintenance and upkeep. 
(1)  Existing conditions. U.S. Route 13, from Lake Como south to the intersection of Carter Road currently functions as a transitional area between the urban section and the high-speed roadway south of Carter Road. With the exception of a 35 MPH transition zone on southbound U.S. 13 just south of Lake Como, the speed limit is posted as 45 MPH. There are numerous commercial and residential entrances onto the road. This area is lined with a mixture of suburban-style shopping centers and commercial development, low-density residential uses abutting the corridor and vacant land, with the majority of buildings set back from the road. Sidewalks are present throughout the more commercialized areas near the Route 1 interchange, however pedestrian scale improvements are not present; signage with no consistent design style appears cluttered and various curb cuts for property access gives the impression that the corridor is built for thru-traffic only and lacks character and purpose. 

(2)  Required conditions. The corridor will continue to serve as a regional transportation route however it is envisioned to become a more attractive urban-style boulevard. Two to three story buildings will be encouraged, with all buildings required to be constructed close to a ten-foot wide paved sidewalk adjacent to a five-foot wide grass buffer located in the existing right-of-way on both sides of the roadway. Streetlights will be installed at regular intervals to create a more pedestrian-friendly environment. 

D.  Building setback standards. 
(1)  Intent. Buildings constructed along U.S. Route 13 are to be located within close proximity to the sidewalk and in general alignment with adjacent buildings in a manner that is reflective of Smyrna's historic downtown to ensure the visibility of retail businesses and encourage active, lively uses. Buildings, along with trees and landscaping shall be predominant rather than parking lots. 

(2)  Minimum lot requirements. 
(a)  Minimum lot width: 50 feet. 
(b)  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(3)  Setback standards. 
(a)  Front yard setback: 
i.  Minimum: 5 feet. 
ii.  Maximum: 15 feet. 
(b)  Rear yard setback: 
i.  Minimum: 0 feet. 
ii.  Maximum: n/a 
(c)  Side yard setback: 
i.  Minimum: Zero feet, except a minimum of 20 feet shall be provided to include a ten-foot planted buffer when adjacent to an existing residential district. 
ii.  Maximum: n/a 
E.  Building height/massing standards. 
(1)  Intent. To reduce the apparent bulk of buildings and to maintain pedestrian scale, a sense of "base" and "top" shall be provided. Building facades shall have a distinct "base" using articulation and materials that reinforce the character of the streetscape by encouraging the greatest amount of visual interest along the ground floor, street facing facades of buildings. The roofline or "top" of a building shall emphasize a distinct profile or outline. The "middle" of the building is encouraged to be made distinct by a change in material or colors, windows, balconies, setbacks and signage. 
The construction of two (2) to three (3) story buildings is strongly encouraged to emulate the traditional character of Smyrna's historic downtown, however single story buildings are permitted, provided that they have a minimum height of sixteen (16) feet with a decorative parapet, gabled, hipped, mansard, or gambrel roof. (See definitions) 

(2)  Building height standards. Building height shall be defined as the vertical distance from the finished grade to the top of the highest roof beams on a flat roof, to the deck level on a mansard roof, and the average distance between the eaves and the ridge level for gable, hipped and gambrel roofs. 
(a)  Height: 
i.  Minimum: 16 feet. 
ii.  Maximum: 45 feet. 



(3)  Façade "base" standards. Ground floor façades facing U.S. Route 13 shall incorporate at least five of the following elements: (Note: Ground floor façades facing a public street other than U.S. Route 13 or common amenity space shall incorporate at least three (3) of the following elements:) 
(a)  Translucent windows. 
(b)  Arcades 
(c)  Porches, porticos. 
(d)  Marquees. 
(e)  Decorative belt courses. 
(f)  Canopies, awnings. 
(g)  Decorative window lintels. 
(h)  Decorative lighting. 
(i)  Pilasters or columns. 
(j)  Any standard not listed, as approved by the planning and zoning commission. 

(4)  Roofline "top" guidelines. At least two of the following elements are required: 
(a)  Varying roof styles and heights. 
(b)  Dormers. 
(c)  Chimneys. 
(d)  Cupolas. 
(e)  Belfries. 
(f)  Balustrades. 
(g)  Decorative cornices. 
(h)  Any standard not listed, as approved by the planning and zoning commission. 


F.  Façade articulation standards. 
(1)  Intent. Buildings shall provide diversity and variation in façade type, width, and roof heights and types to reinforce the character of the streetscape by encouraging visual interest along the ground level of buildings. 

(2)  Buildings with a length of at least 60 feet or greater shall provide at least three of the following architectural façade treatments: 
(a)  Variation in building materials. 
(b)  Porches, portico, canopies, etc. 
(c)  Translucent windows 
(d)  Wall offsets. 
(e)  Varying roof types or heights. 
(f)  An architectural element not listed above, as approved by the planning and zoning commission. 

G.  Window standards. 
(1)  Intent. Windows shall be provided on the ground floor façade of all buildings facing U.S. Route 13. 
(2)  Standards. 
i.  Forty percent of all ground floor building facades fronting U.S. Route 13 shall consist of windows. 
ii.  Sills of the windows shall be no higher than three feet above grade. 
iii.  Windows on front facades facing a street shall be transparent or translucent glass. 
iv.  The use of opaque glass, such as tinted, smoked, or mirrored glass is not permitted. 

H.  Streetscape design standards. 
(1)  Intent. Streetscape design shall ensure that the street edge provides a transition between the roadway, the sidewalk and buildings. Buildings, along with sidewalks, trees, and landscaping shall be predominant rather than parking lots. Street wall/buffer standards shall screen parking lots, driveways and service station fuel pumps. Site furnishings such as benches and trash receptacles compliment the streetscape and create a more pedestrian-friendly atmosphere. 
(2)  Sidewalk standards. 
(a)  Sidewalks along U.S. Route 13 shall be concrete and ten feet in width and separated from the shoulder of U.S. Route 13 by a grass area five feet in width. 
(b)  Sidewalks along all other roadways shall be five feet in width and separated from the shoulder of the roadway by a grass area four feet in width. 


(3)  Street wall/buffer standards. 
(a)  Street wall/buffers consisting of brick piers with black iron, steel, alumunimum (or an approved alternative material) fencing and street trees shall be installed and maintained along those lots where a parking lot, driveway, or service station fuel pumps are located adjacent to U.S. Route 13. 
(b)  Street wall/buffers shall not be located in the public right-of-way and shall be located beyond the clear zone as defined by DelDOT. 
c)  Street wall/buffers shall be permanently maintained by the property owner and/or development association. 
(d)  Brick piers shall be a minimum of two (2) feet square with a maximum height of three and a half (31/2) to four (4) feet tall, and constructed at intervals of twenty (20) feet. 

(e)  Low-lying shrubs are encouraged to be planted every five (5) feet and shall not exceed a maximum height of three (3) feet at maturity. 
(f)  One (1) street tree shall be planted every twenty (20) linear feet of frontage along U.S. Route 13. Street trees at the time of planting, shall be no less than 3 - 31/2 inches in caliper. The following characteristics shall be considered in selecting new trees to plant: size, tolerance to pollution, ability to withstand drought and soil conditions, as well as landscape and ornamental value. It is recommended that individuals contact the Delaware Forest Service for assistance in identifying which tree species would be most appropriate for the area. 
(g)  Black iron, steel, aluminum (or approved alternative) fencing shall be constructed to a maximum height of two and a half (21/2) to three (3) feet. 
(h)  Fence openings shall have a spacing between four and eight inches. 


I.  Building placement (Drive-thru buildings and service stations). 
(1)  Intent-Drive-thru buildings. Drive-thru buildings contain a drive-thru as apart of the commercial or service establishment. Typical uses include banks, pharmacies and fast-food establishments. 
(2)  Standards-Drive-thru buildings. 
(a)  Drive-thru buildings shall not locate drive-thru windows on those facades directly facing onto U.S. Route 13. 
(b)  Drive-thru buildings located on a corner lot shall provide a separate entrance along U.S. Route 13 and exit along the side street. 

(c)  Drive-thru buildings shall provide a separate entrance and exit with one-way automobile circulation. 

(3)  Intent-Service stations. Service stations feature one or more islands of fuel pumps and a convenience store. The intent of this section is to minimize the road frontage visibility of fuel pumps and maximize the visibility of the convenience store. 
(4)  Standards-Service stations. 
(a)  Fuel pumps are encouraged to be located to the rear of the convenience store, shielded from frontage along U.S. Route 13. 

(b)  Fuel pumps are permitted to be located to the side of the convenience store. Fuel pumps are prohibited to be located in the front yard of those parcels fronting U.S. Route 13. 

(c)  Fuel pump canopies shall be constructed utilizing the same building materials used in the construction of the associated convenience store. 

(d)  Fuel pumps shall not be located closer than 25 feet to the public right-of-way along U.S. Route 13 
J.  Parking lot design. 
(1)  Intent. A streetscape formed by a continuous row of buildings located close to the sidewalk with minimal parking lot frontage along U.S. Route 13 will create an attractive urban-boulevard, reflective of the town's historic downtown. Parking lots shall be landscaped to provide an aesthetically pleasing streetscape. 

(2)  Standards. 
(a)  Parking lots shall be designed to the maximum extent feasible to connect parking lots on adjacent lots by providing cross-property easements to share driveways and reduce the need for additional curb cuts. Future connections for parking lot interconnectivity between adjacent lots shall be required. 
(b)  In the case of a driveway located between parking rows adjacent to buildings, a minimum of eighteen (18) feet shall be provided for emergency vehicle access. 
(c)  Access to fire connections shall be provided for. 
(d)  Parking lot speed bumps shall be prohibited. 
(e)  Bicycle racks shall be provided and shall be located in well-lit parking areas, safe from vehicular traffic. A minimum of one rack with five bicycle parking spaces shall be provided in all parking lots containing 20 or more parking spaces. Bicycle racks shall be black in color. 
(f)  Parking is not permitted in the front of a building and shall be located to the side or behind a building rather than in front to reduce the visual impact of the parking lot. 

(g)  Commercial buildings are encouraged to share a common entrance from the roadway to their respective parking lots that are located to the rear of each building. 

(h)  A parallel parking row shall be limited to ten consecutive parking spaces interuppted by a 15-foot by nine-foot landscaped island to separate adjacent parking spaces. Two trees and two low-lying shrubs shall be required for each landscaped island. 

(i)  All parking rows shall be terminated with an 36-foot by nine-foot landscaped, terminal island to protect parked vehicles and confine moving traffic to aisles and driveways. Two trees and two low-lying shrubs shall be required per terminal island. 

(j)  Parking lot trees shall be pruned so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection. Trees shall also be pruned to a minimum height of 14 feet to provide a clear space above surface sidewalks, parking lots and driveways to allow for unobstructed passage of pedestrians and vehicles. 
(k)  Parking lot lights shall be installed and maintained in all off- street parking lots to ensure pedestrian lighting and safety. 
(l)  All parking lot lights shall have an acorn shaped luminaire on a fluted, round pole shaft with a round cast base in a black, powder coated finish. 
(m)  A maximum of five consecutive parrallel parking rows are permitted prior to a full row length landscaped area a minimum of six feet wide. 

(n)  A minimum six-foot wide, full row length landscaped buffer shall be installed between all parking rows abutting adjacent properties and secondary access roads. One tree shall be planted for every twenty-five linear feet of frontage and two groundcover plants are required per tree. An exception may be made if the parking lot is designed to create interconnectivity through shared parking for adjacent lots. Landscaping shall be permanently maintained by the property owner and/or development association. 

(o)  Parking lots with more than five parallel parking rows shall construct sidewalks and crosswalks through a landscaped islands bisecting the parking lot at or near the midpoint to increase pedestrian safety and connectivity. Developers may also submit an alternative design subject to planning and zoning commission approval. 
(3)  Modified parking lot design. To minimize the overall footprint of parking lots, the contruction of modified parking design is encouraged. 
Property owners, land developers, or land users of any parcels in the SCZ (South Corridor) zoning district may install off-street spaces with modified designs with planning commission approval. 
Modified parking designs include, but are not limited to: 
(a)  Double stacking residential parking spaces for each residential unit. 

(b)  Placing parking spaces on the ground story of a building, but behind retail uses or a façade wall. 

K.  Common amenity space. 
(1)  Intent. Commercial development in the South Corridor zoning district shall provide a variety of useable common amenity space that is integrated into the overall site design and plan that enhances the character of U.S. Route 13. 
(2)  Standards. 
(a)  Each development site having 20,000 square feet or more shall provide at least one common amenity space area with a size of at least 2.5 percent of its parcel size. This requirement may be reduced in the instance where a development locates its parking area completely behind the primary building(s) and locates the building(s) as close as is practical to the public sidewalk and street frontage. Any reduction in the amount or waiver of common amenity space must be approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
(b)  Development sites with less than 20,000 square feet, though not required, are encouraged to provide common amenity space. 
(c)  Common amenity space shall be visible and accessible from a public sidewalk and should be contiguous and concentrated in one or two locations rather than scattered in small, unusable spaces. It is preferred that such space be in close proximity to the main entrance of a building to take advantage of pedestrian traffic, but other locations may be considered if they are visible and accessible. 
(d)  Common amenity space shall be provided in one or more of the following forms: 
i.  Pocket parks. Pocket Parks shall be incorporated into the site design at building entrances, street corners, and/or sidewalks and shall range in size from 500 square feet to 1,000 square feet. 
To enhance the attractiveness of the overall site design and to encourage pedestrian connectivity between buildings, parking lots and adjacent commercial uses; Pocket Parks shall feature at least two (2) of the following elements: 
a)  Sitting areas (such as benches, low seating walls). 
b)  Covered structure (such as a gazebo, pergola or pavilion). 
c)  Decorative paving (such as colored/stained concrete, brick or other type of paver). 
d)  Decorative planters. 
e)  Decorative flowering or evergreen shrubs. 
f)  Decorative, pedestrian-scale lighting. 
g)  Public art (such as monuments, sculptures, statuary). 
h)  Decorative water feature (such as a fountain, rain garden). 


ii.  Public squares or plazas. Public squares and plazas shall be incorporated into the overall site design so that primary building façade(s) front the respective public square or plaza and shall range in size from 1,000 square feet to 5,000 square feet. 
To enhance the attractiveness of the overall site design and to encourage pedestrian connectivity between buildings, parking lots and adjacent commercial uses; public squares or plazas shall feature at least three (3) of the following elements: 
a)  Sitting areas (such as benches, low seating walls). 
b)  Covered structure (such as a gazebo, pergola or pavilion). 
c)  Decorative paving (such as colored/stained concrete, brick or other type of paver). 
d)  Decorative planters. 
e)  Decorative flowering or evergreen shrubs. 
f)  Decorative, pedestrian-scale lighting. 
g)  Public art (such as monuments, sculptures, statuary). 
h)  Decorative water feature (such as a fountain, rain garden). 


iii.  Town center greens. Town center greens shall be generally rectangular in shape and shall be allowed on parcels greater than five (5) acres in size; they shall be not be permitted to be located directly on the corner of intersections along U.S. Route 13. 
Town center greens shall range in size from 5,500 square feet to 45,000 square feet. Any design in excess of 45,000 square feet may be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission if it meets the intent of these standards. 
Primary building façades shall directly front onto the Town Center Green on at least three sides and are strongly encouraged to front the green on all four sides. 
To enhance the attractiveness of the overall site design and to encourage pedestrian connectivity between buildings, parking lots and adjacent commercial uses; Town Center Greens shall feature at least four (4) of the following elements : 
a)  Sitting areas (such as benches, low seating walls). 
b)  Covered structure (such as a gazebo, pergola or pavilion). 
c)  Decorative paving (such as colored/stained concrete, brick or other type of paver). 
d)  Decorative planters. 
e)  Decorative flowering or evergreen shrubs. 
f)  Decorative, pedestrian-scale lighting. 
g)  Public art (such as monuments, sculptures, statuary). 
h)  Decorative water feature (such as a fountain, rain garden). 

iv.  Developer's option. Other forms of common amenity space which meets the standards of this section may be permitted if approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
v.  Site furniture standards. 
i)  Benches. Benches installed in common amenity spaces shall be black, six (6) feet wide, Keystone Ridge Lamplighter (Model L16) as pictured below, or an approved alternative. 

j)  Trash receptacles. Trash receptacles installed in common amenity spaces shall be black, 32-gallon Keystone Ridge Midtown (Model MT3-32) as pictured below, or an approved alternative. 

L.  Sign design. 
(1)  Intent. Signage along the U.S. Route 13 Corridor shall be designed and installed in such a way that it becomes a cohesive part of site design, improving the overall visual quality and pedestrian scale of U.S. Route 13. All signage shall be consistent with and complimentary to the architectural design and materials of the building it serves. 
(2)  Monument sign standards. 
(a)  Monument signs shall mean any stand-alone, self-supporting structure affixed to a base that is equal to or wider than the sign itself. 
(b)  The height of the monument sign is to be measured from the finished grade to the top of the sign and shall be no taller than eight feet in height. 
(c)  The minimum monument sign setback is five feet from the existing right-of-way. 
(d)  Monument signs shall be designed and constructed utilizing the same building materials used in the construction of the associated building and/or site. 
(e)  Monument signs may be externally or internally illuminated; external illumination must be directed downward. 

(3)  Wall signs. 
(a)  Wall signs shall not project above the roof, parapet or exterior wall. 
(b)  Wall signs shall be appropriately scaled to the building. Signable area for wall signs shall be limited to 25 percent of the building or occupant's façade. *An increase may be granted for those wall signs that are painted onto the building and is incorporated as a major element of the façade. 
(c)  In multi-occupant, multi-story buildings, walls signs for first floor occupants shall not extend above the window sill of the second floor windows. 
(d)  Wall signs are encouraged to compliment the architectural style of the building. 

(4)  Window signs. 
(a)  Window signs shall not cover more than 50 percent of the window area on the frontage of a building or tenant space and shall be comprised of individual letters, logos or design elements that are not encompassed by a solid opaque background so as not to obscure the view through the window. 
(b)  Window signs are permitted on the first floor of a building only. 

(5)  Projecting signs. 
(a)  Projecting signs shall project no more than 18 inches from a building face or wall. 
(b)  Projecting signs shall not exceed 30 square feet for all faces. 
(c)  Projecting signs shall have a minimum of eight feet of clearance from the ground, a maximum height of 25 feet, measured to the top of the sign and shall not extend beyond the roofline. 
(d)  Projecting signs shall not extend more than five feet from the building face nor extend beyond the curb line of any street or parking area. 
(e)  Multi-tenant buildings are permitted one (1) projecting sign per tenant. Only those tenants with ground floor occupancy are permitted to install a projecting sign. 
(f)  Projecting signs are encouraged to compliment the architectural style of the building. 

(6)  Awning signs. 
(a)  Awning signs are permitted on the ground floor of a building only. 
(b)  Awning signs shall have a minimum of eight feet clearance from the ground. 

(7)  Prohibited signs. 
(a)  Temporary or portable signs with changeable letter and numbers and portable trailer signs with changeable text panels. 
(b)  Digital electronic signs of any kind, except for time, temperature and fuel price signs. 
(c)  Flashing signs. 
(d)  Animated or revolving signs. 
(e)  Signs that produce noise, sounds, emit smoke or vapor, particles or odors. 
(f)  Signs with intermittent lights resembling or seeming to resemble the flashing lights customarily associated with emergency responder vehicles. 
(g)  Vehicles and trailers used primarily as a sign. 
(h)  Neon signs. 
M.  Definitions. 
Arcade: A continuous covered passageway parallel to and open to a street, open space or building and accessible and open to the public. Awning: A roof-like cover that is temporary in nature and projects from the wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window from the elements; also called a canopy. Balustrade: An entire railing system, including a top rail and its balusters and often a bottom rail, found along the edge of a porch, balcony or roof deck. Belfry: That part of a steeple or top of a tower in which one or more bells are hung; also called a bell tower. Belt course: A horizontal band of masonry extending horizontally across the façade of a building and occasionally encircling the entire perimeter; usually projects beyond the face of the building. Cornice: Any molded horizontal projection that crowns or finishes the top of a wall where it meets the edge of a roof; the exterior trim of a structure where the wall and roof meet. Cupola: A small roof tower, usually rising from the roof ridge. Decorative window lintel: A decorative horizontal beam that spans the top of a window opening. Dormer: A projection from a sloping roof that contains a window. Marquee: A permanent canopy, usually of metal and glass, that projects over an entrance to a building, especially that of a theater or hotel; may include lettering or signs indicating current attractions. Parapet: A decorative low wall or similar barrier at the edge of a roof, balcony, or terrace. Pergola: A structure of open construction supported by regularly spaced posts or columns, often latticed and covered by climbing plants such as vines or roses. Pilaster: A column partially embedded in a wall and usually non-structural Porch: A roofed, open area, attached to or part of a building, and with direct access to or from it, providing shelter to a building entrance. Portico: A covered entrance having a roof supported by a series of columns or piers, commonly at the front entrance to a building. Turret: A cylindrical tower that is usually corbeled from one corner of the structure. Wall offset: A projection or recess of at least two feet in depth. Wall offsets that are incorporated onto buildings having a length of at least 60 feet or greater shall be integrated at a minimum of every 40 feet, each offset shall have a minimum length of 20 feet.  

N. Land Use NC Zoning 
District SCZ Zoning 
District Industrial, Manufacturing, Processing and Wholesaling Flammable Liquid, Gas, and Bulk Fuel - Storage and Sale CU CUc> Junkyard - - Manufacturing and Processing - Light CU CU Manufacturing and Processing - Heavy - - Machine or Metal Working Shops - - Mini-storage Warehousing SE 1 SE 1 Research and Development Uses SE SE Transportation or Trucking Yards - - Warehousing and Storage, Commercial P 2 P 2 Wholesaling and Distribution - - Vehicle Towing/Impound Yard SE SE Recreation, Education & Assembly Go-kart, Miniature Automobile Racing CU CU Commercial Recreation Facilities, Indoor P P Commercial Recreation Facilities, Outdoor CU CU Libraries, Museums P P Meeting Facilities, Public or Private or Religious CU CU Schools - Public & Charter CU CU Schools - Private CU CU Theaters P P Universities or Colleges CU CU Trade Schools CU CU Residential 4 Accessory Dwelling Units P 5 P 5 Dwelling: Townhouses P 5 P 5 Dwelling: Apartments P 5 P 5 Nursing Homes P P 5 Planned Residential Development P5 P5 Residence for Owner, caretaker or manager P5 P5 Retail Trade Adult Entertainment Uses - - Bars/Taverns P P Body Art Establishments SE SE Drive-through Retail P P Drive-through Service P P Farmers Markets P P Flea Markets SE SE General Retail Business P P Restaurant or Café P P Services Bed & Breakfast Establishment P P Crematorium - - Day Care Center P P Dry-cleaning, processing P P Equipment Rental Yard SE SE Funeral Homes P P General Services P P Hospital P P Kennel, Animal Boarding SE SE Lodging P P Offices P P Public Services, Major P P Public Services, Minor P P Emergency Services CU CU Veterinary Clinic/Hospital P P Telecommunication Facilities Private communication antennas and towers CU CU Transportation & Infrastructure Passenger Transportation Facilities CU CU Vehicle Sales & Service Automobile Service Station & Convenience Store P P Automobile and Trailer Rental SE SE Automobile/Vehicle Sales and Service, New and Used SE SE Automotive/Vehicle Repair Garages - Minor P P Automotive/Vehicle Repair Garages - Major SE SE Car Washes SE SE Recreational Vehicles, Sales and Service SE SE End Notes 1 Only permitted on lots that do not have highway frontage or behind existing/new commercial uses 2 Only permitted when incidental to permitted use and any outdoor storage be screened from public view 3 This use shall be screened. See Section 8(c) (Street Design Standards) for Street Wall/Buffer requirements 4 Residential uses & residential properties listed on the National Historic Registry existing prior to the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance are considered legal, conforming uses. 5 Residential uses are only allowed as part of a mixed-use development located above or behind the primary commercial use. Key P     Permitted CU    Conditional Use -    Use Note Permitted SE   Special Exception  
(Ord. No. 015-14, § 1, 11-3-14; Ord. No. 003-16, § 6, 3-21-16) 
Section 6. - Supplementary district regulations. 
1.  Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. 
A.  Off-Street Parking Requirements. 
1.  There shall be provided at the time of construction or enlargement of any main building or structure a minimum number of off-street parking spaces in accordance with the minimum national standards as designated by AAHSTO (American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials) and the ANSI (American National Standards Institute) A117-1. 
2.  Parking space as required shall be located on the same lot with the main buildings or within walking distance of the main building. 
3.  Additional off-street parking provisions at 0.5 spaces per dwelling unit is to be provided for all residential developments in R-2A and R-3 Zoning Districts. 
4.  Parking lots, located in all commercial zoning districts, with the exception of the Central Commercial zoning district, with frontage on the public right-of-ways are required to have a set-back distance of ten feet (10) from the property line and suitably landscaped with year round green plantings to aesthetically improve the appearance of the area. The plantings should not interfere with line-of-sight distances. 
The Town Council may vary or waive the requirements of this paragraph following notice and public hearing. 
5.  For buildings in excess of 150,000 square feet in any zone, sufficient off-street loading space shall be provided. Staff will determine the sufficiency of the loading spaces after reviewing written documentation from the applicant through the site plan review process. 
6.  Parking of vehicles on unpaved surfaces within the front yard of all districts shall be prohibited. Exception: Emergency vehicles responding to an emergency, special delivery or moving vehicles which require front door access on a one-time basis. 
7.  Bicycle parking racks are required to be provided for commercial establishments and are to be placed in a brightly illuminated section of the parking area safe from vehicular traffic. A minimum of one rack (5 bicycle spaces) shall be provided in every parking lot containing twenty spaces or more. 
8.  Interior parking lot landscaping requirements: 
(a)  Blocks of parking stalls shall be limited to fifteen (15) consecutive spaces interrupted by a fifteen (15) foot by nine (9) foot landscaped island. 
(b)  A maximum of five (5) consecutive rows of parking are allowed prior to a full row length landscaped island a minimum six (6) feet wide. 
(c)  All parking rows are to be terminated with a minimum eighteen (18) by nine (9) foot landscaped island. 
(d)  All islands are to be a mix of grass covering, shrubs and at least one (1) street tree per 160 square feet of interior parking lot landscaping required. 
9.  The minimum number of parking spaces is as follows: 
(a)  Residential structures: 
(i)  Single-family dwellings, two (2) spaces per unit (including garage). 
(ii)  Two-family dwellings, two (2) spaces per unit (including garage). 
(iii)  Semidetached dwellings, two (2) spaces per unit (including garage). 
(iv)  Townhouse dwellings, two (2) spaces per unit (including garage). 
(v)  Apartment dwellings: 
(a)  Efficiency and one-bedroom, 1.5 spaces per unit (including garage). 
(b)  Two-bedroom and three-bedroom, 2 spaces per unit (including garage). 
(c)  Four or more bedrooms, 3 spaces per unit (including garage). 
(Ord. No. 020-14, § 10, 12-15-14; Ord. No. 005-19, § 2, 4-15-19) 
(b)  Hospitals or similar welfare institutions, one (1) space per every 800 square feet of floor space. 
(c)  Hotels and motels, one (1) space for each guestroom or suite. If an eating or drinking facility is provided, additional parking shall be required at one-half (11/2) the amount as would normally be required for such eating or drinking establishment. 
(d)  Clubs and lodges, one (1) space for each 400 square feet of floor space. 
(e)  Manufacturing buildings, one (1) space for every two (2) employees in the largest working shift. 
(f)  Places of worship and other public buildings, one (1) space per 200 square feet of floor space or one (1) space per five (5) seats. 
(g)  Physician's office, three (3) spaces or parking area equal to the gross floor area devoted to professional practice, whichever is greater. 
(h)  Bowling alley, four (4) spaces per lane. 
(i)  Schools, one (1) space per fifteen (15) seats or students. 
(j)  Theater, 0.3 spaces per seat. 
(k)  Offices, four (4) spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(l)  Retail, five (5) spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(m)  Restaurant, eight (8) spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(n)  Services, five (5) spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(o)  Funeral home, twenty (20) spaces per 1000 square feet of seating and/or viewing room space. 
(p)  Day care or nursery school, one (1) space per teacher/employee on largest shift, plus one (1) space per six (6) students. 
(q)  Non-residential uses in the Central Commercial CC district shall have no minimum number of required off-street parking spaces. Mixed-use properties in the Central Commercial CC district shall comply with the corresponding off-street parking requirements for the residential component of the property. 
(p)  Day care or nursery school, one (1) space per teacher/employee on largest shift, plus one (1) space per six (6) students. 
(q)  Non-residential uses in the Central Commercial CC district shall have no minimum number of required off-street parking spaces. Mixed-use properties in the Central Commercial CC district shall comply with the corresponding off-street parking requirements for the residential component of the property. 
The parking requirements shall be proportionately calculated, rounded down to the nearest parking space, and all uses shall be required to have the minimum spaces identified herein. 
For example purposes only, all retail uses with less than 1,000 square feet of gross floor area shall have at least 5 spaces. Retail uses up to 1,199 square feet of gross floor area shall have 5 spaces, retail uses with 1,200 to 1,399 square feet of gross floor area shall have 6 spaces, etc. 
(Ord. No. 005-19, § 2, 4-15-19) 
B.  Off-street Loading Requirements. 
1.  The minimum standard for off-street loading spaces is (unless otherwise noted): each required off-street loading space shall have minimum dimensions of twelve (12) feet wide and sixty (60) feet long. If more than one (1) loading space is required, subsequent loading spaces may have minimum dimensions of twelve (12) feet wide and forty (40) feet long. At no time shall any part of a truck or van be allowed to extend into a public thoroughfare or right-of-way while the truck or van is being loaded or unloaded. If the outdoor loading area is covered, but not totally enclosed, the minimum height of the outdoor loading space area shall be fourteen (14) feet. When more than one building is located on a parcel, the standards outlined herein shall be calculated based on the total square footage of all the buildings located on the parcel. 
(a)  Hospitals or similar welfare institutions, one (1) off-street loading space for a floor area of 10,000 square feet, one (1) additional off-street loading space for each additional 25,000 square feet or fraction thereof. 
(b)  Hotels and motels, one (1) off-street loading space for each 25,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof. 
(c)  Clubs and lodges, one (1) off-street loading space for a floor area of 10,000 square feet, one (1) additional off-street loading space for each additional 25,000 square feet or fraction thereof. (In lieu of the standard dimensions found in Section B.1, all loading spaces for clubs and lodges shall be at least ten (10) feet wide, twenty (20) feet long and seven and one-half (71/2) feet high.) 
(d)  Manufacturing buildings, sufficient off-street loading spaces shall be required. Staff will determine the sufficiency of the off-street loading spaces after reviewing written documentation from the applicant through the site plan review process. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Physician's office, one (1) off-street loading space for a floor area of 10,000 to 25,000 square feet, one (1) additional off-street loading space for each additional 25,000 square feet or fraction thereof. 
(g)  Bowling alley, one (1) off-street loading space for 8,000 square feet to 25,000 square feet of floor area, and one (1) additional off-street loading space for each additional 25,000 square feet of floor area or faction thereof so used. 
(h)  Schools, one (1) off-street loading space for a floor area of 10,000 square feet, one (1) additional off-street loading space for each additional 25,000 square feet or fraction thereof. 
(i)  Theater, one (1) off-street loading space for 8,000 square feet to 25,000 square feet of floor area, and one (1) additional off-street loading space for each additional 25,000 square feet of floor area or faction thereof so used. 
(j)  Offices, one (1) off-street loading space for a floor area of 10,000 to 25,000 square feet, one (1) additional off-street loading space for each additional 25,000 square feet or fraction thereof. 
(k)  Retail, one (1) off-street loading space for 5,000 square feet to 25,000 square feet of floor area, and one (1) additional off-street loading space for each additional 25,000 square feet of floor area or faction thereof so used. 
(l)  Restaurant, (1) one off-street loading space for 5,000 square feet to 25,000 square feet of floor area, and one (1) additional off-street loading space for each additional 25,000 square feet of floor area or faction thereof so used. 
(m)  Services, one (1) off-street loading space for 5,000 square feet to 25,000 square feet of floor area, one (1) additional off-street loading space for each additional 25,000 square feet of floor area or faction thereof so used. 
(n)  Funeral home, one (1) off-street loading space for each chapel (such loading spaces shall be at least ten (10) feet wide, twenty (20) feet long and seven and one-half (71/2) feet high, in lieu of the standard dimensions found in Section B.1.) 
(Ord. No. 005-19, § 2, 4-15-19) 
C.  Planning and Zoning Commission Waiver. The Planning and Zoning Commission may waive required off-street parking and loading spaces in the following instances: 
(1)  On an improved lot, when it can be demonstrated that retrofitting the site for off-street parking and loading space(s) is impractical or impossible; 
(2)  When the applicant can demonstrate that the intended use is such that no deliveries by large vehicles is expected, now or in the future; 
(3)  When the applicant can demonstrate that the requirements of this ordinance are far in excess of the actual needs on the site; 
(4)  Where on-street parking and loading areas are provided nearby. 
All unique situations or special exceptions for off-street parking requirements regarding the size of the parking space or the width of travel lanes must also meet the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(Ord. of 8-16-93(2), § 5; Ord. of 3-6-00(2), § 2; Ord. No. 024-03, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 019-04, § 1, 11-15-04; Ord. No. 003-08, § 1, 10-6-08; Ord. No. 009-18, §§ 3-5, 7-16-18) 
2.  Travel lanes for off-street commercial parking. 
(a)  Ninety-degree parking requires a 20-foot wide single travel lane. Ninety-degree parking adjacent to two directions of travel requires a 24-foot wide (12-foot wide each direction) travel opening. 
(b)  Sixty-degree parking requires an 18-foot wide travel land [lane] (one direction only). 
(c)  Forty-degree parking requires a 16-foot wide travel land [lane] (one direction only). 
(d)  Thirty-degree parking requires a 12-foot wide travel land [lane] (one direction only). 
(e)  Angles of parking which are in between the above will be required to meet the next higher requirement. 
3.  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 009-18, § 6, 7-16-18) 
4.  Visibility at intersections in zoning districts. On a lot in any zoning district, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to impede vision between a height of 21/2 and ten feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the street lines of such corner lots and a line joining points along said street lines 25 feet from the point of intersection. 
5.  Stripping of topsoil. No topsoil shall be stripped, excavated, or otherwise removed for use other than in connection with the construction or alteration of a building on such premises and excavations and grading incidental thereto. 
6.  Height regulations. The height restrictions in the schedule of district regulations do not apply to spires, cupolas, chimneys, antennas, water tanks, belfries, flagstaffs, hose towers or other structures placed above roof level, not intended for human occupancy and necessary for the operation of the permitted use. 
7.  Front yard adjustment. The front yard required for a dwelling in an R-2 and R-3 district may be reduced in the case of a dwelling located between two dwellings which lack the required front yard and which are less than 100 feet apart. In such case, the front yard depth shall be no less than that of the deeper adjoining lot. 
8.  Accessory buildings. An accessory building may be located in any required side or rear yard provided: 
a.  Such building shall not exceed 15 feet in height. 
b.  Such buildings shall be set back at least six feet from any property line and shall not be located less than ten feet from the principal building. Exception: Wood frame decks on pier foundations without a roof shall not be considered part of the principal structure for the purpose of this section. 
(Ord. of 9-21-92; Ord. of 12-18-00(7), § 1) 
c.  All such buildings in the aggregate shall not occupy more than 30% of the area of the required rear and side yard. Accessory buildings constructed at the same time may be located in pairs or groups in the required rear or side yard along the common sideline or rear line of contiguous lots. 
d.  Handicap ramps may be located in the front, side and rear yard set back(s) subject to design and location as approved by the administrative authority. The planning department shall ensure the ramp location to be least obtrusive to abutting property owners. The building permit will be conditional in that the ramp must be removed within 30 days when the ramp is no longer required. The applicant shall provide the planning department with a physician's note stating a handicap ramp is required and the name of the individual for whom it is required. The individual must reside at the address that the building permit is being issued for. A letter from a physician is required annually documenting the continued need for the ramp. 
(Ord. No. 002-03, § 1, 3-18-03) 
9.  Performance standards. The following standards are applicable to all structures and uses. The purpose of these standards is to regulate any use which may be objectionable through the emission of smoke, odor, fumes, gases, dust, fly ash, vapors or other forms of air pollution, noise, vibration, fire, explosive, and radioactive hazards, electromagnetic disturbance, and any other element that may have an adverse effect on any structure or use located outside of the property limits of the creator. Provisions for administration of these standards are set forth in section 7.5 of this ordinance. 
a.  Fire and explosion hazards. All activities involving and all storage of inflammable and explosive materials shall be provided at any point with adequate safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosion and adequate firefighting and fire suppression equipment and devices standard in the industry. Burning of waste materials in open fires is prohibited at any point. 
b.  Air pollution. 
(1)  Smoke density. No smoke from any source of combustion, the shade or appearance of which is darker than no. 1 on the Ringelmann smoke chart, shall be emitted into the open air except that a density described as no. 2 in the Ringelmann chart may exist for a total of not more than three minutes in any 15-minute period of time when building a new fire or combustion equipment breakdown occurs. The Ringelmann chart, as published and used by the Bureau of Mines, United States Department of the Interior, is hereby adopted and made a part of these regulations. 
(2)  Fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, gases, and other forms of air pollution. No emission shall be permitted which can cause any damage to health, animals, vegetation, or other forms of property, or which can cause any excessive soiling, at any point, and in no event any emission from any chimney or otherwise of any solid or liquid particles in concentrations exceeding 0.3 grains per cubic feet of the conveying gas at any point. For measurement of the amount of particles in gases resulting from combustion, standard corrections shall be applied to a stack temperature of 500 degrees Fahrenheit and 50 percent excess air. 
c.  Emission of heat, glare, radiation, fumes or odors. Every use shall be so operated that it does not emit an obnoxious, offensive or detrimental (to health or property) degree of heat, glare, radiation, fumes or odors at any point beyond any lot line of the lot on which the use is located. 
d.  Vibration generated. Every use shall be so operated that the ground vibration inherently and recurrently generated is not perceptible at any point beyond any lot line of the lot on which the use is located. 
e.  Volume of sound generated. Every use shall be so operated that the volume of sound inherently and recurrently generated by any use shall not exceed the standards set forth below as measured along any lot line of the lot on which the use is located. 
(1)  Sound levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and associated octave band filter manufactured according to the most recent standards prescribed by the American Standards Association. 
(2)  The maximum permitted sound pressure levels, in decibels, for the designated octave bands shall be as set forth in the following table: 
Maximum Sound Pressure Level in Decibels with Reference to 0.0002 Microbar Sound Pressure Octave Band 
 Frequency 
 Cycles per 
Second Daytime 
7:00 a.m.-10:00 p.m. Nighttime 
10:00 p.m.-7:00 a.m. 20-74 70 65 75-149 56 52 150-299 47 42 300-599 42 37 600-1199 37 32 1200-2399 33 28 2400-4799 31 25 4800-10,000 29 24  
Corrections to be made for noise not radiated continuously of or special character. 
Type of Operation or Character of Noise Correction 
in Decibels Noise source operates less than 20% of any one-hour period Plus 5* Noise source operates less than 5% of any one-hour period Plus 10* Noise source operates less than 1% of any one-hour period Plus 15* Noise of impulsive character (hammering, etc.) Minus 5 Noise of periodic character (humming, screech, etc.) Minus 5  
*Apply one of these corrections only 
f.  Electrical disturbance. Every use shall be so operated so that no electrical disturbance (except from domestic household appliances) adversely affecting the operation at any point of any equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbance. 
(Ord. of 8-16-93(2), § 6) 
10.  Planned development. The purpose of these provisions is to encourage the development of areas within the town as integrated, well-planned units allowing for flexibility of lot and yard sizes, structure types, while at the same time providing for more open space resulting in a more desirable living environment. It is not the intent of this section to permit any development which would not be in keeping with the general intent of this ordinance. 
In any R-1, R-2, R-3 district, the planning commission may authorize, after public hearing (see section 14), deviation from the regulations of this ordinance pertaining to minimum lot size, area per family, lot width and depth, front and year yard requirements, and may allow any one or a combination of residence types as permitted within the residential districts of this ordinance subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  The planning commission must determine if the result of the proposal will be an integrated site plan no less beneficial to the residents of such neighboring properties than would be obtained under the use, area, yard, and width and depth regulations of this ordinance for buildings developed on separate lots. 
b.  The plan shall have been approved in accordance with the Town of Smyrna land subdivision regulations. 
c.  The average lot area per family within contiguous portions of the development in a single zoning district is not reduced thereby to an amount less than that required by this ordinance in such district; provided that no land of such size as to be capable of further subdivision under the applicable district regulations shall be included in determining the average lot area, unless the possibility of such further subdivision under the applicable district regulations shall be included in determining the average lot area, unless the possibility of such further subdivision is eliminated either by a deed restriction or agreement in form acceptable to the town solicitor and duly recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds, or by transfer of development rights to the town, or by a dedication for park purposes. 
d.  The building area shall not exceed the percentage of lot area prescribed in this ordinance for the district in which it is located. 
e.  The minimum side yard requirements of any lot shall not be reduced to a width less than that prescribed in this ordinance for the district in which said lot is located. 
f.  The space between any two principal buildings on a single lot shall be at least equivalent to such space as would be required under terms of this ordinance between like buildings on separate lots. 
11.  Day care centers and nursery schools. [2] 
a.  Hours shall not commence until 6:00 a.m. and shall end by 7:00 p.m. 
b.  All day care centers and nursery schools must meet the state department of services for children, youth and their family license service requirements and have this license available for inspection by the Town of Smyrna building inspection department. 
(Ord. of 10-19-98(2), § 2) 
12.  Buffer screening required along the boundary lines of certain districts and properties. There shall be maintained on those properties as specified below, a substantial solid wall or fence, grade level change or thick hedge to a height of six feet, adequate to screen all operations and activities on those properties from view from adjacent properties as specified herein. The use of natural plant material as a screen shall be conditioned on proper maintenance, as determined by the building inspector, throughout the life of any use on the lot required to have buffer screening. Except as otherwise specified in this Code, this requirement of buffer screening shall apply as follows: 
a.  Where abutting residential or institutional-recreational zoning districts, on all commercial or manufacturing district parcels of land (i.e., local commercial LC, central commercial CC, highway commercial HC, and manufacturing M), along the boundaries of all such residential and institutional-recreational districts, agricultural district A, residential district R-1, R-2, R-3, and institutional and recreational district I & R, except that buffer screening shall not be required along street lines abutting the front of the commercial or manufacturing district parcel. The front of the parcel shall be the property line on which the primary entrance is located. 
b.  In the R-2 and R-3 residential zones, along the property lines (excepting street lines) of any parcel of land improved by apartment buildings or buildings containing more than one dwelling (e.g., duplex, townhouses, etc.); provided however, that this requirement shall not apply to those property lines abutting parcels improved by the same use (i.e., apartment buildings abutting apartment buildings; duplex abutting duplex, etc.) or where the abutting property is zoned manufacturing or commercial. 
After the effective date of this ordinance (7-21-86) no building permit, certificate of occupancy, special exception or subdivision approval shall be granted to any lot or parcel of land not complying with the provisions of this paragraph 10; provided, however, that the board of adjustment may grant a variance from such compliance where the requisite showing is made under section 9 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 8-16-93(2), § 7; Ord. of 10-19-98(2), § 2; Ord. No. 005-19, § 1, 4-15-19) 
13.  Screening of dumpsters in all zoning districts other than (A) agricultural and (R-1) residential districts. 
a.  In all zoning districts of the Town of Smyrna other than the A agricultural and R-1 residential districts, all trash receptacles or garbage disposal units commonly referred to as "dumpsters" shall be situated at an appropriate location on all properties so as not to constitute a nuisance for users of the property and adjoining property owners and shall be appropriately screened to improve the appearance of the area. The location of the units on the property and the type of screening necessary shall be approved by the building inspector. 
b.  In areas under the joint or overlapping jurisdiction of the Delaware department of highways and transportation and the Town of Smyrna, the regulations of the Delaware department of highways and transportation relating to ingress and egress drives shall control. 
c.  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain such a unit on his property unless approved by the building inspector where such approval is required. 
d.  Any such trash receptacle or garbage disposal units, commonly referred to as "dumpsters," already in place as of the effective date of this ordinance (7-21-86) shall be deemed nonconforming unless approved and screened as required by this paragraph and shall be subject to section 4, paragraph 6 ("Nonconforming Uses-Gradual Elimination of Certain Uses") of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 10-19-98(2), § 2) 
14.  Conditional uses, general guides and standards. The purpose of the "conditional use" procedure is to provide for certain uses which cannot be well-adjusted to their environment in particular locations with full protection offered to surrounding properties by rigid application of the district regulations. 
These uses either have unusual characteristics or are generally of a public or semipublic character and are essential and desirable for the general convenience and welfare but, because of the nature of the use, the importance or relationship to the comprehensive plan and possible impact, not only on neighboring properties, but on a large section of the town, require the exercise of planning judgment on location and site plan. 
A "conditional use" should be approved by the mayor and council after compliance with the applicable section of this code concerning public hearings and only if it is found that the location is appropriate and not in conflict with the comprehensive plan, that the public health, safety, morals and general welfare will not be adversely affected, that necessary safeguards will be provided for the protection of surrounding property, persons and neighborhood values and, further provided that the additional standards of this article are complied with. Unless otherwise specified in this article or specified as a condition of approval, the height limits, yard spaces, lot area, sign and parking requirements shall be the same as for other uses in the district in which the conditional use is located. 
(Ord. of 10-19-98(2), § 2; Ord. of 3-15-99(3), § 1) 
15.  Signs. General: The placement of all signs must comply with the setback requirements of that zoning district with the exception of shopping centers and industrial/office/research park under one ownership with multiple tenant pad sites. Signs shall be permanent in nature and positioned outside vehicular line-of-sight areas. One sign per business on building, except corner properties, two signs per business, may include name of business, address of business, and type of business. Maximum height for any sign is 40 feet. All signs requiring a permit shall be renewed and inspected annually. 
Fees for the re-inspection shall be paid at the time of the permit renewal. 
A.  Definitions. 
1.  A-frame signs are designed to stand on their own either on public or private property, so long as there remains four feet of unobstructed passageway. A-frame signs are not to be permanently affixed to any object, structure, or the ground. The maximum sign area per sign is eight square feet, sign area is calculated on one side only. The maximum size for rectangular A-frame signs is four feet in height and two feet in width. A-frame signs must be taken indoors at the close of each business day. One A-frame sign is permitted per building; corner buildings permitted one A-frame signs per street frontage. 
2.  Banners shall mean a temporary sign of cloth or similar material no larger than four feet wide by eight feet long. If a larger banner is desired, written permission MUST be obtained from the town manager or his designee. Banners shall be carefully designed and constructed as they reflect on the appeal and attraction of the business and the town. 
3.  Billboard shall mean a structure which is erected by an advertising company for the purpose of the placement of a sign for hire. Each such space for hire shall be considered a specific billboard regardless of whether or not the face is incorporated into the ground structure. 
4.  Electronic variable message sign (EVMS) means a sign or portion thereof where the message copy includes characters, letters or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged electronically without touching or physically altering the primary surface of the sign. Message copy may be changed in the field or from a remote location. 
5.  Ground sign means a detached sign supported by uprights, pylons, poles or braces for support and not attached to any structure. 
6.  Illumination (acceptable types) shall mean the provision of light provided either internally or non-glare directly. 
5.  Marquee sign means erected upon any awning, canopy, hood or permanent construction projecting from a wall of the building above the entrance, thoroughfare, walkway or sidewalk. 
6.  Monument sign means any stand-alone, self-supporting structure affixed to the ground and intended to advertise the name of the development or commercial entity on the premises. The monument structure height shall not exceed five feet. Residential development monuments are not to exceed a total sign area of 32 square feet with a maximum of two per entrance road to the development provided 1,500-foot separation between entrances along one common road frontage. 
7.  Off-premises sign means a sign directing attention to a business, commodity, service or product which is not conducted, sold or offered upon the premises where the sign is located. 
8.  On-site sign shall mean a sign directing attention to a business, commodity, service or product which is conducted, sold or offered upon the premises where the sign is located. 
9.  Real estate sign shall mean any sign (unlighted) not more than 25 square feet in area and advertising only the sale or rental of the promises upon which the sign is situated. 
10.  Roof sign shall mean any sign erected, constructed and maintained wholly upon or over the roof of any building with the principal support on the roof structure, subject to the requirements of the definition of wall sign. 
11.  Sign area shall mean the entire sign including trim, moldings, battens and nailing strips. 
12.  Two-faced sign shall mean signs that are back to back and are not more than 60 inches from one another at any time. The signs are to be identical in words and representations. Permissible size shall be determined by the square footage of one side of the sign. 
13.  Wall sign shall mean any sign, not including a marquee sign or nameplate sign, erected against the wall of any building or displayed with the exposed face thereof in a plane parallel to the plane of the wall. Wall signs shall include any business or advertising matter painted directly upon any wall. 
B.  Exempt from permit or fee (non-illuminated only). 
1.  Areas zoned R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-2A, R-3 or MH shall be permitted to post a maximum of two temporary unlighted real estate signs to be removed upon sale. 
2.  Traffic safety signs, directional signs, street identification, and instructional signs affixed to posts as approved by DelDOT. 
3.  Signs painted on windows advertising services offered by the establishment with exception of the historic preservation overlay district (HPOD) requiring review and approval by the historic district review board. 
4.  Political party candidates seeking public office provided that the signs are removed within ten days from post-election. 
5.  Signs (unlighted) not to exceed four square feet in area in recognition of a charitable donation. 
6.  Signs bearing occupants names, house numbers and street, not having commercial implication and not exceeding one square foot. 
7.  Ornamental or patriotic flags not commercially connected. 
8.  Legal notices, municipal signs, railroad crossings and related safety signs. 
9.  Specific decorative signs, banners and/or flags related to holidays. 
10.  Agricultural districts shall be permitted to erect a sign advertising home-grown products not to exceed three square feet. 
11.  Signs which are attached or are an integral part of fuel pumps and do not extend permanently beyond the area of the pump. 
12.  Business related flags, i.e. open flags, flags relating to merchandise, etc., so long as the flag is no larger than three feet by five feet in size and is taken indoors at the close of each business day. 
13.  Balloons no larger than 18 inches in diameter. 
C.  Sign permits required. 
1.  The following types of signs are allowable in the listed zoning district. 
Zoning District Real Estate Sign Electronic Variable Message Sign Ground Sign Monument Sign Wall Sign or Marquee Sign Illuminated Sign "A-Frame" Signs Banners/Temporary Signs Flags A, R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-2A, R-3 P NA NA P NA NA NA NA P I&R P SE NA P 6 P 2 NA 1 NA P P LC P NA NA NA P 2 SE NA P P CC P NA NA NA P 2 P P P P HC P P P 4 P 6 P 3 P NA P P M P P NA P 6 P 3 SE NA P P MHP P NA NA P 6 P 5 SE NA NA P IORP P SE NA P 6 P 2 SE NA P P CRD P NA NA NA SE SE NA P P SC P SE P 4 P 7 P 3 P NA P P HPOD 8 P NA NA P P P P P P  
P: Permitted 
NA: Not allowed 
SE: Special exception 
1  Allowable for hospitals and emergency medical center. 
2  One sign, two s.f./bldg. l.f. & 100 s.f maximum. 
3  One sign, three s.f./bldg. l.f. & 150 s.f. maximum. 
4  One sign of 200 s.f. maximum. 
5  One sign for management office, 4 s.f. maximum. 
6  One sign per site frontage, 1 s.f./frontage l.f. & 75 s.f. maximum. 
7  One sign per pad site frontage, 25 s.f. maximum. 
8  Subject to additional review by the historic district review board. 
Permitted sign area: The tables below apply to the following types of signs: Wall Signs (including awning and canopy, window, painted and temporary signs). 
I&R, LC, CC, and IORP Zoning Districts Building frontage (feet) Maximum permitted sign area (square feet) 5 10 10 20 20 40 30 60 40 80 50 and above 100  
HC, M, and SC zoning districts Building frontage (feet) Maximum permitted sign area (square feet) 5 15 10 30 20 60 30 90 40 120 50 and above 150  
Permitted sign area: The tables below apply to the following types of signs: Monument signs. 
All zoning districts; except: LC, CC, CRD and HPOD Premise frontage (feet) Maximum permitted sign area (square feet) 5 5 10 10 20 20 30 30 40 40 50 50 60 60 70 70 75 and above 75  
2.  In all residential districts, a permit for signs measuring over three square feet in area is required. 
3.  Commercial and public uses shall be permitted to erect the type of signs indicated for the zoning district and placed upon that property and specific to the business being conducted. 
4.  Shopping center monument signs are to be located along the landscaped area between the sidewalk and the parking areas a minimum of ten feet within the property line. These signs are to be consistent in structure design and materials. 
D.  Not permissible at any time in any zoning district. 
1.  Billboards within the incorporated area of the town. 
2.  Roof signs of any kind. 
3.  Flashing or rotating lights. 
4.  Noise emitting signs or lights. 
5.  No sign in the residential area shall be illuminated. 
6.  Banners more than 30 days (without special exception). EXCEPTION: Those banners referring to a credibility/merit award awarded to a business or organization; allowed for one year from the time the honor is awarded. 
7.  Signs erected in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision or, by reason of the position, shape or color, may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device or which makes use of words "stop," "look," "danger" or any other word, phrase, symbol or character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse vehicular traffic. 
8.  Signs erected, constructed or maintained so as to obstruct or be attached to any firefighting equipment, windows, doors or openings used as a means of ingress or egress or for firefighting purposes, or placed so as to interfere with any opening required for proper light and ventilation. 
9.  Construction height greater than 40 feet. 
10.  Dimensions greater than 200 square feet. 
E.  Off-premises signs. 
1.  Off-premises signs are allowable by special exception only in the HC zoning district. 
2.  Only one off-premises directional sign per use is allowable. 
3.  Only one off-premises sign is to be located on any given lot in the HC zoning district. 
4.  Such signs are not to exceed five square feet in area. 
5.  Such signs are to be set back a minimum of five feet from the right-of-way/property line of all public streets/roads. 
6.  Such signs are not to be higher than three feet above grade. 
7.  Such signs are not to be placed within vehicular sight triangles. 
8.  Such signs are be no further than 1,000 feet from the property line of the premises of the business it refers to. 
F.  Electronic variable message signs (EVMS). 
1.  Electronic variable message signs may substitute in lieu of other permitted signs pursuant to section 15.B.1., allowable signs. The EMVS shall be further restricted by the additional standards in this subparagraph. 
2.  The EVMS is restricted to no more than 50 square feet of sign area or as specified in section 15.B.1., and shall not be located within 75 feet of any residential use. The setback shall include any right-of-way and be measured property line to sign structure. 
3.  Except for public emergency announcements, the message displayed on the EVMS shall be static and non-animated and shall not be changed more than once every 15 minutes. In the event of a public emergency, announcements may scroll continuously until the public emergency message is no longer necessary. 
4.  A public emergency announcement is limited to weather related emergencies, national and local security events, Amber Alerts, and the like and dispatched only by the Emergency Broadcast System, local police and state police departments. 
5.  The applicant for an electronic variable message sign permit shall certify in writing to the Building and Zoning Department of the Town of Smyrna that the message (except for public emergency announcements) to be displayed on the sign shall remain static and shall not flash or scroll at any time and that the message will remain unchanged for at least 15 minutes at a time. 
G.  Maintenance and removal of signs. 
1.  Maintenance. The owner, lessee or person or entity in control of any premises upon which an on-site sign defined in this section is present, in any form, shall be responsible for maintaining said sign, together with all supports, braces, guys, anchors or other fastening or hanging devices, in a structurally sound and safe condition and otherwise in good repair. 
2.  Removal of on-site signs. The owner, lessee or person or entity in control of any premises upon which an on-site sign is present, in any form, shall be responsible for the removal of any on-site sign which refers to a business or establishment which has permanently closed and/or relocated or which otherwise no longer operates from that location, together with all supports, braces, guys, anchors or other fastening or hanging devices, within 180 days of such permanent closing, relocation or cessation of operation. 
H.  Abandoned signs. Any on-site sign remaining on a premise 180 days or more after the permanent closing and/or relocation of the business or establishment shall be deemed abandoned. A business or establishment will be considered permanently closed and/or relocated by written or posted notice to the town and/or the public of such closing or relocating, or upon such other usual indication including, but not limited to: 
1.  The cessation of the sale of goods and/or the rendering of services; 
2.  The lack of business operating hours, including hours by appointment; 
3.  The extended absence of employees from the establishment; 
4.  The closing and/or securing of the means of egress to the business or establishment. 
I.  Notice. 
1.  The town shall, upon a determination that an on-site sign or any support, brace, guy, anchor or other fastening or hanging device of an on-site sign is not properly maintained or has been abandoned, prior to taking any other action to enforce compliance with this section 15, give written notice (delivered in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested and by posting upon the subject property) to the owner, lessee, or person or entity in control of the premises, that an on-site sign has been deemed abandoned and/or not properly maintained. The notice shall also: 
a.  If the sign is found to be not properly maintained, specify the nature of the deficiency; 
b.  Provide notice of the need to repair if not properly maintained or, if abandoned, the need to remove said sign, and all supports, braces, guys, anchors or other fastening or hanging device of the sign, within 30 days; 
c.  State that upon failure to comply with the notice and order to repair or remove, the town may repair or remove said sign, together with all supports, braces, guys, and/or other fastening or hanging devices, as provided in subsection G., and/or institute proceedings against such person or entity to collect a civil penalty for violation of this ordinance. 
2.  The effective date of notice under subsection H. shall be the later of: 
a.  The date of personal delivery or, if mailed, the date the return receipt is signed, or if not signed, the date the notice is marked refused, unclaimed or otherwise undeliverable by the U.S. Postal Service; or 
b.  The date the property is posted. The fact that such notice was not actually received by the person or entity shall not be a defense to the town's subsequent enforcement of this section 15. 
3.  Should the town determine an on-site sign presents an immediate threat or danger to the health, safety and welfare of the community, the above notice set out above in subsection 1. shall not be required and the town may take immediate action to make safe the danger, including repair or removal of the sign, and all supporting or mounting devices or hardware. Notice shall then be sent to the owner, lessee, or person or entity in control of the premises advising them of the action taken, the costs incurred and the means of recovery pursuant to subsection K. 
J.  Removal of signs. 
1.  If the violation is not remedied within the time set forth in the notice and order as provided above, the town is authorized to order the repair or removal of any on-site sign, together with all supports, braces, guys, anchors or other fastening or hanging devices deemed by the town as being: 
a.  Not properly maintained, in a state of disrepair, structurally unsound, unsafe or otherwise deficient; or 
b.  Abandoned, as that term is defined at subsection H. 
2.  All on-site signs which are determined to be not properly maintained and which have not been repaired within the time set forth in the required notice and order of subsection I. may, at the town's reasonable discretion, be repaired, or be totally removed, including the support structure and/or mounting hardware, at any time after the effective date of the notice. 
3.  All on-site signs which are deemed abandoned and which have not been removed within the time set forth in the required notice and order of subsection I. may, at the town's reasonable discretion, be refaced with a blank or blacked out face or be totally removed, including the support structure and/or mounting hardware, at any time after the effective date of the notice. Covering sign copy with tarps, paper, tape, cardboard, or other non permanent materials is not an acceptable method of re-facing. 
4.  Any sign which has been removed from the premises shall be considered discarded and replacement shall constitute a new sign and require a new permit. 
K.  Costs of removal. 
1.  When the town is required under this section to repair or remove any on-site sign, the charge shall be: (1) the town's actual cost if contracted out, or (2) if performed by town personnel, $50.00 per hour, with a minimum charge of $50.00 plus any equipment or other incidental charges incurred. There also shall be assessed an administrative fee of $25.00. 
2.  The cost to repair or remove any on-site sign in accordance with this section, together with any civil penalties and costs, shall be recoverable. Such costs and fines may be collected as any other fine or cost is collected. Costs shall include court costs and reasonable attorney's fees, whenever permitted by law. 
L.  Penalties . Any person determined by any court of competent jurisdiction to have violated this section shall forfeit and pay to the town pursuant to section 17, penalties for violation, a civil penalty in the amount of not more than $100.00 per day, plus costs. Each day of a continuing violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 2-5-01, § 2; Ord. No. 003-07, § 2, 10-15-07) 
16.  Waiver of sidewalk requirement for residential properties in existing subdivisions. Upon the recommendation of the town manager, the council may waive the sidewalk requirement for existing vacant lots in existing residential subdivisions (those approved prior to the effective date of this ordinance) if all of the following conditions are met: 
a)  The lot(s) for which a waiver is requested is part of an existing residential subdivision where no sidewalks previously existed or where sidewalks were not required at the time the subdivision was approved; 
b)  The subdivision is substantially complete with few remaining undeveloped but properly recorded building lots (for the purpose of this provision "substantially complete" shall mean that greater than 90 percent of the total approved lots have been built upon); 
c)  There is no demonstrable public purpose served by the installation of sidewalks on the remaining properties; 
d)  The properties are not subject to a major or minor site plan requirement or further subdivision so as to create additional lots which would otherwise have to comply with the town's sidewalk requirements; and 
e)  The provisions of the subdivision ordinance and the Town Code as relate to sidewalks are met. 
An applicant for a waiver must submit a written request to the town manager in the manner prescribed by the town manager; the town manager must review the request and, if he/she concurs, submit a recommendation to the town council; the town council must by act by resolution to waive the requirement; and the approved waiver must be recorded with the building permit for the property in question. 
(Ord. No. 010-03, § 1, 4-21-03) 
17.  Exceptions for projections into required yard setbacks. The following exceptions from the required yard setbacks are permitted for residential dwellings: 
a.  Bay windows, oriels or balconies may project not more than three feet into the required rear yard setback; 
b.  Chimneys, cornices and eaves may project not more than two feet into the required rear yard setback; 
c.  Sills, leaders, belt courses and similar ornamental or structural features may project not more than six inches into the required rear yard setback; 
d.  An open fire balcony, a fire escape or a fire tower may project not more than four feet into the required rear yard setback; 
e.  An uncovered patio at ground level may project into the required rear yard, provided that it is setback from any lot line by a minimum of two feet; 
f.  An uncovered porch or deck or any part thereof elevated above ground level may project up to eight feet into the required rear yard setback. Stairs leading from the porch or deck, with an uncovered landing area at ground level not greater than nine square feet, may project an additional two feet into the rear yard setback. The porch or deck must remained uncovered and not be improved in any manner, including, but not limited to, enclosing the porch or deck with screens or windows, the installation of temporary overhangs, or the installation of a trellis; 
g.  Uncovered stairs and covered enclosures of basement stairs providing entry directly to a dwelling and including a landing above ground level of not more than 25 square feet may project up to eight feet into the rear yard setback; 
h.  Fences may be constructed in any yard setback pursuant to any other town code, including the Town Zoning Code, governing the installation, placement, location and construction of fences. 
18.  Hotel and conference centers. 
a.  No building shall exceed 60 feet in height, exclusive of roof tanks and supports, chimneys or enclosures for elevators or air conditioning machinery or other apparatus. 
b.  No building shall be closer than 40 feet to any abutting street right-of-way line with a maximum 25 percent of the required parking maintained within the front yard with the exception of limited access roadways. Waivers may be considered for properties having more than one roadway frontage. 
c.  No building shall be closer than 20 feet to a side yard and rear yard lot line with exception of residential districts where the building setback line is to be a minimum 50 feet plus two feet for each foot of building height with a maximum 120 feet setback. 
d.  A minimum 20-foot wide landscaped buffer is to be provided along the entire perimeter of the hotel and conference center, provided that a buffer shall not be required along any property line abutting a street situated at the front of the parcel, and a corner parcel shall not be required to have buffering on either property line abutting the street. This buffer is to provide six and one-half-foot high screening adjacent to all residential districts. Screening is to consist of evergreen trees and bushes and berms. 
(Ord. No. 005-19, § 3, 4-15-19) 
e.  A hotel and conference center shall provide off-street parking at the rate of one parking space for each guest room. In addition to those required for guest rooms, parking is to be provided at the rate of one space for every 200 square feet of floor area of said meeting space facilities, ballroom, conference suites, restaurant and/or bar. 
f.  A hotel and conference center shall be permitted on a site containing a minimum of five acres. 
g.  A hotel and conference center is to provide a combination of minimum 150 guest rooms and 10,000 square feet of conference/meeting space area. 
h.  Any restaurant as an accessory use to a hotel operation shall only be permitted if it is located within the hotel building. Also permitted as an accessory use to a hotel operation if located within the hotel building, are stores, shops and service facilities, primarily for the use and convenience of hotel guests. 
19.  Home occupation/home-based business (major and minor/no impact). A home occupation/home-based business is defined as any activity carried out for gain by a resident and conducted in the resident's dwelling. 
Minor home occupation/no impact home-based business and major home occupation/major home-based business shall be permitted when in accordance with the following standards: 
A.  Minor home occupation. Minor home occupations shall meet all of the following requirements: 
(1)  The business activity shall be compatible with the residential zoning of the property and surrounding uses. 
(2)  The use is carried on entirely by the inhabitants of the dwelling, and shall employ no employees other than family members residing in the dwelling. 
(3)  The use does not involve any customer, client, or patient visits, whether vehicular or pedestrian, to the dwelling. 
(4)  Such use involves no pickup, delivery, or removal functions to or from the premises in excess of those normally associated with the residential use. 
(5)  There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or inventory of a substantial nature. 
(6)  There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including, but not limited to, parking, signs or lights. 
(7)  The business activity may not use any equipment or process which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic interference, including interference with radio or television reception, which is detectable in the neighborhood. 
(8)  The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with residential use in the neighborhood. 
(9)  The business activity shall only be conducted within the dwelling and the floor area devoted to such use shall not exceed 20 percent of the total floor area of the principal residential structure. 
(10)  Such business use shall not involve any illegal activity. 
B.  Major home occupation. A home occupation that does not meet one or more of the criteria listed under subsection A. above shall be defined as a major home occupation/major home-based business. Major home occupations shall be permitted only by special exception in those zoning districts where major home occupations are permitted and when other applicable criteria of this Section and Ordinance can be met. 
C.  Prohibited home occupations. Home occupations shall not include the following uses, which shall be classified as commercial or institutional uses: 
(1)  Animal shelter, commercial kennel or veterinary office; 
(2)  Rooming or boarding home; 
(3)  Bed and breakfast; 
(4)  Funeral home; 
(5)  Restaurant; 
(6)  Outdoor café; 
(7)  Club or lodge; 
(8)  Medical or dental clinic (two or more doctors or dentists); 
(9)  Retail shop; 
(10)  Rental business; 
(11)  Furniture stripping; 
(12)  Auto or small engine repair; 
(13)  Painting of vehicles, trailers, or boats; 
(14)  Manufacturing, repairing or other mechanical work performed in connection with the home occupation performed in any outdoor area; 
(15)  Private school with organized classes; private schools are defined as any building or groups of buildings, the use of which meets state requirements for elementary, secondary or higher education and which does not secure the major part of its funding from any governmental agency. 
(16)  Welding shop; or 
(17)  Other uses of similar character to those listed above. 
D.  [Home occupation-Minor, major or prohibited.] The town manager or his designee shall determine whether a proposed home occupation falls under the category of minor, major, or prohibited. The applicant shall be responsible for supplying such information as deemed necessary by the town manager or his designee to make this determination. The following requirements for approval and permitting shall apply: 
(1)  Upon determining that the proposed use is a minor home occupation and is in conformance with the requirements of this ordinance, the town zoning officer shall issue a certificate of zoning compliance. 
(2)  Where the town manager or his designee determines that the proposed use is a major home occupation, the use shall be permitted only as a special exception and shall require review and approval by the board of adjustment in accordance with the provisions is section 9.2., Special Exceptions; conditions governing; procedures, and the criteria of this section. The board of adjustment may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it deems necessary to implement the purposes of this Ordinance. Following approval, the town zoning officer shall issue a certificate of zoning compliance. 
(3)  An approved certificate of zoning compliance for a home occupation shall not be transferable to another property or to another type of home occupation. The certificate of zoning compliance issued shall only be valid for the use and on the property for which it was originally issued. In the event that a property with an existing home occupation is sold, leased, or rented to someone other than the original permit holder, the new owner, lessee or renter, shall be required to obtain a certificate of zoning compliance, demonstrating full compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and any other applicable regulations. 
(4)  Per the 2003 Property Maintenance Code, Section 104, Duties and Powers of the Code Official, 104.4 Right of entry and the 2003 International Building Code, Section 104, Duties and Powers of the Building Official, 104.6, Right of entry, a town official shall be permitted to inspect the home occupations to ensure that the requirements of this Section and other applicable town regulations are being carried out. 
E.  General standards applicable to home occupations. The following standards shall apply to all home occupations, whether major or minor: 
(1)  As long as all other criteria is met, more than one home occupation shall be permitted per lot or dwelling in the case of minor home occupations. 
(2)  The practice of a home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling which is the bona fide residence and under ownership of the principal practitioner or contained entirely within an accessory building and located on the same lot as the dwelling. 
(3)  All applicants for a home occupation shall be required to obtain an approved certificate of zoning compliance from the town in accordance with the requirements of subsection D. above within 30 days prior to beginning operation of the use. 
(4)  There shall be no change in the exterior appearance of the dwelling, any accessory building and/or the lot, which would cause the premises to differ from its residential character by the use of advertising, materials, show windows, or special lighting visible from the outside of the premises to attract customers or clients. No public display of any goods and/or product, information and/or advertising concerning any goods and/or product or interior display shall be visible from the outside. 
(5)  The home occupation shall not cause noise, glare, vibration, fumes, dust and/or electrical interference detectable to normal senses beyond the property in excess of levels customarily generated by a residential use. 
(6)  There shall be no storage or use upon the premises (beyond normal household use) of toxic, explosive, polluting, dangerous, or other substances defined as hazardous by DNREC, or through applicable regulations. 
(7)  Deliveries form major commercial suppliers which may be disruptive to the neighborhood shall not be made between the hours of 8:00 p.m. prevailing time and 8 a.m. prevailing time. 
(8)  There shall be no unenclosed exterior storage of material or refuse resulting from the home occupation. All home occupations shall meet applicable outdoor storage standards set forth in this ordinance. 
(9)  All commercial vehicles shall be parked on the same lot as the home occupation, and only one commercial vehicle may be parked outside of a garage, enclosed structure, or screened parking space within the lot boundaries. Such a commercial vehicle shall have no more than two axles. There shall be no storage of tractor-trailers on the lot on which the home occupation is located. 
F.  Standards applicable to minor home occupations. In addition to other applicable criteria of this Ordinance, the following standards shall apply to minor home occupations: 
(1)  No employees shall be permitted, except the inhabitants of the dwelling in which the home occupation is located. 
(2)  A minor home occupation shall be permitted in any dwelling type. 
G.  Standards applicable to major home occupations. In addition to other applicable criteria of this ordinance, the following standards shall apply to major home occupations: 
(1)  Major home occupations shall be permitted only in single-family detached dwellings or an accessory structure to a single-family detached dwelling. 
(2)  The area used for a major home occupation shall not exceed 30 percent or 600 square feet of the total floor area of the principal residential structure or accessory structure. 
(3)  No more than one person, other than resident members of the immediate family may be employed or subcontracted at the residence. Use of nonresident employees must have prior approval from the board of adjustment. 
(4)  No more than two clients at any one given time shall be permitted to visit the premises to conduct business related to the major home occupation. 
(5)  No articles shall be sold or offered for sale except those produced on the premises. Such sales must have prior approval by the board of adjustment. 
(6)  Where employees or customer visits are anticipated, off-street parking shall be provided in a sufficient capacity to prevent interference with normal residential parking in the neighborhood. Minimum off-street parking requirements shall apply as designated in section 6.1. 
(7)  Beauty parlors and barber shops may be permitted as a major home occupation provided that no more than two stylist or barber chairs are provided and all other provisions of this ordinance are met. 
(8)  Instructional services may be permitted as a major home occupation provided that a maximum of three students may be instructed at any one time, and there shall be no more than two trips per hour. 
20.  Temporary storage. The following temporary activities shall be permitted in all zoning districts in the Town of Smyrna: temporary storage of construction materials (including dirt, stone, gravel, and the like), equipment, or vehicles used only in connection with and during construction; temporary placement of construction-related facilities (e.g. "porta-potties", dumpsters, temporary fuel tanks, security lighting, storage pods) used only in connection with and during construction; temporary parking areas for vehicles operated by workers involved in the construction project; and the temporary placement of storage pods for use in connection with relocating personal property from the premises to another location. These activities shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements outlined below. To the extent these requirements are inconsistent with any requirements found in Section 5 ("District regulations") for a specific zoning district, any such inconsistencies shall be resolved in favor of the requirements specific to a particular zoning district. The activities identified herein shall be permitted as long as they are: 
(a)  Located on the property upon which the related project is taking place, or on a parcel immediately abutting the same, from and to which direct access is available, provided written permission has been granted by the owner of the abutting property; 
(b)  Located within the public right-of-way directly adjacent to the property upon which the related project is taking place in such a way that it will not impede the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic where it is determined by the town manager or his/her designee that site restrictions will not allow placement on the property; 
(c)  Used only by contractors or workers involved in the project; 
(d)  Removed from the property or public right-of-way upon the expiration of three months (or one month if located within a public right-of-way) from the date that such storage area, parking area, or facility was first placed on the property or removed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the town manager or his/her designee may, for good cause shown, extend such time for up to an additional three months (which shall be done in no greater than one-month increments if located within a public right-of-way). If two or more adjacent lots are owned and actively being developed by the same individual or entity, extensions for up to 12 months may be granted, subject to the other conditions outlined herein. 
(e)  Maintained in good order, repair, and condition, and free of all rubbish and debris (with the exception of rubbish and debris deposited in dumpsters). 
(f)  In compliance with such additional site conditions (e.g. placement, screening, protective barriers, reflective markings, lighting, light-shielding, fencing, dust abatement, security, fire protection) as reasonably imposed by the town manager and his/her designee, subject to appeal to the board of adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 018-05, § 1, 11-7-05; Ord. No. 004-07, § 2, 7-2-07; Ord. No. 007-07, § 2, 7-16-07; Ord. No. 004-08, § 2, 5-19-08; Ord. No. 007-17, § 1, 11-20-17; Ord. No. 005-19, § 3, 4-15-19) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- An Ord. of Oct. 19, 1998, § 1 repealed App. A, § 6 11. in its entirety. Former App. A, § 5 11. pertained to an environmental impact assessment report. 

Section 7. - Administration and enforcement; building permits and certificates of zoning compliance. 
1.  Administration and enforcement. An administrative official designated by the town council shall administer and enforce this ordinance. He may be provided with the assistance of such other persons as the town council may direct. 
If the administrative official shall find that any of the provisions of this ordinance are being violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures, or of additions, alterations, or structural changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this ordinance to insure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. 
2.  Building permits required. No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a permit therefor, issued by the administrative official. No building permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, state laws and permit requirements and federal laws and permit requirements except after written order from the board of adjustment. 
(Ord. of 4-5-93(1), § 13; Ord. of 10-19-98, § 2) 
3.  Application for building permit. All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by site plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon; the exact sizes and locations on the lot of buildings already existing, if any, and the location and dimensions of the proposed building or alteration. The application shall include such other information as lawfully may be required by the administrative official, including existing or proposed uses of the building and land; the number of families, housekeeping units, or rental units the building is designed to accommodate; conditions existing on the lot; and such other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance with, and provide for the enforcement of, this ordinance. 
One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the administrative official, after he shall have marked such copy either as approved or disapproved and attested to the same by his signature on such copy. The second copy of the plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the administrative official. 
4.  Certificates of zoning compliance for new, altered, or nonconforming uses. It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued therefor by the administrative official, stating that the proposed use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this ordinance. 
No nonconforming structure or use shall be maintained, renewed, changed or extended until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued by the administrative official. The certificate of zoning compliance shall state specifically wherein the nonconforming use differs from the provisions of this ordinance provided that upon enactment or amendment of this ordinance, owners or occupants of nonconforming uses or structures shall have three months to apply for certificates of zoning compliance. Failure to make such application within three months shall be presumptive evidence that the property was in conforming use at the time of enactment or amendment of this ordinance. The administrative official shall maintain a record of nonconforming structures and uses from the date of the adoption of this ordinance for the purpose of identifying such nonconformities. 
No permit for erection, alteration, moving or repair of any building shall be issued until an application has been made for a certificate of zoning compliance; the certificate shall be issued in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance upon completion of the work. 
A temporary compliance certificate may be issued by the administrative official for a period not exceeding six months during alterations or partial occupancy of a building pending its completion, provided that such temporary permit may require such conditions and safeguards as will protect the safety of the occupants and the public. 
The administrative official shall maintain a record of all certificates of compliance and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person. 
Failure to obtain a certificate of zoning compliance shall be a violation of this ordinance and punishable under section 17 of this ordinance. 
5.  Performance standard administration. An application for a building permit or a certificate of zoning compliance for a nonresidential use shall be submitted to the administrative official on a form prescribed by the planning commission. The administrative official shall approve, conditionally approve or refer minor site plans to the planning commission. 
Minor site plan applications must include four copies of a site plan drawn to scale. 
The administrative official shall thereupon refer all major site plans to the planning commission. In the case of a major site plan or a minor site plan (where the administrative official deems the installation of sidewalks to be beneficial to pedestrian traffic) which involves frontage on an existing street where adequate sidewalks do not exist, sidewalks shall be installed as part of the site development and shall be included on the site plan. Inadequate sidewalks shall include missing sidewalks, sidewalks having a width less than four feet, lack of handicap depressions in appropriate areas and/or sidewalks in a deteriorated condition. 
The applicant for a major site plan shall submit ten copies of a site plan drawn to scale of 20 or 40 feet to the inch, except that if the property has a maximum dimension over 900 feet, a scale of 50 feet to the inch may be used, placed on a sheet of paper 24 inches by 36 inches, containing the following information: 
A.  Legal data. 
1.  Lot, block and section number of the property. 
2.  Name, address, and owner certification of the owner of record. Owner certification shall be in the following form: 
I, ___________, hereby certify that I am the owner of the property described and shown on this plan, that the plan was made at my direction*, and I acknowledge the same to be my act and desire the plan to be recorded according to law. 
Date: _____ Signature: _____  
*In the case of proposed streets to be dedicated, add the following after the word "direction" to the above certification: "that all streets shown hereon and not heretofore dedicated are hereby dedicated to the public use and that all proposed monuments and markers shown hereon will be set at the location indicated,". 
3.  Name and address of the equitable owner, if any. 
4.  Name, address and certification of person, firm or organization preparing the map. This certification shall be in the following form: 
I, ___________ hereby certify that I am a registered engineer, land surveyor, or architect in the state, that the information shown hereon has been prepared under my supervision and to my best knowledge and belief represents good engineering, surveying and/or architectural practices as required by the applicable laws of the state. 
Date: _____ Seal: _____  
Signature: _____ 
5.  Date, north point and written and graphic scale. 
6.  Sufficient description of information to define precisely the boundaries and total acreage of the site. All distances shall be given in feet and tenths of a foot. All angles shall be given to the nearest ten seconds or closer. The error of closure shall not exceed one in 10,000. 
7.  The locations, names and existing widths of adjacent street right-of-way and curblines. 
8.  The locations, if involved, of Town of Smyrna and/or county boundaries. 
9.  The locations and owners of record of all adjoining lands. 
10.  Location, width and purpose of all existing and proposed easements, set backs, reservations and areas dedicated to public use within or adjoining the property. 
11.  A complete outline of existing or proposed deed restrictions or covenants applying to the property and recital of the deed references if they are of record. 
12.  Existing zoning on the site and adjacent properties. 
13.  One location map, at a scale of 400 feet to the inch, showing the distance along all adjacent roads to the nearest intersections. 
14.  Record of any agreements between the applicant and the town regarding the proposed development. 
B.  Existing features. 
1.  Location and size of existing sanitary sewers. 
2.  Location and size of existing storm sewers, watercourses and drainage flow. 
3.  Location and type of all existing topographical features which may affect proposed streets. 
4.  Location and size of all existing water mains. 
5.  Parcels of land, such as additional right-of-way along old roads, intended to be dedicated, and the conditions, if any, of such dedication or reservation. 
6.  Tentative grades of proposed streets to an existing street or to a point 400 feet beyond the subdivision boundaries. 
C.  Natural features. 
1.  Contour lines at vertical intervals of two feet for land with average existing slope of four percent or less, and at intervals of five feet for land with average existing slope greater than four percent. 
2.  Location of different soil types, as indicated by the Soil Survey of Kent County, prepared by the Soil Conservation Service, and including locations of flood hazard areas including the 100-year floodplain boundary(ies). The soils information shall be supplemented by soil boring and percolation test data if requested by the town (if the site is within or near the environmental protection overlay district/floodplain subdistrict, see also the regulations prescribed at sections 5.10, 6.9 and 7.8 of the zoning ordinance). 
3.  Location of significant natural features, including bodies of water, wetlands, and forest areas. 
D.  Proposed development. 
1.  Existing buildings and other structures. 
2.  Location and width of all proposed streets and rights-of-way. 
3.  Location of all proposed structures, except one-family detached dwellings. Indication of the total number of dwelling units. 
4.  Location and dimensions of all lot lines. 
5.  Building setback lines on all lots. 
6.  Location of all uses not requiring structures, including parks, playgrounds and other open space areas. 
7.  Location and plans for any outdoor signs. 
8.  Location, direction, power and time of use for any proposed outdoor lighting. 
9.  The locations, size and arrangement of proposed sidewalks, driveways, loading areas, off-street parking areas and other paved areas. 
10.  Indication of the total amount of impervious surfaces and the development coverage. 
11.  Any proposed changes in elevation of the site and elevations of all streets, parking areas and building foundation. The datum to which all elevations, including existing contour elevations refer, shall be clearly indicated on the plan. 
12.  Plans for surface drainage of the site, if requested by the town. Such plans shall include stormwater runoff calculations and shall show the proposed method of accommodating the anticipated runoff. 
13.  Any proposed belowground or aboveground utilities and any contemplated public improvements, including road improvements, on or adjoining the property. Plans for such utilities and improvements shall indicate whether the developer, the town, or other agency will bear the financial responsibility for the construction, and which improvements are intended to be dedicated to the town. 
14.  Proposed grading, screening and landscaping (indicating size and height), including the types and locations of proposed streets. 
The information submitted shall also include a description of the proposed machinery, operations and products. Specifications for the mechanisms and techniques to be used in restricting the elements mentioned in section 6.6 of this ordinance shall be submitted by the applicant. The applicant shall submit a written statement acknowledging his understanding of the performance standards and agree to conform to the standards at all times. Submitted data will be treated confidentially if the applicant so desires. Administration of the performance standards shall be paid for by the applicant for a fee of $50.00 for the first review and $25.00 for each following review required by the administrative official, plus all costs incurred by the town for an engineer's review to aid the planning commission in rendering a decision relevant to any application. 
The planning commission, if there is any reasonable doubt as to the likelihood of conformance, shall refer the application for investigation and report of an expert consultant(s) to determine whether a proposed use will conform to the performance standards specified in section 6,6. Consultant(s) report(s) shall be submitted to the planning commission within 30 days after his or their receipt of the application. Consultant(s) report(s) shall be promptly furnished to the applicant. 
Upon receipt of the consultant(s) report(s), the planning commission must, within 30 days, approve or disapprove the application or suggest modifications under which the proposal may be approved. The decision must be immediately transmitted in written form to the applicant. 
Lawfully existing uses shall, within three years from the date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, comply with the performance standards of section 6.6 of this ordinance. 
The administrative official shall investigate any alleged violation of the performance standards and, if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a violation exists, he shall notify the planning commission. The planning commission shall investigate the alleged violation and may employ the assistance of necessary expert consultant(s). Upon determination that a violation does exist, necessary steps as prescribed in section 17 of this ordinance shall be taken. 
(Ord. of 11-15-99(1), § 1) 
6.  Expiration of building permit. Expiration of building permits shall be regulated as outlined in section 108.10 of the BOCA National Building Code in effect. 
(Ord. of 12-18-00(8), § 1) 
7.  Construction and use to be as provided in applications, plans, permits and certificates of zoning compliance. Building permits or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the administrative official authorize only the use, arrangement and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement or construction. Use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed violation of this ordinance, and punishable as provided by section 17 thereof. 
8.  Floodplain subdistrict: Criteria for construction or placement of structure and plan approval. 
a.  Building permits. 
(1)  No building permits will be issued by the administrative official until it has been determined that any new construction or substantial improvements in the floodplain subdistrict are: 
(a)  Designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement; 
(b)  Constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(c)  Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(2)  Depending on the type of structure involved, the following information shall be included in the building permit for work within the floodplain subdistrict: 
(a)  A plan showing the size of the proposed structure and its relation to the lot where it is to be constructed. 
(b)  A determination of elevations of the existing ground, proposed finished ground and lowest floors, certified by a registered professional engineer, surveyor or architect. 
(c)  Plans showing the method of elevating the proposed structures, including details of proposed fill, pile structures, retaining walls, foundations, erosion protection measures, etc. When required by the administrative official, these plans shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer or architect. 
(d)  Plans showing the methods used to protect utilities, (including sewer, water, telephone, electric, gas, etc.) from flooding to the base flood elevation at the building site. 
(e)  For structures to be elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation (nonresidential structures only): 
(1)  Plans showing details of all floodproofing measures, prepared by a registered professional engineer or architect, and showing the size of the proposed structure and its relation to the lot where it is to be constructed; 
(2)  A determination of elevations of existing ground, proposed finished ground, lowest floors and floodproofing limits certified by a registered professional engineer, surveyor or architect; 
(3)  A certificate prepared by the registered professional engineer or architect who prepared the plans that the structure in question, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, is designed so that (1) below the base flood elevation, the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and (2) the structure will withstand the hydrostatic, hydrodynamic, buoyant, impact and other forces resulting from the flood depths, velocities, pressures and other factors associated with the base flood. 
b.  Minimum floodproofing standards. In order to prevent excessive damage to buildings, structures and related utilities and facilities, the following restrictions apply all development, subdivision proposals, manufactured home parks, new construction and to construction of substantial improvements to existing structures occurring in the floodplain area: 
(1)  Basements and lowest floors. All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures must have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation. All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures must have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood elevation, the structure is floodproofed in accordance with 7.8.a.2.e.3. 
For all new construction and substantial improvements of elevated building, fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on the exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(2)  Fill. If fill is used to raise the finished surface of the lowest floor to one foot above the base flood elevation: 
(a)  Fill shall extend beyond a structure for a sufficient distance to provide acceptable access. For residential structures, fill shall extend laterally 15 feet beyond the building line from all points. For nonresidential structures, fill shall be placed to provide access acceptable for intended use. At-grade access, with fill extending laterally 15 feet beyond the building line, shall be provided to a minimum of 25 percent of the perimeter of a nonresidential structure; 
(b)  Fill shall consist of soil or rock materials only. Sanitary landfills shall not be permitted; 
(c)  Fill material shall be compacted to provide the necessary stability and resistance to erosion, scouring or settling; 
(d)  Fill slopes shall be no steeper than one vertical on two horizontal unless substantiating data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to and approved by the office of code enforcement; 
(e)  Fill shall be used only to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent properties. 
(3)  Placement of buildings, structures and manufactured homes. 
(a)  All buildings and structures shall be constructed and placed on the lot so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a minimum obstruction effect upon the flow and height of floodwater. 
(b)  The following shall not be placed or caused to be placed in the designated floodway: fences, except two-wire fences, other matter which may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water or that will catch or collect debris carried by such stream of floodwaters. 
(c)  Manufactured homes shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of each manufactured home will be at least one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(d)  Adequate surface drainage and access for a manufactured home hauler shall be provided. 
(e)  When manufactured homes are to be elevated on pilings, lots shall be large enough to permit steps. Piles shall be placed in stable soil no more than ten feet apart, and reinforcement shall be provided for pilings more than six feet above the ground level. 
(4)  Anchoring. 
(a)  All buildings and structures and substantial improvements shall be firmly anchored in accordance with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, thus reducing the threat to life and property and decreasing the possibility of the blockage of bridge openings and other restricted sections of the watercourse. 
(b)  All air ducts, large pipes and storage tanks located at or below the base flood elevation shall be firmly anchored to resist flotation. 
(c)  All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement by providing over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors. Specifically: 
(i)  Over-the-top ties shall be provided at each of the four corners of the manufactured home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations with manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring one additional tie per side; 
(ii)  Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points, with manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per side; 
(iii)  All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds; 
(iv)  Any additions to a manufactured home shall be similarly anchored. 
(5)  Storage. No new construction which stores materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or, in times of flooding that could be injurious to human, animal or plant life, shall be stored below base flood elevation. 
c.  Plan approval. The owner or developer of a proposed use shall include on the plan the following information: 
(1)  A map showing the location of the proposed development with respect to the town's floodprone areas, fills, flood or erosion protective facilities, and areas subject to special deed restriction. In addition, all residential subdivisions or other proposed new developments greater than 50 lots or five acres in area, whichever is less, shall include base flood elevation data; 
(2)  Where the development lies partially or completely in the floodprone areas, the plan shall include detailed information giving the location and elevation of all proposed roads, public utilities and building sites. 
d.  Manufactured home parks. For all new manufactured home parks, or expansions to existing manufactured home parks and for existing manufactured home parks where the repair, reconstruction or improvement of streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement has commenced, the following requirements shall be met for any construction within the floodway fringe or approximated floodplain: 
(1)  Manufactured home berthing spacing or lots shall be elevated on compacted fill or on pilings so that the lowest floor of each manufactured home will be one foot above the base flood elevation; 
(2)  Adequate surface drainage and access for a manufactured home hauler shall be provided; 
(3)  When manufactured homes are to be elevated on pilings, lots shall be large enough to permit steps. Piles shall be placed in stable soil no more than ten feet apart, and reinforcement shall be provided for pilings more than six feet above ground level. 
e.  Utility and facility requirements. 
(1)  All new or replacement water systems located in the floodplain subdistrict, whether public or private, shall be one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  All new or replacement sanitary disposal systems located within the floodplain subdistrict, whether public or private, shall be floodproofed to one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(3)  All other new or replacement public and/or private utilities and facilities shall be elevated or floodproofed to one foot above the base flood elevation. 
f.  Drainage. Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure of flood hazards. 
g.  Administration. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, cooperative, business or corporation to undertake, or cause to be undertaken any development, as designed herein in the floodplain subdistrict, without first obtaining a permit from the office of administrative official. 
(2)  All permits and plans shall be approved only after it has been determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in conformance with the requirements of these regulations and all other applicable codes and ordinances. 
(3)  The office of code enforcement shall require copies of all necessary permits from those government agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law. 
(4)  No manufactured home shall be placed at any location within the floodplain subdistrict without the owner or owners having first obtained a placement permit from the office of the administrative official. 
h.  Appeals. Whenever any person is aggrieved by an administrative decision with respect to the provisions of these regulations, it is the right of that person to appeal to the board of adjustment. Such appeals must be filed in accordance with the procedures of the board. All decisions on appeals regarding the provisions of these regulations shall adhere to the following criteria: 
(1)  An affirmative decision shall not be issued by the board within the designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(2)  A decision may be issued by the board for the construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a legally established lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood elevation in conformance with the procedure of paragraphs (3), (4), (5) and (6) of this section. 
(3)  Affirmative decisions shall only be issued by the board upon (i) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the appeal would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that the granting of an appeal will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing town laws or ordinances. 
(4)  Affirmative decisions shall only be issued upon determination that it is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(5)  The board shall notify the applicant in writing that (i) the issuance of a decision to allow construction of a structure below that base flood elevation will result in increased risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all decisions as required in paragraph (6) of this section. 
(6)  The town shall (i) maintain a record of all decisions including justification for their issuance and (ii) report such decisions issued in its annual report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration. 
(7)  Variances in flood hazard district. The board of adjustment is granted the power to issue variances for new construction or substantial improvements in the flood hazard district, with or without a hearing, as follows: 
a.  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, in conformance with the procedures of paragraphs b, c, d and e of this section. 
b.  Variances shall only be issued upon (i) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant and (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in the increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
c.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
d.  The Town of Smyrna shall notify the applicant in writing over the signature of a town official that (i) the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage and (ii) such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions as required in paragraph (e) of this section. 
e.  The Town of Smyrna shall (i) maintain a record of all variance action, including justification for their issuance, and (ii) report such variances issued in its annual report submitted to the administrator. 
(Ord. of 4-5-93(1), §§ 2-9, 12) 
9.  Municipal liability. The granting of a permit or approval of a site plan in an identified floodprone area shall not constitute a representative, guarantee or warranty of any kind by the Town or by any official or employee thereof of the practicability or safety of the proposed use, and shall create no liability upon the town, its officials or employees. 
(Ord. of 4-5-9(1), (2)) 
Section 8. - Board of adjustment; procedure. 
    A board of adjustment is hereby established which shall consist of five members who shall be residents of the town and who shall have knowledge of and experience in the problems of urban and rural development, and who, at the time of appointment, shall not be candidates-elect for or incumbents of an elective public office. The mayor, with consent of the council, shall appoint four members for terms of four years, provided that the terms of the original members shall be established in a manner that one shall expire each year, and one member who shall be chairman and who shall be appointed by the mayor, with consent of council, and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. 
1.  Proceedings of the board of adjustment. The board of adjustment shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs, and in keeping with the provisions of this ordinance. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. The chairman, or in his absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public. The board of adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be a public record and be immediately filed in the offices of the board. 
2.  Hearings; appeals; notice. Appeals to the board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of appeal, give public notice as required by section 14 of this ordinance as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and hold the public hearing within 30 days from the date of filing of the notice of appeal. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The board shall then decide the appeal within 45 days from the time of the hearing. 
3.  Stay of proceedings. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of adjustment after the notice of appeal is filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of adjustment or by a court having jurisdiction on application, on notice to the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(Ord. of 8-16-93(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Section 9. - The board of adjustment; powers and duties. 
    The board of adjustment shall have the following powers and duties: 
1.  Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the administrative official in the enforcement of this ordinance. 
2.  Special exceptions; conditions governing; procedures. to hear and decide requests for those special exceptions which are specifically enumerated in this ordinance when, in the judgment of the board of adjustment, the particular use will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of the ordinance, will not significantly impair the appropriate use of adjoining or nearby property, and will serve the convenience and welfare of the community. No special exception shall be granted for a period of less than one year, and there shall be no limit upon the number of times a special exception can be renewed. 
a.  In making such determination, the board of adjustment shall consider, among other things: 
(1)  The volume of existing traffic and the volume of traffic that will be generated by the proposed use; 
(2)  The adequacy or inadequacy of available parking and the possible need for and availability of additional off-street parking; 
(3)  The potential for objectionable or nuisance-causing activities, including but not limited to air pollution (smoke, ash, dust, fumes, vapors or gases), vibration, noise, heat, glare, light, noxious odors, or radio or television interference; 
(4)  The economic and aesthetic effect upon adjoining or nearby properties; 
(5)  The suitability of the proposed use in keeping with the harmony of adjoining or nearby properties; 
(6)  The amount of pedestrian traffic generated, including the potential for congregation of individuals at or near the property involved. 
b.  (i)  In granting a special exception, the board of adjustment may impose any conditions not otherwise inconsistent with the terms of this ordinance reasonably calculated to minimize the impact of the permitted use upon adjoining and nearby properties, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Limiting the hours of operation; 
(2)  Requiring additional off-street parking above that otherwise required by the terms of this ordinance: 
(3)  Requiring the erection of fences, shrubbery or other screening devices; 
(4)  Further limiting the size, location and number of signs otherwise permitted by this ordinance; 
(5)  Limiting the number of persons involved in the use at any one time, including those conducting the use and those being served by the use; 
(6)  Limiting the use to a specific percentage of floor area or lot area or a specific portion of the lot or structure involved; 
(7)  Limiting the number and hours of deliveries; 
(8)  Limiting or prohibiting the display of products of samples visible from nearby streets or public ways; 
(9)  Any other condition reasonably calculated to protect the community and nearby properties from any adverse effects resulting from the use if permitted as a special exception. 
b.  (ii)  In granting a special exception for adult entertainment establishments and/or body art establishments, as these terms are defined at section 5.10.b.(2) of the zoning code, the board of adjustment shall impose the following time, place, and manner restrictions: 
1.  All adult entertainment establishments shall strictly comply with all provisions of 24 Del.C. Chapter 16, as now in effect or as hereafter amended. Failure to comply with this requirement shall void the special exception permit. 
2.  All body art establishments shall strictly comply with all provisions of the State of Delaware "Regulations Governing Body Art Establishments", adopted by the Secretary, Delaware Health and Social Services under authority of 16 Del.C. Chapter 1, §122(3)(w) , effective September 30, 2002, as now in effect or as hereafter amended. Failure to comply with this requirement shall void the special exception permit. 
3.  Adult entertainment establishments and body art establishments shall be permitted in the highway commercial district (HC), only. 
4.  All adult entertainment establishments and body art establishments, (hereafter referred to collectively as "adult uses") shall be subject to the following time, place, and manner regulations: 
a.  No more than one activity constituting an adult use shall be permitted on any lot. 
b.  No adult use shall be permitted in any building otherwise used in whole or part for residential purposes. 
c.  No adult use shall be permitted on any lot which is located within 1,000 feet of any other lot on which is located an adult use. This distance shall be measured from the nearest property line of such use to the nearest property line of the proposed adult use. 
d.  No adult use shall be permitted on any lot which is located within 1,000 feet of any lot in any residential district. This distance shall be measured from the nearest property line of any residential district to the nearest property line of the proposed adult use. 
e.  No adult use shall be permitted on any lot which is located within 1,000 feet of any lot on which is located a church, community center, funeral home, school, day-care center, hospital, alcoholism center or drug treatment center, counseling or psychiatric treatment facility or public park. This distance shall be measured from the nearest property line of such above use to the nearest property line of the proposed adult use. 
f.  No adult use shall be permitted on any lot which is located within 1,000 feet of any school bus stop. This distance shall be measured from the nearest school bus stop to the nearest property line of the proposed adult use premises. 
g.  No adult use shall be permitted on any lot which is located within 1,000 feet of any commercial enterprise that customarily employs minors. This distance shall be measured from the nearest commercial enterprise to the nearest property line of the proposed adult use premises. 
h.  No adult use shall be permitted on any lot which is located within 1,000 feet of any establishment that sells or serves alcoholic beverages. This distance shall be measured from the establishment that sells or serves alcoholic beverages to the nearest property line of the proposed adult use premises. 
i.  The proposed use shall meet all other requirements of the laws of the Town of Smyrna, including but not limited to district lot and bulk regulations, parking regulations and signage requirements. 
j.  It shall be a condition of any special permit issued for an adult use that no person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted into the premises. 
k.  Explicit messages or drawings on signs and/or the public display of explicit sexual material associated with any adult entertainment use is prohibited. 
l.  Adult uses may operate only between the hours of 10:00 a.m. 8:00 p.m., Mondays through Fridays, and between 10:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on Saturdays, only. 
m.  All adult uses shall continuously carry liability insurance with minimum limits of $1,000,000.00 single limit. 
5.  In the event the adult use special exception applicant shall meet all of the above requirements, the adult use special exception permit shall be issued, subject to forfeiture for a violation of any of the requirements imposed by this ordinance. 
6.  Any adult use special exception issued or granted pursuant to this amendment to the zoning code shall be personal to the applicant only, and shall not be deemed to go with the land or lot upon which the adult use is located, and shall not be transferable. 
7.  All adult use special exceptions issued or granted pursuant to this amendment to the zoning code shall be of a limited duration of three years, however, any such adult use special exception applicant may apply to the board of adjustment for renewal of said adult use special exception within six months of the expiration date of the current adult use special exception. 
8.  All adult use special exception holders shall permit the State of Delaware, through its designated agents, and the Town of Smyrna, through its designated agents, to enter upon the entirety of the premises upon which the adult use is conducted during its hours of operation, for the purpose of inspection and testing, and for the purpose of determining whether the terms of applicable state and town laws are being complied with. 
9.  If any section, paragraph, sentence or clause of this amendment is determined or declared to be invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder hereof shall remain in full force and effect. 
c.  Any person desiring a special exception as authorized under the terms of this ordinance shall file a written application describing the requested use in detail. Such application shall include, among other information: 
(1)  The nature of the requested use; 
(2)  The specific section of the zoning ordinance authorizing such use as a special exception; 
(3)  The address of the property subject to the request; 
(4)  A detailed description of the intended use addressing those considerations (and other appropriate considerations, if any) listed in paragraph 2(a) above. 
Applications shall be accompanied by a brief site plan drawn to scale showing the size and location of the lot and structures involved, adjoining properties and streets, the area where the use will be confined, and the location of off-street parking on the subject property. 
In addition to the above information and site plan, the applicant shall provide such other relevant information as requested by the zoning officer. 
d.  The board of adjustment shall hold a public hearing on the request which shall be noticed as provided in section 14 of this ordinance. In addition, the applicant and adjoining property owners shall be notified by mail. ("Adjoining property owners," for purposes of this paragraph, means properties contiguous to the subject property and, if separated by a street or alley, properties which would be contiguous to the subject property if their sidelines were extended at right angles across such street or alley.) 
e.  At the public hearing, any party may appear in person by agent or by attorney. 
f.  The board of adjustment shall make specific findings as to those considerations listed in paragraph 2(a) and shall approve or deny the request accordingly. If the application is approved, the board may impose any appropriate conditions as provided in paragraph 2(b) above. 
g.  The board of adjustment may limit a special exception to a specified period of time at the end of which time the special exception shall expire and the right to continue such use shall automatically terminate unless a new application to continue the special exception is approved; provided however, that no special exception shall be granted for a term of less than one year. 
In allowing any application to renew or extend the term of a special exception, the board of adjustment shall consider and make appropriate finding, taking into account changing circumstances of the area, if any, and the impact that the use has had on nearby properties during the period of time it has been in existence. If the request to renew or extend the term of the special exception is granted, the board may, in so granting the request, impose new or alternate conditions reasonably calculated to effectuate the purpose and intent of this ordinance. 
h.  The violation of any condition imposed by the board of adjustment may be grounds for the termination of such special exception after notice and hearing before the board on the issue of such violation. Such notice and hearing shall be effected pursuant to section 14 of this zoning ordinance. 
3.  Variances; conditions governing applications; procedures. To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship and/or exceptional practical difficulties. A variance from the terms of this ordinance shall not be granted by the board of adjustment unless and until: 
a.  A written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating: 
(1)  That special conditions or exceptional practical difficulties exist which are particular to the land, structure or building involved because, among other reasons, of its size, shape, location or topography and which are not applicable to other lands, structures or buildings in the same district; 
(2)  That literal interpretation of the provisions of this ordinance would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this ordinance; 
(3)  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant; 
(4)  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this ordinance to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district. 
No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures or buildings in the same district, and no permitted use of lands, structures or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance. 
The above standards shall be construed and applied consistent with the then-current controlling law covering the granting of area variances by the board of adjustment, including, but not limited, case law interpreting the exceptional practical difficulties standards. No application to the board of adjustment shall otherwise be required when the criteria of section 11 of this ordinance are met. 
b.  Notice shall be given as specified in section 14 of this ordinance. The owner of the property for which the variance is sought or his agent shall be notified by mail. 
c.  The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
d.  The board of adjustment shall make findings that the requirements of section 9(3)(a) have been met by the applicant for a variance. 
e.  The board of adjustment shall further make a finding that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance, and that the variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of land, building, or structure. 
(1)  The variance is the minimal variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building or structure; 
(2)  The granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the zoning code; and 
(3)  The variance will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
f.  The board of adjustment shall further make a finding that the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this ordinance, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
(1)  The variance is the minimal variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building or structure; 
(2)  The granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the zoning code; and 
(3)  The variance will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
In granting any variance, the board of adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this ordinance. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance and punishable under section 17 of this ordinance. 
Under no circumstances shall the board of adjustment grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this ordinance in the district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this ordinance in said district. 
(Ord. of 8-16-93(2), § 3; Ord. No. 010-10, § 1, 5-17-10) 
4.  Decisions of the board of adjustment. In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the board of adjustment may, so long as such action is in conformity with the terms of this ordinance, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of the majority of the members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this ordinance, or to effect any variation in the application of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 4-5-93(2); Ord. No. 004-06, §§ 1-4, 2-21-06) 
Section 10. - Appeals from the board of adjustment. 
    Any person or persons, or any board, taxpayer, department, board or bureau of the town aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment may seek review by the superior court of such decision, in the manner provided by the laws of Delaware and particularly by 22 Del. C. § 301 et seq. 
Section 11. - Duties of administrative official, board of adjustment, town council, and courts on matters of appeal. 
A.  Generally. It is the intent of this ordinance that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the administrative official and through him to the board of adjustment only on appeal from the decision of the administrative official, and that recourse from the decisions of the board of adjustment shall be to the courts as provided by law and particularly by 22 Del. C. § 301 et seq. 
B.  Administrative official. 
1.  Administrative variance. Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, the administrative official shall have the authority, as qualified below, to grant a dimensional variance in the case of any structure existing or partially constructed which does not comply with the dimensional requirements of this ordinance applicable at the time such structure was erected. Such a variance may be approved by the administrative official in accordance with the following provisions: 
(a)  The need for the variance was the result of good faith error by the property owner and/or the property owner's builder or surveyor. The property owner shall have the burden of establishing the existence of such good faith error by substantial evidence. 
(b)  The variance does not exceed one foot. 
(c)  Such variance will not impair the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(d)  Such variance will not be detrimental to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity. 
(e)  Such variance will not create an unsafe condition with respect to other property or public streets. 
(f)  Denial of such variance would cause exceptional practical difficulties or un-necessary hardship upon the owner. 
(g)  Such variance will not result in an increase in density or the impervious surface ratio from that permitted by the applicable zoning district regulations. 
(h)  In approving such a variance under the provisions of this section, the administrative official shall authorize only the minimum variance necessary to provide reasonable relief and, as reasonable under the circumstances, may prescribe such conditions, to include landscaping and screening measures, to assure compliance with the intent of this chapter. 
(i)  Upon the approval of an administrative variance under this section for a particular building, the same shall be deemed to be a lawful building. 
(j)  The administrative official town manager or his designee shall have no power to waive or modify the standards necessary for approval as specified in this section. 
(k)  If the dimensional variance requested exceeds one foot, the application shall be referred to the Board of Adjustment in accordance with this chapter. 
C.  Board of adjustment. The board of adjustment shall hear appeals of decisions of the administrative official town manager or his designee in accordance with the provisions of section 9 ("the board of adjustment; powers and duties"). 
D.  Town council. It is further the intent of this ordinance that the duties of the town council in connection with this ordinance shall not include hearing and deciding questions of interpretation and enforcement that may arise. The procedure for deciding such questions shall be as stated in this section and this ordinance. Under this ordinance, the town council shall have only the duties of (1) considering the adopting or reflecting proposed amendments or the repeal of this ordinance, as provided by law, and (2) of establishing a schedule of fees and charges as stated in section 12 below. 
E.  Courts. Recourse from the decisions of the board of adjustment shall be to the courts as provided by law and particularly by 22 Del. C. § 301 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 010-10, § 2, 5-17-10) 
Section 12. - Schedule of fees, charges, and expenses. 
    The town council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses, and a collection procedure, for zoning certificates of compliance, appeals and other matters pertaining to this ordinance by resolution. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the administrative official and may be altered or amended only by resolution of the town council. 
    No certificate, permit or variance shall be issued unless or until such costs, charges, fees, or expenses have been paid in full, nor shall any action be taken on proceedings unless or until preliminary charges and fees have been paid in full. 
(Ord. of 8-7-95(2), § 1) 
Section 13. - Amendments. 
    The regulations, restrictions and boundaries set forth in this ordinance may, from time to time, be amended, supplemented, changed or repealed, provided, however, that no such action may be taken until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. Public hearing shall be advertised as required by section 14 of this ordinance. 
    Any proposed amendment shall be submitted to the planning commission for report and recommendation prior to any action thereon by the town council. 
    In case of a protest against such changes signed by the owners of 20 percent or more, either of the area of the lots included in such proposed change, or of those immediately adjacent thereto extending 100 feet therefrom, or of those directly opposite thereto, extending 100 feet back from the street frontage of such opposite lots, such amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of all the members of the town council. 
    When a zoning amendment is adopted by the Smyrna Town Council for a "zoning map change," the amendment shall take effect on the date of passage. However, every two years beginning January 1, 1999, the Mayor and Council will review all Zoning Map amendments made during the preceding two years to determine if those amendments: 
1.  Remain consistent with the Comprehensive Land Use Plan or if the reasons stated for approving any amendment not consistent with the Plan remain valid. 
2.  Remain consistent with the surrounding zoning. 
3.  Remain consistent with the goals of the town council for development in the surrounding area. 
EXCEPTION: Any property that has completed 50 percent of the proposed construction of the entire rezoned property. 
For purposes of this exception, proposed construction shall include all capital improvements shown on any plot plan, site plan or subdivision plan approved by the town. Engineering, surveying, legal and governmental costs shall not be considered construction. 
For purposes of this exception, rezoned property shall mean the entire property described in the rezoning application regardless of whether the property is subsequently divided. If one property is rezoned into more than one new zone, each new zone shall be considered a rezoned property and development on one will not satisfy the requirements of any other. 
Following review by mayor and council a resolution will be adopted as follows: 
1.  Proposing no changes. 
2.  Scheduling one or more amendments (including a proposed new zoning district designation) for public hearing with the planning commission for rezoning. 
(Ord. of 2-18-97(3)) 
Section 14. - Public hearings. 
    After adoption of this ordinance, the town council, board of adjustment, planning commission, zoning commission, and the historic review board are required to conduct public hearings prior to acting on specific matters under this ordinance; provided, however, that the planning commission shall not be required to hold a public hearing when considering proposed amendments to the text of this ordinance. Public hearings shall be advertised in the following manner: 
1.  Date, time, place and brief descriptions of the nature of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the town at least 15 days prior to the hearing. 
2.  Where specific properties are involved, they shall be posted indicating the date, time, place and brief description of the nature of the hearing at least 15 days prior to the hearing. 
3.  Notice shall be posted in the town hall indicating date, time, place, and brief description of the nature of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 015-03, § 1, 6-16-03) 
Section 15. - Provisions of ordinance declared to be minimum requirements. 
    In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. Wherever the requirements of this ordinance are at variance with the requirements of any other lawful rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions or comments, the more restrictive or those imposing the higher standards shall govern. 
Section 16. - Complaints regarding violations. 
    Whenever a violation of this ordinance occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint, stating fully the causes and basis thereof, shall be filed with the administrative official. The administrative official shall record properly such complaint, immediately investigate, and take action thereon as provided by this ordinance. The administrative official shall notify the source of any complaint in writing of the results of his investigation. 
Section 17. - Penalties for violation. 
    Violation of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $100.00 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
    The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
    Nothing herein contained shall prevent the town from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
Section 18. - Separability clause. 
    Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
Section 19. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this ordinance, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows: 
    The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual. 
    The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural, the plural number includes the singular. 
    The word "shall" is mandatory, the word "may" is permissive. 
    The word "used" or "occupied" includes the words "intended," "designed" or "arranged to be used or occupied." 
    The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel." 
    Accessory use or structure. A use or structure on the same lot with and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure. 
    Administrative official. The administrative official shall be the town manager or his/her designee. 
    Alcoholic beverage establishment. A commercial establishment wherein alcoholic beverages are sold and served for consumption on the premises, excluding full-service restaurants. 
    Bed and breakfast establishment. A single family dwelling in which lodging or lodging and meals are offered to the general public for compensation, offering no more than five bedrooms for lodging purposes. 
    Boutique. Boutiques are those small retail shops having floor space of 1,200 square feet or less with hours of operation within the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. and which sell antiques, arts, art objects, decorative accessories, art and craft supplies, clothing, flowers and plants, jewelry and similar items. The town board of adjustment shall determine whether or not a specific use falls within this definition. 
    Building official. The assistant town manager. 
    Commercial services. A business in which the primary occupation is the rendering of services to persons and/or businesses rather than the sale of products, including but not limited to electricians, plumbers, repair services, installation services, general contractors, cleaning services without bulk storage of chemical cleaning materials, and businesses providing similar commercial services. Commercial services may include, as an accessory use only, retail sales of items related to the services being provided. 
    Conditional use. A use listed as such in this ordinance and which may be permitted in a specified district under certain conditions to be determined in each case by the terms of this ordinance and by the mayor and council of the Town of Smyrna after public hearing and report by the planning commission in accordance with the procedures specified in this ordinance in section 6.16 [6.15] and applicable Delaware state laws. 
    Day care centers and nursery schools. A facility which provides a daytime care and/or instruction to children and operates on a regular or seasonal basis. 
    Density, maximum gross. The maximum number of individual dwelling units permitted per acre in a subdivision, calculated by dividing the total number of dwelling units in the subdivision by the total acreage of the subdivision tract (including all undevelopable areas). 
    Development. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
    Dwelling. A structure designed or used as the living quarters for one or more families, not to include hotel, motel, automobile court, rooming or boarding house or tourist home. 
    Dwelling, one-family. A detached dwelling on a permanent foundation designed for or occupied by one family only. 
    Dwelling, two-family. A detached dwelling on a permanent foundation designed for or occupied by two families only, with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each. 
    Dwelling, semidetached. A one-family dwelling on a permanent foundation with one wall in common with only one adjacent dwelling. 
    Dwelling, townhouse. A single family dwelling in a row of at least three such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other unit by one or more vertical common fire-resistant walls with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each. 
    Dwelling, apartment. A dwelling which contains three or more single family dwelling units within a building that are separated only by horizontal floors or by a combination of horizontal floors and vertical walls with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each. 
    Family day care home. An occupied residence in which a person provides day care for any child or children other than his or her own immediate family members. Such care in a family day care home is limited to that care given to six or less children, including preschool children living in the home and preschool children of close relatives cared for in the home. 
    Fill. Any nonstructural composition which is used to artificially alter the contours of the original land surface. 
    Financial institution. Any establishment wherein the primary occupation is concerned with such state regulated businesses as banking, savings and loans, loan companies and investment companies. 
    Flood or flooding. 
a.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; 
(3)  Mud slides (i.e., mud flows) which are proximately caused or precipitated by accumulations of water on or under the ground. 
b.  The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in (a)(1) of this section. 
    Flood hazard area. Any area within the town identified as having some probability of flooding by the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Flood, 100-year. The flood having a one percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate, improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway, regulatory. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Floor area. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building or buildings on a lot measured from the exterior walls or from the centerline of party walls separating two buildings, excluding cellar and basement areas only for storage or for the operation and maintenance of the building. 
    Floor, habitable. Any floor usable for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, or a combination thereof. A floor used only for storage purposes is not a habitable floor. 
    General retail business. Establishments engaged in the selling or rental of goods or merchandse directly to the public, including services incidental to the sale of such goods and merchandise. The establishment may process or manufacture some of the products, such as a jeweler or bakery, but such processing or manufacturing is incidental to the selling activities. 
Please note: General retail business establishments shall not include motor vehicle sales and service uses. 
    Hazardous waste or material. Any waste or material which, because of its quantity, concentration of physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may: 
1.  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or 
2.  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. 
    Home occupation. An occupation or profession which: 
(a)  Is customarily carried on in a dwelling or in a building or other structure accessory to a dwelling. 
(b)  Is carried on by a member of the family residing in the dwelling with not more than one assistant. 
(c)  Is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes. 
(d)  Must maintain the residential character of the structure. 
(e)  Does not display goods, store a stock in trade, or sell commodities on the premises. 
In particular, a home occupation includes but is not limited to the following: 
Art studio. 
Dressmaking. 
Professional office of a physician, dentist, lawyer, engineer, architect or certified public accountant within a dwelling occupied by the same. 
However, a home occupation shall not be interpreted to include the following: 
Barbershops and beauty parlors; 
Real estate offices; 
Restaurants; 
provided further, however, that a barbershop or beauty parlor limited to one chair and otherwise coming within the definition of a "home occupation" may be permitted if approved by the board of adjustment as a special exception pursuant to section 9, 2 of this ordinance. For purposes of this section, a "one-chair barbershop or beauty parlor" shall mean a one-operator shop with not more than one chair for washing, one chair for styling and not more than two chairs for drying. 
    Institutions. Any building or open area used only by an educational, religious, medical, charitable philanthropic or other essentially nonprofit organization, either public or private. 
    Junkyard. A lot, land, or structure, or part thereof used primarily for collecting, storage or sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal, or discarded material; or for the collecting, dismantling, storage or salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in running condition or for the sale of parts thereof. 
    Large scale indoor entertainment use. Cocktail lounge, bar, billiard parlor and/or similar place of indoor entertainment exceeding 6,000 square feet and/or serving alcoholic beverages and/or offering live entertainment, excluding movie theaters. 
    Libraries, museums. Public or quasi-public facilities, examples of which include: aquariums, arboretums, art galleries and exhibitions, botanical gardens, historic sites and exhibits, libraries, museums, observatories, planetariums, and zoos. May also include accessory retail uses such as a gift/book shop or a restaurant. Line, front. Any property line which separates a lot from a street right-of-way. 
    Line, side. Any property line which separates a lot from an adjoining lot or an alley and which extends from a street right-of-way to a rear line, another side line, or another street right-of-way. 
    Line, rear. Any property line which separates a lot from an adjoining lot or an alley and which extends from one line to another. 
    Lodging: A building or group of buildings containing individual rooms or suites of rooms, each having a private bathroom, for the purpose of providing overnight lodging facilities to the general public for compensation with or without meals, and which has common facilities for reservations and cleaning services and on-site management. Includes hotels and motels. 
    Lot. For zoning purposes, as covered by this ordinance, a lot is a parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are herein required. Such lot shall have frontage on an improved public street and may consist of: 
(a)  A single lot of record; 
(b)  A portion of a lot of record; 
(c)  A combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots of record and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of record; 
(d)  A parcel of land described by metes and bounds; provided that in no case of division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created which does not meet the requirements of this ordinance. 
    Lot frontage. The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion nearest the street. For the purpose of determining yard requirements of corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and yards shall be provided as indicated under Yards in this section. 
    Lot measurements. 
(a)  Depth of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between the midpoints of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear. 
(b)  Width of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot, measured across the rear of the required front yard, provided however that width between side lot lines at their foremost points (where they intersect with the street line) shall not be less than 80 percent of the required lot width except in the case of lots on the turning circle of culs-de-sac, where the 80-percent requirement shall not apply. 
    Lot of record. A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the county recorder of deeds, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded. 
    Major site plan. Any nonresidential use including new construction or addition which exceeds 3,500 sq. ft. shall require plans as described in section 7.5 of this ordinance. Review of site plans will be conducted by the planning commission at a regularly scheduled meeting. 
    Mean sea level. The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. 
    Minor site plan. Any nonresidential use including new construction or additions under 3,500 sq. ft. shall not require plans as in section 7.5 of this ordinance unless required by the administrative official. The administrative official shall approve, conditionally approve or refer minor site plans to the planning commission. 
    Mobile home. A structure that: (a) is not constructed in accordance with the standards set forth in the Town of Smyrna building code; and (b) is composed of one or more components, each of which was substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and designed to be transported to the home site on its own chassis. 
    Offices. Premises available for the transaction of general business and services including but not limited to professional, management, financial, legal, health, social, or government offices, but excluding retail, artisan, and manufacturing uses. 
    Offices, small. Small offices are those business offices with 1,200 square feet or less of floor space with hours of operation within the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. and which serve as an office or studio for artists, craftsmen, composers, and the like; barber and beauty shops; funeral homes; or as offices for business and professional purposes. 
    Outdoor advertising business. Provision of outdoor displays or display space on a lease or rental basis only. 
    Parking space, off-street. An off-street parking space shall comprise not less than 180 square feet per parking stall plus necessary maneuvering space. Space for maneuvering incidental to parking or unparking shall not encroach upon any public way. Every off-street parking space shall be accessible from a public way. Off-street parking spaces for single-family residential dwelling units and for manufacturing development shall be paved with sufficient stone aggregate, hot mix or concrete to support the vehicular traffic for which it is designed to handle. Off-street parking spaces for multifamily dwelling units, two-family dwelling units, apartment dwelling units and all commercial developments shall be paved with hot mix or concrete to a sufficient thickness to support the traffic for which it is designed to handle. 
    Permitee. The individual or entity that owns an Alcoholic Beverage Establishment and to whom a Conditional Use approval to operate an Alcoholic Beverage Establishment has been granted. 
    Personal services. The primary occupation is the repair, care of, maintenance or customizing of personal properties that are worn or carried about the person or are a physical component of the person. Personal service establishments shall include, but need not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Barber shops and beauty salons. 
2.  Establishments in which massage is administered to the upper body of a fully clothed client while seated in a chair and/or to the scalp, face, neck, shoulders, arms, hands and or feet. 
3.  Laundries/laundromats which provide self-service type washing, drying and ironing facilities for the use of retail customers. 
4.  Cleaning pickup stations, which are establishments where there is no on-site cleaning of garments, articles or goods of fabric and the use consists of drop off and pickup by customers of such articles that are sent to another location for cleaning. 
5.  Tailors, dressmaking shops, shoe cleaning or repair shops, and other similar places of business. 
Please note: Personal services do not include motor vehicle related services or body art establishments. 
    Portable sign. Any device designed to inform or attract the attention of persons not on the premises on which the sign is located, that is not constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. 
    Potable water. That water that is satisfactory for drinking, culinary and domestic purposes, meeting current state and federal drinking water standards. 
    Private clubs and lodges. Any building which serves as a meeting place for a selected membership, together with recreation and dining facilities which are not open to the general public. 
    Professional office. The office of a person engaged in any occupation, vocation or calling, not purely commercial, mechanical or agricultural, in which a professed knowledge or skill in some department of science of learning often gained after intensive academic preparation is used by its practical application to the affairs of others, either by advising or guiding them in serving their interest or welfare through the practice of an act founded thereon. By way of example, and not limitation, a "professional office" would be an office in which professional services are rendered by licensed architects, certified or other public accountants, chiropodists, chiropractors, doctors of dentistry, doctors of medicine, optometrists, osteopaths, professional engineers and attorneys at law. 
    Residential conversion. A structure that has been modified or converted from a one-family dwelling to a two-family or multi-family dwelling. 
    Restaurant or café. An establishment whose function is the preparation and serving of food to patrons primarily on the premises, with carry-out facilities as a subordinate function. 
    Restaurant, full-service. A place which is regularly used and kept open for the serving of meals to guests for compensation which has: 1) suitable kitchen facilities; 2) a primary use of sit-down meal service to patrons; 3) adequate seating arrangements for patrons provided on the premises; 4) a restaurant license or brewery-pub license issued by the Delaware Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission, as applicable; 5) alcoholic beverages served for consumption on the premises are clearly incidental to the primary food services, as applicable. The sale or service of sandwiches and snack foods (whether prepared in a kitchen or made elsewhere) shall not constitute a full service restaurant. 
    Restaurant patios and sidewalk cafes. Decks, porches, or similar structures, whether covered or uncovered, raised or at grade, or the placing or locating of chairs and tables directly on sidewalks, used in connection with restaurants or cafes. 
    Riverine. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
    Sanitary landfill. A disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible wastes or hazardous wastes, are disposed of on land by placing earth cover thereon. 
    School bus stop shelter. A three-sided bus stop shelter, approved as a special exception use by the board of adjustment, meeting the following criteria: Placement, construction and set-up shall be approved by the town building official; however, no shelter shall be approved without documentation evidencing liability insurance coverage of at least $300,000.00, and a contractual obligation to maintain the shelter on, at least, a monthly basis. Approval shall also be obtained from the school which the students who utilize the shelter attend. Bus shelters shall not exceed the dimensions of 8 feet wide × 10 feet deep and shall not exceed the height of 81/2 feet. Any bus shelter so constructed shall have a minimum setback of 5 feet from the street line, and no shelter shall be erected within 25 feet of the right-of-way line of an intersection with another street. Anything in this ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding, up to two signs may be display on any school bus shelter, which signs may be displayed only on the sides thereof. The sign area shall not exceed 32 square feet per sign (per side). No sign shall be permitted which advertises or promotes cigars, little cigars, smokeless tobacco, pipe tobacco, alcoholic liquors, (including beer and wine), or other products or establishments that the possession of, use by, or patron of, by any minor would be in violation of any federal, state, or local law, ordinance, or regulation. Furthermore, no sign shall be permitted which the town building official determines, in accordance with judicially-recognized First Amendment standards and principles, to pose a significant threat to the health, safety, morals, and/or welfare of the minor(s) for whose use the bus stop shelter has been erected. Such signs shall also be in accordance with all other provisions of the town Code. 
    Setback line, building or structure. The interior line of the required yard space on a lot. 
    Sign. Any device designed to inform or attract the attention of persons not on the premises on which the sign is located provided that the following shall not be included in the application of the regulations herein: 
(a)  Signs not exceeding one square foot in area and bearing only property numbers, postbox numbers, names of occupants of premises not having commercial connotations; 
(b)  Flags and insignias of any government except when displayed in connection with commercial promotion; 
(c)  Integral notices; identification, information, or directional signs erected or required by governmental bodies; 
(d)  Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, except letters, trademarks, moving parts, or moving lights; 
(e)  Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on private property but bearing no advertising matter. 
    Signs, number and surface area. For the purpose of determining the number of signs, a sign shall be considered to be a single display surface or display device containing elements organized, related and composed to form a unit. Where matter is displayed in a random manner without organized relationship of elements, or where there is reasonable doubt about the relationship of the elements, each element shall be considered to be a single sign. 
The surface area of a sign shall be computed as including the entire area within a regular geometric form or combination of regular geometric forms comprising all of the display area of the sign and including all of the elements of the matter displayed. Frames and structural members not bearing advertising matter shall not be included in computation of surface area. 
    Sign, on-site. A sign relating in its subject matter to the premises on which it is located, or to products, accommodations, services, or activities on the premises. On-site signs do not include signs erected by the outdoor advertising industry in the conduct of the outdoor advertising business. 
    Sign, off-site. A sign other than an on-site sign. 
    Small office. Small offices are those business offices with 1,200 sq. ft. or less of floor space with hours of operation within the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. and which serve as an office or studio for artists, craftsmen, composers and the like; barber and beauty shops, funeral homes; or as offices for business and professional purposes. 
    Street line. The right-of-way line of a street. 
    Structure. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among other things, structures include buildings, mobile homes, walls, fences, billboards, and poster panels. 
    Structure (supplementing). For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a mobile home. 
    Substantial improvement. Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either (a) before the improvement or repair is started, or (b) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either (1) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions or (2) any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places. 
    Theater. An indoor facility for group entertainment, other than sporting events. Examples of these facilities include civic theaters, facilities for live concerts and movie theaters. 
    Variance. A variance is a relaxation of the terms of the zoning ordinance where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and were, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. As used in this ordinance, a variance is authorized only for height, area, and size of structure or size of yards and open spaces; establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of nonconformities in the district or adjoining districts. 
    Water surface elevation. The projected heights in relation to mean sea level reached by floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
    Wellhead. The upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves and other attachments. 
    Wellhead protection area. The surface and subsurface area surrounding a water well or well field supplying a public water system through which contaminants are reasonably likely to move toward and reach such well or well field. 
    Yard. The required open space, unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or portion of a structure on any lot measured horizontally from the lot line to the building setback line and measured vertically from the ground to the sky. 
    Yard, front. There shall be a front yard along each front line between the sidelines extending inward to a line separated from the front line by a dimension equal to the required front yard dimension. 
    Yard, side. There shall be a side yard along each sideline extending its entire length from the rear of the front yard, extending inward to a line separated from the sideline by a dimension equal to the required side yard dimension. 
    Yard, rear. There shall be a rear yard along each rear line between the inner side yard lines, extending inward to a line separated from the rear line by a dimension equal to the required side yard dimension. 
    Year [yard], rear on corner lots. In the case of a corner lot in a residential district with no rear lines as herein defined, the shorter of the remaining side lines shall be treated as a rear line. Where the lines are of equal length, any may be selected. 
(Ord. of 9-21-92; Ord. of 4-19-93, § 1; Ord. of 8-16-93(2), § 8; Ord. of 8-16-93(3), § 1; Ord. of 7-20-98(7), § 2; Ord. of 4-15-02(2), § 1; Ord. of 5-20-02, § 1; Ord. No. 001-08, § 5, 1-7-08; Ord. No. 010-10, § 3, 5-17-10, eff. 6-2-2010; Ord. No. 018-14, § 4, 12-1-14; Ord. No. 020-14, §§ 10, 11, 12-15-14; Ord. No. 021-14, §§ 4, 5, 1-20-15; Ord. No. 004-19, § 12, 4-15-19) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Section 20. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances; effective date. 
    All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this zoning ordinance or inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this ordinance full force and effect. 
    This ordinance shall become effective on May 20, 1964. 
APPENDIX B - SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- An Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2, repealed appendix B, sections I-X, in its entirety and replaced it with a new appendix B, sections 1.00-1.05, 2.00-2.02, 3.00-3.11, 4.00-4.07, 5.00-5.17, and appendices 1-6. Former appendix B pertained to similar material and derived from Gen. Ords. Art. 5, adopted July 26, 1957; Ord. of June 5, 1995(2), § 1; Ord. of Nov. 6, 1995(4), §§ 1, 2; Ord. of Sept. 3, 1996; Ord. of Oct. 21, 1996, §§ 2-5; Ord. of April 21, 1997(2); Ord. of Nov. 1, 1999(2); Ord. of Nov. 15, 1999(2), §§ 1, 2; Ord. of Nov. 15, 1999(3), §§ 1, 2; Ord. of April 17, 2000(2), §§ 1-3; and Ord. of 5-7-01(2), § 1. 
Cross reference- Amusements, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 38; parks and recreation, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; traffic and vehicles, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 70; vegetation, ch. 74. 

ARTICLE 1. - TITLE AND PURPOSE 

Sec. 1.00. - Title. 
    An ordinance to revised rules, regulations and procedures for the subdivision of land and/or land development within the corporate limits of the town, pursuant to the Delaware Code is hereby adopted by the town on December 17, 2001. 
    The ordinance shall be known as "Town of Smyrna Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of December 2001." 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 1.01. - Purpose. 
    These rules, regulations and procedures have been adopted to insure the orderly development of land within the town's corporate limits and to promote the health, safety, convenience and welfare of the residents and visitors to the town. 
a.  Establish a formal process of reviewing proposed subdivisions of land or land development by the town's planning commission, manager, engineer, solicitor, and council. 
b.  Provide for coordination of development within the town's corporate limits by insuring all streets, open space, pedestrian walkways and site infrastructure work together in a harmonious and orderly manner. 
c.  Establish minimum infrastructure design and construction standards. 
d.  Establish bonding requirements of the land owner or developer prior to plan approval by council and recordation of plan. 
e.  Establish procedures for the acceptance by the town of completed infrastructure construction proposed by the subdivision or land development record plan. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 1.02. - Exception from compliance. 
    All subdivision of land or land development plans, which have received council approval and/or have been officially received for review as of the date of adoption of the "Town of Smyrna Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of December 2001," are exempt from compliance with this ordinance except as specified in section 3.06.c. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 1.03. - Amendments to ordinance. 
    Revisions or amendments to the "Town of Smyrna Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of December 2001" shall be by appropriate action by the town council in accordance with the following procedure: 
a.  Ordinance to be drafted by the manager and introduced to council for consideration. 
b.  Council shall send the proposed ordinance to the planning commission for their considerations and written recommendation to council. 
The planning commission shall give their recommendation to council within 60 calendar days after receipt of ordinance. 
c.  Council shall hold a public hearing after receipt of the planning commission's recommendation, at which, it shall hear public testimony and render a decision on the ordinance. In the event the planning commission fails to make any recommendation within the 60 calendar day period, council can proceed with their public hearing without input from the planning commission. 
d.  Prior to holding a council public hearing, a notice containing the date, time, place and brief description of the nature of the amendment shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the town and posted at the town hall at least 15 calendar days prior to the hearing. Where the date of publication and date of posting are not the same date, the last date shall control for purposes of computing the 15 calendar days required notice. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 1.04. - Discrepancies between these and other regulations. 
    Whenever there is a discrepancy between minimum standards or dimensions noted herein and those contained in the zoning ordinance, building code or other official regulations of the town, the highest standard shall apply. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 1.05. - Separability, savings clause. 
    Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or other provision of this ordinance be declared illegal, unconstitutional, or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder hereof shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
ARTICLE 2. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 2.00. - General. 
a.  Word used in the singular include the plural and words in the plural include the singular; words in the present tense include the future tense; words in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter genders as well. 
b.  The word "person", "owner", "developer" and "subdivider" shall include individuals, partnerships, corporations, unincorporated associations, trusts, estates or other legal entities entitled to operate in the state. 
c.  The word "should" or "may" are permissive; the word "shall" or "will" are mandatory and directive. 
d.  The word "building" shall include "structures" and shall be construed to include the following phrase "or part thereof." 
e.  The word "water course" shall include drain, ditch, swale, stream, river, creek and spring. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 2.01. - Specific words or terms. 
    Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words or terms shall have the meaning noted: 
    Access way. A right-of-way which provides common vehicular and pedestrian access to a property or properties, extending not more than 400 feet from a street to a dead end. 
    Active recreation. Those recreational activities involving competition, use of designated land for the activity and specified equipment. Examples of active recreation includes athletic fields, pools, tot lots and picnic areas, etc. 
    Alley. A strip of land over which there is a right-of-way, publicly or privately owned, on which no dwelling or store front, servicing as the rear entrance to two or more properties. 
    Applicant. Owner or developer, who has filed an application for subdivision or land development, including their heirs, successors and assigns. 
    Appeal. A method by which an applicant can have an administration decision, action and order reviewed by an independent governing body. 
    Approval. Means that the town council and/or manager have issued formal approval of the subdivision or land development record plan and the plan can be recorded in the county recorder of deeds office. 
    Approved dwelling unit. Approved dwelling units (A.D.U.) are dwelling units approved for development, whether built or not, under these subdivision regulations. "Dwelling unit" shall mean a separate living space designed for occupancy by a family, an individual or individuals living together as a family which space shall include kitchen, sleeping and toilet facilities. 
    Architect. An individual licensed by the state to practice architecture. 
    Benchmark. A known point of elevation, generally a permanent marker in character, used to establish the site elevation. All benchmark's shall be based upon either NAD 1927/NGVD 1929 or NAD 1983/NGVD 1988, unless updated by a Federal government agency in the future. 
    Block. A parcel of land surrounded by streets, public open space, right-of-way or watercourse. 
    Building. A structure permanently erected on a lot for the intended use of housing, sheltering and enclosing persons, animals or property of any nature. 
    Caliper. The diameter of new landscaping material to be placed on a lot, measured six inches above ground surface elevation. 
    Certificate of accuracy. A statement by a licensed surveyor or engineer that the record plan has been prepared in accordance with accepted surveying and engineering standards. 
    Certificate of completion. A certificate signed by the town manager certifying that the construction of the improvements for which a permit was issued has been completed in accordance with the requirements of the town. 
    Certificate of occupancy. A statement signed by the town granting the owner the right to occupy and use the building or intended use as specified therein and that all improvements have been made per the approved plans. 
    Certificate of ownership. A statement by the owner that they are the legal owners of the property, that the plan submitted has been prepared per their direction and that all streets, open space and other improvements intended for use by the general public is hereby dedicated to the town, county or state as the case may be. 
    Completion guarantee. A bond or deposit of funds or securities in escrow sufficient to cover the cost of required improvements as estimated by the town's engineer, conditioned by their satisfactory completion within the time specified in the construction permit, or an approved extension thereof. 
    Contiguous. Land that abuts other lands or have common property boundary lines. 
    Council or town council. The Town of Smyrna, Delaware governing body. 
    County. Kent County, Delaware. 
    Crosswalk. A right-of-way, publicly or privately owned, ten feet or more in width, which cuts across a block in order to improve pedestrian access to adjacent streets or properties. 
    Delaware Department of Transportation (DelDOT). The division of highways of the state department of transportation. 
    Designed storm frequency. The time duration in years of the storm occurrence used to determine storm drainage infrastructure sizing. 
    Detention/retention basins. A stormwater management structure designed to manage the peak stormwater runoff to not exceed the existing watershed runoff rate. 
    Driveway. A private access way, located on private property, for the primary purpose of vehicular access to the lot from a public street. 
    Easement. A grant by a property owner to the town, the public, a corporation or a person or persons of a right to the use of a strip of land for a specific purpose. 
    Endorsement. The signature of the town's manager, engineer and council that the subdivision or land development plan has been approved per the ordinance and can be recorded. 
    Engineer, Professional. An individual registered by the state to practice civil engineering. 
    Engineer or town engineer. An individual, partnership or corporation retained by the town to serve the role of reviewing, inspecting and commenting on the engineering aspects of subdivisions and land developments submitted to the town for approval. 
    Freeboard. The vertical distance from the 100-year storage elevation to the top of embankment in a detention/retention basin. 
    Highway specifications. Specifications for highway improvements of the town. 
    Historic Resource. Any building, structure, road, object or other historic use that the town considers to be important from a historical, architectural or archaeological in the history of the town or county and worthy of preserving. 
    Homeowners' Association. A non-stock corporation (the members of which hold record legal title to lots or parcels of land within a subdivision) which is legally responsible for the maintenance of private open spaces and/or common facilities; also known as "maintenance corporation". 
    Hydric soils. Soils inventoried or described as hydric in the "Soil Survey Kent County, Delaware" prepared by the U.S. Department of Agriculture. The following soil types designation shall be considered hydric soils: Bayboro (Ba), Elkton (El); Fallsington (Fa), Johnston (Jo), Othello (Ot), Plummer (Pl), Pocomoke (Po), Mixed Alluvial Land (Mv), Swamp (Sw), and Tidal Marsh (Tm). 
    Improvement construction permit. A permit authorizing improvements to be constructed in accordance with the terms and conditions of approved construction plans and specifications. 
    Land surveyor, professional. An individual licensed by the state to practice land surveying. 
    Landscape architect. An individual licensed by the state to practice landscape architecture. 
    Lot. A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for transfer of ownership or for building development. 
    Maintenance corporation. See "Homeowners' Association". 
    Manager or town manager. An individual employed by the town to manage the day to day affairs of the town. 
    Marker. A metal pin or pipe with a minimum diameter of three-fourths inches and 24 inches in length. 
    Monument. A stone or concrete property boundary marker with a four-inch square top and a minimum depth of 24 inches. 
    Open space, common. Land and/or water bodies designed, intended and restricted for the sole use of the residents of a development (i.e., lot owners). The land shall be owned in common through the establishment of a "maintenance association" duly created by the laws of the town, county and state. 
    Open space, public. A tract or parcel of land or water bodies created to provide passive or active recreational uses for a proposed subdivision or land development. The land shall be deeded to and owned by the town, the county, or the state as the case may be. 
    Passive recreation. Those recreational activities not involving competition or specialized equipment. Examples of passive recreation includes nature areas, walking trails, ponds and lakes, etc. 
    Plan, as-built. A plan prepared by a professional engineer or land surveyor showing actual locations of all streets, curbs, sidewalks, water lines, sewer lines, laterals, storm sewers, etc. 
    Plan, minor subdivision. A subdividing of an existing lot into no more than three lots including the existing lot with no more than three existing or proposed individual dwelling units and involving no new streets. Once a plan meets all the terms and conditions of this ordinance the plan shall be reviewed and approved by the town manager. 
    Plan, preliminary sketch. A concept plan drawn approximately to scale, indicating existing site features, wetlands and floodplains and the general layout of the streets and lots. 
    Plan, resubdivision. A replotting or subdividing of the previously recorded lot or lots to affect lot line revisions. The plan shall be reviewed and approved by the town manager. 
    Plan, subdivision. A properly certified plan prepared by a professional engineer or land surveyor showing lot lines and areas, deed restrictions, easements, right-of-way lines, and other information pertaining to the lots and the streets on which the lots abut in a proposed subdivision for recording in the office of the recorder of deeds of the county. 
    Plan of streets. The town's plan of streets and alleys, including those which have been or may be laid out, but not opened. This plan is maintained in the town manager's office. 
    Planning department. Individuals employed by the town to review and process subdivisions of land and land developments. 
    Planting screen. A landscaped area with a minimum width of 20 feet and designed to provide a visual barrier between adjoining uses. The plant material shall consist of 50 percent evergreen material, having a minimum height of five feet, and spaced evenly throughout the area. 
    Right-of-way. The dedicated width of street, alley, access way or crosswalk. 
    Sanitary sewer specifications. Specifications for sanitary sewer improvements of town. 
    Sidewalk. A pedestrian way constructed of Portland cement concrete and located within a street or crosswalk right-of-way. 
    Site improvement. Grading, paving, curbing, street lights, street signs, fire hydrants, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and other street improvements, including where specified by the town council sidewalks, crosswalks and off-street parking paving. 
    Site plan, major. Any non-residential use including new construction or additions which exceeds 3,500 square feet shall require plans as described in section 7.5 of the "Smyrna Zoning Code." Review of site plans will be conducted by the planning commission. 
    Site plan, minor. Any non-residential use including new construction or additions under 3,500 square feet shall not require plans as in section 7.5 of the "Smyrna Zoning Code", unless required by the planning commission. Review of minor site plans will be conducted by the town manager and his staff. 
    Solicitor. An individual, partnership or corporation retained by the town to provide legal advice to the council, manager, and planning commission. 
    Subdivision. The division of a parcel of land into two or more lots or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development. The term includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided. 
    Street. A general term used to describe a right-of-way, publicly owned by the state or town or privately owned, serving as a means of vehicular and pedestrian travel, furnishing access to abutting properties, and space for sewers and public utilities. 
    Street, arterial. A major thoroughfare designed to provide vehicular access to both local and regional traffic and generally owned and maintained by DelDOT. 
    Street, boulevard. A divided collector street utilizing one way traffic movements and divided by a minimum eight [foot] wide landscaped island. 
    Street, collector. A secondary street designed to connect residential streets to the arterial street system. An example of a collector street is the main entrance into a residential subdivision. 
    Street, cul-de-sac. A residential street having one end open for public vehicular or pedestrian access, and the other end terminated by a vehicular turn around. 
    Street, residential. A minor or local street designed to serve residential lots fronting on it and to connect to a collector street. 
    Subdivision ordinance. The Town of Smyrna "Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of December 2001." 
    Water main specifications. Specifications for water supply system improvements of the town. 
    Wetlands. A tract of land which experiences saturated soil conditions and contains vegetation as defined in the "Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands," dated June 10, 1989 and as amended in the future. 
    Zoning map. The official map of the town indicating the zoning classification for each tract or lot located within its corporate limits. 
    Zoning ordinance. The "Smyrna Zoning Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 001-05, § 1, 2-7-05; Ord. No. 008-07, § 1, 7-16-07) 
Sec. 2.02. - Cross reference. 
    Words not defined in section 2.01 shall have the meaning given in Webster's Unabridged Dictionary. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
ARTICLE 3. - SUBMISSION AND REVIEW PROCEDURES 

Sec. 3.00. - General. 
    Upon adoption of this ordinance, all subdivision of land or land developments within the limits of the town shall be reviewed by the council and other public agencies deemed appropriate by the council (i.e. DelDOT, DNREC, and the county department of planning, etc.). 
    The planning commission shall forward their recommendations to the town council, who shall approve or disapprove the proposed subdivision or land development. After receipt of council approvals, the planning department and town manager shall complete the plan review process prior to recordation of the plans. 
    All owners and developers shall submit plans in accordance with the procedures outlined below. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 3.01. - Records. 
    The town manager shall maintain an accurate record of the findings of the planning commission, town engineer, solicitor and council concerning all proposed subdivisions of land or land development plans submitted to the town for review and approval. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 3.02. - Subdivision and land development control. 
a.  No subdivision or land development plan will be recorded in the county recorder of deeds office without the endorsement of the town manager and/or the town engineer, as the case may be. 
b.  No infrastructure improvements (i.e. grading, utilities, streets, buildings, etc.) shall be begun prior to the approval of the subdivision plan, site plan or improvement construction plans by the council, town engineer, planning commission and/or manager. Plans requiring recordation shall be recorded prior to commencement of construction activity. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 001-05, § 2, 2-7-05) 
Sec. 3.03. - Variances from subdivision and land development ordinance. 
a.  Pursuant to the requirements of 22 Del. C.§ 321 et. seq., the board of adjustment shall grant variances from the provisions of this ordinance when, due to special conditions or an exceptional situation, a literal application the provisions of this ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship or exceptional practical difficulty to the owner of the property under consideration. All case law currently existing, and which continues to be made, interpreting 22 Del. C.§ 321 et. seq. shall be adhered to by the board of adjustment. The board of adjustment may grant relief from either the minimum lot width or depth, but not both, provided that the lot thus created meets the minimum lot area requirement. No relief from the right-of-way or pavement widths and/or minimum lot area requirement shall be permitted. 
b.  Prior to any application being heard by the board of adjustment, a notice containing the date, time, place, and brief description of the nature of the relief requested shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the town at least 15 calendar days prior to the hearing. The subject property shall also be posted by the planning department with a notice containing the same information at least 15 calendar days prior to the hearing. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 3.04. - Subdivision plans. 
a.  The submission and review of a subdivision or land development plan is a four-step process involving a planning commission review, a council review, planning department and town engineer reviews and final review and approval from the town manager. 
All steps in the process require a complete submission of the information required in this section. It is the responsibility of the owner and/or the developer to obtain, organize and provide the required information. 
1.  A submission for step one must be made by the date of the planning commission meeting one month prior to the review hearing (i.e. to be considered at the July planning commission meeting, all information must be submitted to the planning department no later than 4:30 p.m. the day of the June planning commission meeting). 
2.  The planning department will submit the subdivision or land development plan to council at their second meeting of the month following the planning commission meeting where the plan was reviewed. 
3.  The planning department and engineer shall have 60 days from the date a complete subdivision or land development plan is submitted for step three, to complete their reviews and respond in writing. 
4.  The town manager shall have 30 days from the date a complete subdivision or land development plan is submitted for step four to complete his/her review and respond in writing. 
Submissions for each step in the process must include all required information. If any information is omitted, the application shall be returned to the applicant with a list of deficiencies. The time frames for submission and review will start over from the last completed step in the process. In order to resubmit the application, the owner and/or developer shall provide all the information outlined in the letter of deficiencies, the original application and a deficient plan submission penalty fee as specified in appendix 1, fees. 
b.  Although not mandatory, it is recommended that the owner and/or developer meet with the town's planning commission, Planning Department, manager and engineer to informally discuss the proposed project, obtain guidance and direction prior to the preparation of the subdivision or land development plan. 
c.  Planning commission review process. 
1.  The first step in the review process is submission to the planning commission. This submission shall include the following information: 
a.  Completed subdivision application form. 
b.  A deed plot of property boundaries; pertinent existing features, such as structures, water courses; tree/forest masses; adjoining developments and access locations; existence of wetlands or floodplains and the proposed development. 
c.  Wetlands delineation and report. 
d.  Existing infrastructure evaluation report, reviewed by the town's engineer, to determine if adequate public water, sanitary sewer or storm water capacity exists to serve the proposed development. 
e.  Delineation of location and design of all buffer screening as required in section 6.12. of the Zoning Ordinance. 
f.  General design requirements: All streets and lots shall be designed per section 5.01, be located to accommodate the volume of traffic anticipated, provide a coordinated system of streets conforming to the town's plan of streets, afford adequate light and air, facilitate fire protection, provide access for fire fighting equipment to buildings. Building sites shall be designed to accommodate the uses allowed in the zoning ordinance without danger to health, peril from fire, flood or other hazard. A metes and bounds description of all lots, streets and parkland shall be included on the plans. Any recorded easements or deed restriction shall be noted and identified. 
g.  Fifteen sets of prints of the subdivision plan prepared in accordance with this section and section 4.01. 
h.  Payment of all review fees per appendix 1, fees. 
i.  Letter from the town's business office that there are no outstanding municipal liens on the property. No plan can be reviewed until the liens are satisfactorily satisfied. 
j.  A "staff report" from the planning department listing all agencies which must review and approve the plan prior to final town approval. 
k.  Copies of deed restrictions, homeowners association articles of incorporation and bylaws, and maintenance declarations applicable within the subdivision (including agreements for operation and maintenance by the homeowners association or property owners in the subdivision of any open space, common areas, storm water management facilities, recreation facilities, or any other facility which is of common use or benefit and not accepted by the town) must accompany the record plat and be made a part thereof. All deed restrictions and maintenance agreements shall be recorded in conjunction with the final record plan. A homeowners' association shall be created for the maintenance of all common facilities or lands not to be held in public ownership. 
2.  The planning commission shall review the proposed subdivision or land development; offer advice on code compliance issues; make recommendations on plan revisions; suggest additional reviews by appropriate agencies; recommend approval or disapproval of the subdivision or land development and forward the submission unto council for consideration. The planning commission will state the reasons for all recommendations in the form of a motion to council based upon a majority vote of its members. 
d.  Mayor and council review. 
1.  The second step in the review process is submission to mayor and council. This submission shall include the following information: 
a.  All items listed in section 3.04.c. 
b.  A copy of the minutes from the planning commission meeting along with their recommendations. 
2.  The mayor and council shall review the subdivision or land development submission, planning commission recommendation and staff report. Based on this review the mayor and council shall authorize the plan to proceed to the next step in the process, which is the review by the planning department and engineer or request plan changes and re-review of the plan or disapprove the application. The authorization to proceed shall be made in the form of a motion approved by a majority vote of council members. 
e.  Planning department and engineer's review. 
1.  The third step in the review process is a submission to the planning department and engineer. This submission shall include the following: 
a.  All items listed in sections 3.04.c. and 3.04.d. 
b.  A copy of the minutes from the mayor and council meeting along with their authorization to submit the plan for review by the planning department and town engineer. 
c.  A copy of the staff report, along with all approvals from the agencies listed in the report. 
d.  Any changes required by the mayor and council. 
e.  Completed subdivision design which meets or exceeds all requirements listed in the subdivision ordinance, zoning ordinance and standard specification and details manual. 
f.  Final approval by town manager. 
1.  The fourth and final step in the review process is a review by the manager. The manager shall assure that all steps in the review process have been complied with and that all approvals have been obtained. Once this is completed the manager will issue a letter which shall certify that the subdivision plan has received final approval from the town. Once this is completed the owner and/or developer shall: 
a.  Within 60 calendar days furnish three sets of reproducible tracings and three sets of prints of the plan for approval signatures by the engineer and manager. The town shall retain one set of reproducible tracings and two sets of prints of the approved plans. All others will be returned to the owner and/or developer for recordation of the final subdivision plan within 30 calendar days of the date on the town manager's letter of approval, in the office of the recorder of deeds for the county. All costs associated with recordation of the plan will be at the expense of the owner and/or developer. If the owner and/or developer fails to record the approved plan within this time period, the manager's approval of said plan will be null and void, unless an extension of time is granted in writing by the manager after receipt of a written request from the owner and/or developer to do so. In no case shall the manager grant an extension of longer than 90 days. 
b.  Upon recordation of final subdivision plan and prior to construction activity, the owner and/or developer shall furnish the town an AutoCAD disc of the approved plan for its use and records. 
c.  As part of the final approval by the town manager, the town manager, in consultation with the planning department, engineer, and owner and/or developer, shall set a projected completion date for all site work under the plan. If the plan includes phasing, a completion date shall be set for each phase. Such completion date shall be based upon the owner and/or developer's projected starting date, which shall be within the limits set by section 3.06.b. Once the projected starting date is identified, the completion date shall be the time estimated to bring the site work to completion, assuming continuous and reasonably diligent work thereon. 
If the site work contemplated under a plan is not completed by the completion date set for the plan pursuant to this section, a presumption shall exist that the owner/developer is in default of the completion bond required pursuant to section 3.08.d. of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 018-03, § 1, 7-21-03; Ord. No. 008-07, § 2, 7-16-07) 
Sec. 3.05. - Resubdivision and minor subdivision plans. 
a.  A resubdivision or minor subdivision plan can be submitted to the town manager for review and approval, if the following conditions are met: 
1.  The lots to be adjusted are recorded lots in the office of the recorder of deeds for the county. 
2.  The creation of no more than three lots including the existing lot with no more than three existing or proposed individual dwelling units total. 
3.  No new streets are created. 
4.  All lots involved will comply with the zoning ordinance after adjustment of lot lines. 
5.  Adjustment of lot lines to insure existing utilities are contained within the easement. 
6.  A six-foot easement shall be recorded on all sides and rear property lines, which do not currently have recorded easements. 
b.  Submission to the town manager shall include the following: 
1.  Completed application form. 
2.  Three sets of prints of the resubdivision or minor subdivision plan. 
3.  Plan review fees per appendix 1, fees. 
c.  The manager shall review the proposed plan changes for compliance with the subdivision and zoning ordinances and issue a written approval or disapproval of the plan. 
d.  Upon receipt of the manager's approval, the owner and/or developer within 60 calendar days shall furnish three sets of reproducible tracings and three sets of prints of the plan for his approval signature. The plan shall contain the following notations: "The revised plot has been approved by the town manager pursuant to the authority delegated to him under section 3.05 of the Town of Smyrna Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of December 2001." 
The town shall retain one set of reproducibles and two sets of prints of the approved plans. All others will be returned to the owner and/or developer for recordation of the resubdivision or minor subdivision plan within 14 calendar days of the approval signatures date in the office of the recorder of deeds for the county. All costs associated with recordation of the plan will be at the expense of the owner and/or developer. 
If the owner and/or developer fails to record the approved plan within this time period, the town manager approval of said plan will be null and void, unless an extension of time is granted in writing by town manager after receipt of a written request from the owner and/or developer to do so. 
e.  Upon recordation of resubdivision or minor subdivision plan and prior to start construction activity, the owner and/or developer shall furnish the town an AutoCAD disc of the approved plan for its use and records. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 3.06. - Sunsetting of approved plans. 
a.  Subdivision plans must receive the town manager's final approval within one year from the date on the initial subdivision application; provided however, that any owner/developer may, prior to the expiration of the first year following the initial subdivision application, apply in writing for an extension of one year to obtain final approval. Such application shall be granted by the town manager for good cause shown. "Good cause" for purposes of this section shall mean facts which reasonably demonstrate that the owner/developer has been delayed from obtaining final subdivision approval by events or causes largely beyond his reasonable control, coupled with a showing that the owner/developer has made substantial efforts and expenditures in a good faith attempt to obtain final subdivision approval. 
b.  Construction permitted pursuant to any subdivision plan approved by the town manager after the adoption of this ordinance shall commence within one year after the date of final approval of the town manager; provided however, that any owner/developer may, prior to the expiration of the first year following the final subdivision approval, apply in writing for an extension of one year to begin construction. Such application shall be granted by the town manager for good cause shown. "Good cause" for purposes of this section shall mean facts which reasonably demonstrate that the owner/developer has been delayed from starting construction by events or causes largely beyond his reasonable control, coupled with a showing that the owner/developer has made substantial efforts and expenditures in a good faith attempt to begin construction. Commencement of construction shall mean completion of at least five percent of the site improvements within one year after the date of final approval of the town manager, pursuant to any and all required permits. The following costs will not be considered in determining the five-percent threshold: land purchase and financing costs; engineering and legal expenses/fees paid; review, filing and recordation fees; and building construction costs including permit fees. Prior to commencement of construction, the completion bond required by section 3.08.d. of this ordinance shall be filed with the town. Such completion bond shall be filed with the town prior to any site work being performed pursuant to a subdivision plan. 
c.  All subdivision plans approved, reapproved or extended prior to the adoption of this ordinance shall become null and void no later than two years after the adoption of this ordinance. Plans approved prior to the adoption of this ordinance may be reapproved or extended pursuant to its subdivision and land use ordinance in effect prior to the adoption of this ordinance. However, any such reapprovals or extensions shall be null and void two years after the adoption of this ordinance, unless construction has started as defined in section 3.06.b. and such plans, if resubmitted, shall be required to undergo the processes as set forth in this ordinance, and shall be subject to all of the provisions of this ordinance, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 011-05, 5-16-05; Ord. No. 016-06, § 1, 8-21-06) 
Sec. 3.07. - Improvement construction plans. 
a.  Upon receipt of approval of the final subdivision plan by town manager, improvement construction plans shall be submitted to the town engineer for review and approval. 
b.  Submission to the town engineer shall include the following: 
1.  Completed application form for "improvement construction permit." 
2.  Three sets of prints of the improvement construction plans. 
3.  Plan review fee per appendix 1, fees. 
c.  1.  The engineer shall review the plans for compliance with the subdivision and zoning ordinances, town specifications for construction and sound engineering design. The engineer shall issue written comments within 30 calendar days of receipt of plans to the owner and/or developer noting approval or disapproval of the plans. Any non-compliance comments will specify the reason and the need for plan revisions. 
2.  The owner and/or developer shall revise the improvement construction plans and resubmit to the engineer for review. 
d.  Upon approval by the engineer, the manager shall sign the plans and specifications certifying such approval and shall return one approved and signed set of plans to the owner and/or developer. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 3.08. - Subdivision improvement construction permit. 
a.  Upon approval of the subdivision improvement construction plans and specifications by the town manager, the town manager shall issue a construction permit authorizing the owner and/or developer to construct the subdivision improvements per the approved plans and specifications, plus any conditions imposed by town council. Issuance of the permit allows work to begin, but does not constitute acceptance of the work to be performed thereunder. Such permit shall become null and void, if the work is not commenced within six months from the date of the permit issuance; provided, however, such permit may be extended for six months upon written application to and written approval from the town manager. 
b.  Development by sections. In addition to the requirements of section 4.02., an owner and/or developer seeking to develop less than the entire approved subdivision at one time may develop the subdivision section by section subject to the following: 
1.  Each section, including all the layout of lots and the configuration of all streets for that section, shall require approval by the town council prior to issuance of any subdivision improvement construction permit by the town manager. 
2.  Each section, including all improvement construction plans for that section, shall require approval by the town engineer prior to issuance of any subdivision improvement construction permit by the town manager. 
3.  Water mains in each section shall be designed and constructed so as to be looped (connected at two remote locations), prior to being used for potable water. Refer to appendix 4, section 10. 
4.  No dead end streets shall be permitted upon completion of the entire subdivision unless designed and completely constructed under the classification of "cul-de-sac." Each section shall be designed and constructed such that segments of any street resulting in a dead end shall include a cul-de-sac or a "T" background in accordance with section 5.01.d.2. 
c.  Time limit to complete construction. All work shall be fully completed within two years of the date of the subdivision improvement construction permit; provided however, that a owner and/or developer may obtain an extension of time to fully complete such improvements by resolution of the town council after hearing the recommendations of the town manager. The responsibility for obtaining an extension of time shall be upon the owner and/or developer and the failure to fully complete all required subdivision construction improvements within the permitted time limit (including any extensions thereof) shall, at the town's sole option, constitute a breach of the owner and/or developer's approved surety which breach shall authorize and empower the town to exercise any and all remedies including but not limited to: 
1.  Bringing an action at law for damages against the owner and/or developer. Should the town bring any action or proceeding at law to recover damages, and if the town recovers judgment in any sum, the town shall also recover its reasonable attorney's fees plus service charges, interest, and all litigation expenses, including witness fees and court costs. 
2.  Bringing an action in equity for specific performance against the owner and/or developer. 
3.  Declaring the owner and/or developer in default under its subdivision improvements construction bond and commencing execution proceedings thereunder. 
4.  Entering into possession of all uncompleted subdivision improvement construction and causing the same to be completed by employees of the town and/or by independent contractors retained by the town, the cost thereof to be recovered from the owner and/or developer and/or the owner and/or developer's approved surety. 
d.  Completion and maintenance bonds required. No building permit shall be issued and no individual lots shall transfer ownership until the owner and/or developer has filed with the town a completion bond in the amount of 10 percent of the total cost of the construction plus 150 percent of the cost of the construction for all improvements (not already completed to the satisfaction of the town manager) for those section(s), for which a subdivision improvement construction permit is sought, the amount of such completion bond to be based upon estimates submitted to the town manager by an engineer approved by the town. Every completion bond shall be accompanied and secured by an "approved surety" as hereinafter provided. 
The completion bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful completion by the owner and/or developer of each and every item shown on the approved improvement construction plans, in accordance with each and every item identified in any written subdivision improvement agreement with the owner and/or developer, and in strict accordance with the town's standards and specifications, at the time and in the manner prescribed within the time limits established by this ordinance, including the payment in full to every person furnishing material or performing labor in the construction of the improvements of all sums of money due him for such labor or material. The completion bond shall contain the owner and/or developer's guarantee to indemnify and save harmless the town for all costs, damages and expenses growing out of or by reason of the owner and/or developer's failure to complete the improvements in strict accordance with the town's standards and specifications including, but not limited to, court costs and reasonable attorney and expert witness fees. 
The completion bond shall remain in place until 100 percent of all improvements covered by this bond are accepted by the town. Failure to comply with this requirement will result in a "stop work order" being issued by the town. No further building permits or certificates of occupancy will be issued by the town until the completion bond is resubmitted and accepted by the town. 
Prior to the final release of the completion bond or as a part thereof, the owner and/or developer shall submit to the town council a maintenance bond as specified in appendix 1, fees. Said maintenance bond shall continue in force for a period of one year from the date of acceptance of the improvements by the town council. 
For purposes of this section, "approved surety" shall be limited to: 
1.  Cash or certified check deposited in a Delaware bank to the credit of the town in an amount equal to the amount of the bond. 
2.  A first lien mortgage in an amount equal to double the amount of the bond in favor of the town upon real estate situated in the town, the appraised value of which real estate shall be at least double the amount of the bond. 
In the event the owner and/or developer elects to provide surety in the form of a first lien on real estate as herein above provided, he shall, at his own expense and before the subdivision improvement construction permit may be issued, provide the town with: 
a.  An appraisal of the subject property prepared by and certified to by a real estate appraiser licensed to do business in the state and approved by the town. 
b.  A certificate of title executed by an attorney at law admitted to practice before the Supreme Court of Delaware and approved by the town certifying that the mortgagor is seized of good and marketable fee simple title to the subject real estate and that there is of record in the appropriate county a duly executed and properly recorded mortgage creating a first lien against the subject real estate in favor of the town in an amount equal to double the amount of the performance bond. 
3.  Letter of credit. Such letter of credit shall be for such term as acceptable to the town and shall provide that it shall automatically re-new for an additional like term unless the town receives written notice (via registered mail) not less than 30 days nor more than 60 days prior to the then-current expiration date, to permit a request for an extension or to permit the town to draw thereon. Nothing herein shall preclude the town from requiring a letter of credit which does not have an expiration date. 
4.  Commercial surety bond. A commercial surety bond in form acceptable to the town, in favor of the town, securing the owner or developer's obligations under the subdivision improvement completion and payment bond and under the subdivision improvement maintenance bond in amounts equal to the amount of those bonds. 
e.  Certificate of completion. When (1) all work has been completed in accordance with all the requirements pertaining thereto and (2) a release of liens in proper form has been presented to the town evidencing the release of liens by all persons furnishing labor or material for the subject subdivision improvement, the town manager shall issue a certificate of completion. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 008-10, 3-1-10) 
Sec. 3.09. - As-built plans. 
a.  Upon completion of construction of the infrastructure improvements, the owner and/or developer shall submit as-built plans reflecting any approved construction revisions to the previously approved final subdivision and improvement construction plans. 
b.  Submission to the town engineer should include the following: 
1.  Completed application form. 
2.  Three sets of prints of the as-built plans. 
3.  Plan review fee per appendix 1, fees. 
c.  The engineer shall review the plans to determine its conformity with the approved final subdivision and improvement construction plans and its compliance with the subdivision ordinance. The engineer shall sign the plan certifying that he has approved the plan on the date shown, that improvements not completed have the surety required by section 3.08 in place and that the maintenance bond required by section 3.08 is in place. 
One set of approved as-built plans will be returned to the owner and/or developer. 
d.  Streets become part of town's plan. After the as-built plans have been approved and town council accept streets, the streets shown thereon shall be considered to be a part of the town's plan of streets. 
e.  Streets, parks and other improvements private until dedicated or condemned. 
1.  Every street, park, or other public open space or improvement shown on a final subdivision plan or as-built plan shall be deemed to be a private street, park, open space or improvement until such time as the same has been offered for dedication to the town and accepted by council's ordinance or resolution, or until it has been condemned for use as a public street, park, open space or improvement. Until acceptance or condemnation by the town, the owner and/or developer shall at all times be responsible for the maintenance of all subdivision improvements including but not limited to street sweeping, snow plowing, maintenance and repairs of water installations (including fire hydrants), maintenance and repairs of sewer installations, maintenance of erosion and settlement, street damage, curb damage, and sidewalk damage and street lights, street signs, signals. If the owner and/or developer fails to make such repairs after receiving reasonable advance written notice from the town, the town shall be authorized (but not obligated) to make repairs and charge the cost of all such repairs and maintenance to the owner and/or developer or to the owner and/or developer's approved surety. "All costs" includes but is not limited to engineering, bidding, court costs and expert witness and attorneys fees. 
f.  Maintenance bond. No subdivision improvement constructed under authority of subdivision improvement construction permit issued pursuant to section 3.08.a. shall be accepted by the town, and the town shall have no responsibility for any such subdivision improvements until the owner and/or developer submits a maintenance bond, in form acceptable to the town, pursuant to section 3.08.d. 
g.  Dedication and acceptance. Dedication of streets and utility systems shall be by appropriate deeds, deeds of easements and/or bill of sale to be executed by the owner and/or developer and delivered to the town at such time as the town is prepared to accept ownership and responsibility for the various site improvements. 
The owner and/or developer shall be responsible for recordation of these documents at their sole expense and furnished recorded copies of same to the town. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 3.10. - Homeowner's associations. 
a.  The owner and/or developer shall create a homeowner association for the proposed development where private open space and stormwater management facility ownership and maintenance responsibility exist. The homeowners' association shall be organized and established as a legal entity prior to or as a part of the final plat approval and recording process and all documents related to the homeowners' association shall be submitted in draft form at the time of application for the subdivision plan review (whether minor or major). Such documents shall be acceptable to the town as a condition of subdivision plan approval. 
b.  The owner and/or developer should pay for the preparation of the legal document necessary to create the association, have same approved by the town solicitor and council and record same in the recorder of deeds office for the county. 
c.  The legal documents prepared will give the town the authority to require the homeowner's association to perform routine maintenance and minor/major repairs as necessary to keep the property in good condition, and eliminate any health or safety issues. 
If the homeowner's association does not respond to the town citation within 14 calendar days, the town shall have the right to perform the work itself and assess each property owner of the homeowner association or the homeowner's association itself a fee to recover its cost. This money will be recovered during the normal real estate tax process as a special assessment to these lot owners or the homeowner's association. 
d.  Homeowners' association requirements. If the applicant is required to establish a homeowners' association for purposes of ownership and maintenance of common areas, common facilities and/or open spaces, such association documents shall require, at minimum: 
1.  Membership mandatory. Membership in the organization shall be mandatory for all purchasers of properties within the development and their heirs and assigns and it shall be inseparable from property ownership. Membership shall become effective upon the first conveyance of a lot by the developer. The members of the homeowners association shall share equitably in the costs of maintaining all open space, common areas and facilities, recreation areas and facilities, and stormwater management areas and facilities which are not accepted by the town in writing in accordance with the provisions of all deed restrictions and maintenance agreements, all applicable property maintenance codes, all record plan notes, and in accordance with procedures established by the homeowners' association. The deed restrictions shall require, at minimum, that the costs of such maintenance shall be collectable from the owner of the lot(s) to which such costs are assessed and to their successor-in-interest; and that such costs shall be and constitute a lien upon such lot(s), subordinate only to the lien of any mortgage on the property regardless of the priority of such mortgage. 
2.  Responsibilities. The homeowners association shall be responsible for all maintenance, insurance, taxes, fees, and other burdens customary to the ownership of real property and all improvements and construction thereon, but not limited to all recreation amenities, walkways, storm water facilities, ponds, landscaping, and other facilities not owned or accepted by the Town of Smyrna. 
3.  Deed restrictions. Restrictive covenants shall provide that they may not be amended without written approval from the Town of Smyrna that the amendment is in compliance with the Town Code. Restrictive covenants shall provide that in the event the association fails to maintain the common areas, common facilities, and open areas according to the standards of the Town of Smyrna, in accordance with the recorded plan, and in accordance with the requirements of recorded restrictions, the town, following reasonable notice may: 
a.  Demand that the deficiency of maintenance be corrected; or 
b.  Enter the common area to maintain same. The cost of such maintenance shall be charged to the association or to each property owner of the association, pro rata; or 
c.  Enforce collection of all assessments owing to the homeowners association from the members thereof in accordance with the provisions of the Homeowners Association Agreement, to the same extent as the Homeowners Association. 
4.  Compliance with Delaware laws. The homeowner's association shall be formed and operated in compliance with 25 Del. C. Chapter 81 ("Delaware Uniform Common Interest Ownership Act"). 
e.  Homeowner association reporting responsibilities. 
1.  Each Home Owners Association (HOA) established pursuant to Article 3 of Appendix B, Smyrna Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance shall, not later than December 31 of each year, provide to the Town Manager of the Town of Smyrna a listing of the officers of such HOA, including their addresses and telephone numbers, and the date of the annual meeting. 
2.  The HOA shall list the terms of office of each officer and the date of the annual election. The HOA shall provide the name, address, phone number and contact information for any firm providing services in behalf of or acting as agent for the HOA in carrying out its responsibilities 
3.  On or before December 31 of each year, each HOA shall file a report with the town setting forth actions taken during the preceding 12 months to carry out its responsibilities and evidencing that the HOA has properly assessed required fees as set forth in the articles of incorporation of the HOA. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 008-07, §§ 3, 4, 7-16-07; Ord. No. 002-08, § 1, 1-22-08; Ord. No. 004-11, §§ 1-5, 8-1-11) 
Sec. 3.11. - Impact fees. 
a.  Residential: Prior to issuance of a building permit for an approved dwelling unit (A.D.U.) or (upon approval of subdivision plans, at the direction of council, when adequate utilities are not in place), all owners and/or developers shall pay an impact fee as specified in appendix 1, fees. 
This impact fee represents the project's portion of the town's capital improvements already in place or improvements necessitated by the new development. 
b.  Commercial/industrial: Prior to issuance of a building permit (or upon approval of subdivision plans/site plans, when adequate utilities are not in place), for all commercial districts, all owners and/developers shall pay an impact fee as specified in appendix 1, fees for the buildings on the approved building permit application. This impact fee represents the project's portion of the town's capital improvements already in place or improvements necessitated by the new development. 
c.  Manufacturing/industrial research park: Prior to issuance of a building permit (or upon approval of subdivision/site plans, when adequate utilities are not in place) for all manufacturing/industrial research park districts, all owners and/or developers shall pay an impact fee as specified in appendix 1, fees for the buildings on the approved building permit application. This impact fee represents the project's portion of the town's capital improvements already in place or improvements necessitated by the new development. 
The town council shall have the authority to enter into agreements with developers which allow in-kind contribution of some or all of the impact fees above set forth in lieu of cash payments. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
ARTICLE 4. - PLAN REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 4.00. - General. 
a.  Plans shall be drawn to a scale not less than 1 inch = 50 feet. 
b.  Sheet size shall be 24 inches by 36 inches with all prints made using blue or black lines on white background. 
c.  When more than one sheet comprises a set of plans, each sheet should have a "key map diagram" indicating this sheet's location to the total set. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 4.01. - Final subdivision plan. 
a.  A title, consisting of name and address of owner and/or developer, professional land surveyor or professional engineer responsible for plan preparation, location and area of subdivision, date, scale, north point and elevation based on town level datum. 
b.  Courses and distances given in feet and decimals; bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds of boundary line survey. 
c.  Names, locations, widths, paving widths and curb lines, right-of-way and curb line radii at intersection of existing and plotted streets. 
d.  Location and size of existing sanitary sewers. 
e.  Location and size of existing storm sewers, water courses and drainage. 
f.  Location and size of existing water mains. 
g.  Contours at intervals of one foot. 
h.  Layout of proposed streets, including names, right-of-way and paving widths and widths of alleys, crosswalks and easements. 
i.  Layout and dimensions of proposed lots and lot areas. 
j.  Parcels of land, such as additional right-of-way along old roads, intended to be dedicated, and the conditions, if any, of such dedication or reservation. 
k.  Tentative grades of proposed streets to an existing street or to a point 400 feet beyond the subdivision boundaries. 
l.  Tentative location and size of proposed sanitary sewers. 
m.  Tentative location and size of proposed storm sewers, drainage ditches, watercourses and stormwater management facilities. 
n.  Tentative location and size of proposed water lines. 
o.  All easements, existing and proposed, temporary or permanent, with dimensions and statement of purpose (i.e., drainage easement for swale, etc.). 
p.  Delineation of wetland areas, if present. Notation on plan indicating name of wetlands consultant and the date of the field analysis and report. 
q.  Delineation of 100-year floodplain areas, if present. Notation on plan indicating the source of the floodplain information. 
r.  Delineation of proposed active recreational improvements. 
s.  Notation on plan indicating ownership and maintenance responsibility for all open space areas including active recreational facilities, wetlands and stormwater management facilities. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 4.02. - Phased developments. 
A.  Stage development will require a phasing plan to be part of the approved final subdivision plan. The plan will reflect the sequence of development and the requirements for looped water mains and temporary turnarounds. 
B.  When only a portion of the property is to be developed and the remainder is to be left as is, the owner and/or developer will be required to submit an overall master plan for the property. The plan will reflect future development of the remaining lands and how proposed development and its infrastructure will fit into the overall plan. This plan is for review purposes only by council. 
C.  Lands which are proposed for development will require the following: 
1.  Electric, public works and planning and inspections departments will be notified in writing of the anticipated date of commencement of the next phase. 
2.  Separate construction plans must be submitted for each phase of the subdivision illustrating in detail the proposed layout of roadbeds, sewer and water, etc. 
3.  The construction plans, the public works agreement, electric agreement and any required bonds must be approved and in place prior to construction of each phase. 
4.  A mandatory pre-construction meeting will be held including representatives from all utilities and town departments, including but not limited to, electric, public works, planning and inspections, gas company, cable company, telephone company. 
5.  All utilities, streets, and curbs must be completed, inspected and approved in writing by the appropriate department before any building permit is issued. 
6.  All grading, seeding and sidewalks must be completed, inspected and approved before any certificate of occupancy will be issued. 
7.  The town will not accept any phase of the subdivision until 75 percent of the houses are complete. 
D.  Approval of a final subdivision plan for a portion of the property does not constitute approval or acceptance of this overall master plan by council. The plan will not be part of the approved final subdivision plan. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 009-04, § 1, 11-15-04) 
Sec. 4.03. - Certification. 
a.  The approved subdivision plan shall contain the following certifications: 
1.  Professional engineer or professional land surveyor certification. 
I, _______ hereby certify the plan represents a survey made by me (or firm's name), that the accuracy of the information shown is correct to acceptable surveying standards and practices, the monuments shown as existing are accurately shown and the plan complies with the applicable zoning and subdivision ordinances of the town. 
______________       _______ 
Name and Seal       Date   
2.  The owner certifying his adoption of plan. 
I(we), _______ hereby certify that the final subdivision plan was prepared at my(our) direction, the public improvements to be dedicated to the Town of Smyrna will be done upon acceptance by the town, and that we have read and agree to the terms of section 3.06 sunsetting of approval plans of the subdivision ordinance of the Town of Smyrna. 
______________       _______ 
Name       Date   
3.  Signature and certificate of town engineer. 
The final subdivision plan conforms to the applicable town zoning and subdivision ordinances. 
______________       _______ 
Name       Date   
4.  Signature of town manager. 
Town council approved the final subdivision plan at a public meeting held on _______ and the construction activity must be started within one year of the approval date or this plan's approval expires. 
______________       _______ 
Name       Date   
5.  Sections of the subdivision plan may be recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds for the county, after approval by council for development. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 001-05, § 2, 2-7-05) 
Sec. 4.04. - Wetland delineation report. 
a.  A wetlands delineation report shall be prepared by an individual or firm with expertise in wetlands vegetation and soils identification and evaluation. The report shall be prepared using the current Corps of Engineers guidelines for delineating wetlands. A physical survey of the wetlands flagging placed will be tied to the perimeter boundaries and accompany the report. 
b.  If the field evaluation determines that no wetlands exist, a summary report shall be submitted to the town indicating "no wetlands present." 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 4.05. - Existing infrastructure evaluation report. 
a.  In coordination with the town's engineer and manager, the owner's and/or developer's professional engineer shall prepare a report indicating the following: 
1.  Anticipated sanitary sewer flows to be generated by the proposed development. 
2.  Anticipated water consumption needs of the proposed development. 
3.  Anticipated vehicular traffic to be generated by the proposed development. 
4.  Analysis of the town's existing sanitary sewer and public water supply systems to determine if they can provide the anticipated services. If not, what improvement will need to be made to the existing system to provide the services required. 
a.  If no capacity exists prior to the development, the cost to upgrade the system will be the sole responsibility of the owner and/or developer. 
b.  If capacity exists prior to the development, but not enough to accommodate the entire project, then the total cost to upgrade the system will be the sole responsibility of the owner and/or developer. As an alternative the owner and/or developer can propose a smaller project that can be accommodated by the existing system. 
c.  At the town's sole discretion, the existing system may require upgrading to offset capacity or maintenance problems. The town will share in this cost to upgrade the system on a proportional basis with the owner and/or developer. Each share will be proportional to the flows within the system (i.e., developments plus existing). 
5.  A traffic impact study will be required of the owner and/or developer, if the number of peak hour trips generated by the proposed development exceeds 50 vehicles. If DelDOT maintained roads are involved, the traffic study must be reviewed by DelDOT and comments or approval given prior to final subdivision plan approval. 
6.  If the existing downstream storm drainage system is inadequate to handle the proposed stormwater flows, the proposed stormwater management facilities shall be oversized based upon these constraints. No additional impacts are allowed on the existing system. 
b.  In the event the town desires to upgrade the off-site improvements for their benefit, then the proportional cost increases due to this upgrade shall be paid for by the town. Refer to appendix 3, section 5.a.3.; appendix 4, section 5.a.3.; appendix 5, section 5.a.2. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 4.06. - Improvement construction plans. 
a.  Improvement construction plans shall be required for the construction of all improvements shown on the approved final subdivision plan. 
b.  1.  Street plan and profiles. Plans to be drawn at a scale of one inch = 40 feet horizontal and one inch = four feet vertical and include: 
a.  Center line with bearings, distances and curve data and stations corresponding to the profile. 
b.  Right-of-way and curb lines with radii at intersections. 
c.  Beginning and end of proposed construction. 
d.  Tie-ins by courses and distances to intersection of all public roads, with their names and right-of-way widths. 
e.  Location of all monuments with references to them. 
f.  Property lines and ownership of abutting properties. 
g.  Location and size of all existing and proposed drainage structures and public utility crossings. 
h.  Profile of existing ground surface along center line and both right-of-way lines. 
i.  Proposed center line grade with percent of grade on tangents, elevations at 50-foot intervals, and top of curb for grades for intersections. 
j.  Vertical curve data including length, point of tangency elevations, elevations at 25-foot intervals and elevation at high and low points. 
2.  Construction details. 
a.  Street typical sections. 
1.  Right-of-way width and location and width of paving. 
2.  Type, thickness, and slope of paving. 
3.  Type of curb. 
4.  Width, type, and thickness and slope of sidewalk and bike path areas. 
b.  Storm drainage structures. 
1.  Typical details of all proposed structures to be used including, but not limited to catch basins, manholes, flared end sections and riprap. 
c.  Sanitary sewer structures. 
1.  Typical details of all proposed structures to be used including but not limited to manholes, cleanouts, concrete encasements and pipe bedding. 
d.  Stormwater management structures. 
1.  Cross-sections of embankments, emergency spillways and pond sections. 
2.  Details for outfall system. 
3.  Details for forebays. 
e.  Water distribution system. 
1.  Typical details for buttresses, fire hydrants and water service and meters. 
3.  Sanitary sewer and storm drainage plan and profiles. Plans to be drawn at a scale of one inch = 40 feet horizontal and one inch = four feet vertical and include; 
a.  Location and size of line with stations corresponding to the profile. 
b.  Locations, type and offsets from centerline of street of manholes or catch basins with slope of line and top of each manhole or catch basin. 
c.  Property lines and ownership of abutting properties, with details of easements where required. 
d.  Beginning and end of proposed construction. 
e.  Location of laterals, Y's, etc. 
f.  Location and size of all other drainage facilities and public utility crossings. 
g.  Profile of existing ground surface and proposed centerline with elevations of street. 
h.  Profile of storm drain or sewer showing size of pipe, grade, cradle (if any), manhole or catch basin locations. 
4.  Water main plan and profiles. Plan to be drawn at a scale of one inch = 40 feet horizontal and one inch = four feet vertical and include; 
a.  Location and size of the line with stations corresponding to profiles. 
b.  Location of valves, fittings, fire hydrants, depressions and other appurtenances. 
c.  Property lines and ownership of abutting properties, with details of easements where required. 
d.  Beginning and end of proposed construction. 
e.  Location of service lines, etc. 
f.  Location and size of all other drainage facilities and public utility crossing. 
g.  Profile of existing ground surface and proposed center of street with elevations. 
h.  Profile of water main showing size of pipe, cover, etc. 
5.  Bridges and other improvements. These plans shall contain sufficient information to provide complete working plans for the proposed construction. 
6.  Sediment and erosion control plans. These plans shall be prepared in accordance with the state Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, dated 1989, or the most current version. 
a.  Pre-development sediment and erosion control measures required to control sediment on-site. This plan generally deals with site perimeter controls. 
b.  Post development sediment and erosion control measures required to control sediment on-site during the implementation phases of the approved improvement construction plans. 
c.  Narrative of sediment and erosion control measures chosen. 
d.  Sequence of construction to be followed. 
e.  Typical details of all proposed sediment and erosion control measures to be used including but not limited to silt fence, diversion berms, sediment traps and basins, stabilized construction entrances and temporary seeding specifications. 
7.  Certification. The approved improvement construction plans shall contain the following certifications: 
a.  Professional engineer or professional land surveyor certification. 
I, _______ hereby certify that these improvement construction plans have been prepared in accordance with the current, as of the date _______ below zoning ordinance and subdivision and land development ordinance of the Town of Smyrna. 
______________       _______ 
Name and seal       Date   
b.  The owner and/or developer certifying his adoption of plan. 
Owner and/or developer certification 
I(we), _______ hereby certify that these improvement construction plans were prepared at my (our) direction and that I (we) will construct the improvements as shown on these plans. 
______________       _______ 
Name       Date   
c.  Signature of town's engineer and manager that plans conform to applicable ordinances and standards. 
Town's engineer and manager certification 
These improvement construction plans conform to the applicable town of Smyrna ordinances and standards. 
______________       _______ 
Town engineer       Date   
______________       _______ 
Town manager       Date   
8.  Construction notes. Refer to appendix 6 for standard notes to be placed upon the improvement construction plans. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 4.07. - As-built plans. 
a.  An as-built plan is required for every subdivision. Plan will not be approved by council unless required improvements have been installed in strict accordance with town ordinances and standards or specifications, or the town is assured by means of a proper bond or deposit of funds in escrow sufficient to complete the work, that the said improvements will subsequently be installed. 
b.  At this time the town will accept a deed conveyancing the rights-of-way (streets, water, sewer, curb and gutters) in the subdivision and all improvements therein. 
c.  Information to be shown: 
1.  Title as required for the final subdivision plan. 
2.  Courses and distances for the legal description of all property lines shown on plan. 
3.  Names of abutting owners. 
4.  Names, locations, widths, center line courses, distances, and curve data, paving widths and curb lines, right-of-way and curb line radii at intersections of all existing plotted and approved streets, alleys, rights-of-way and easements; and parks and other public places or improvements within the land being subdivided. 
5.  Location, elevation, material and size of all monuments with references to them. 
6.  Layout and dimensions of lots with lot areas. 
7.  Locations and size of sanitary and storm sewers including manholes, catch basins and house laterals. 
8.  Location and size of water mains including service lines, valves, fire hydrants and appurtenances. 
d.  The as-built plan shall be approved by council before dedication of any improvements is accepted by town. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
ARTICLE 5. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 5.00. - General. 
a.  The standards contained in this article are considered minimum acceptable to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of and visitors to the town. 
b.  In case of conflict with rules and regulations contained in other town ordinances, the more restrictive will govern. 
c.  Subdivision or land development proposals shall take into account the planning principles of the comprehensive plan and plan of streets of the town. 
d.  Land subject to hazards to life, health and safety, such as flooding or fire shall not be subdivided or developed, unless the owner and/or developer can document how these perils will be mitigated by their proposed project. Any proposed mitigation measures shall be approved by the appropriate regulatory agency and town. 
e.  The proposed subdivision or land development shall be designed to promote interconnecting developments, either through streets, sidewalks or other pedestrian ways; preservation of existing tree or forest areas; and preservation of natural resources, such as wetlands, watercourses and historic structures. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 5.01. - Streets. 
a.  Arrangements. Streets shall be designed to conform with the arrangement of both existing and planned streets, so as to provide for the harmonious and systematic development of the town. Arterial and collector streets shall be designed to provide continuation of the existing street system. Residential streets shall be designed to discourage their use as collector streets. 
b.  Conformance to topography. Wherever possible streets shall conform to existing topographical conditions. 
c.  Grading. The entire right-of-way shall be graded to allow surface stormwater runoff to enter the street's storm drainage system. 
d.  Right-of-way and paving widths. 
1.  Streets. The minimum width of the right-of-way and the paving, which includes the curb, shall not be less than the existing street, which the proposed street is a continuation of or the following whichever is greater; unless council grants a waiver from these standards: 
Street type required Right-of-way Paving Curb Arterial 80-100' 44' Yes Collector 60-80' 36' Yes Boulevard 70-80' 18' one-way Yes Residential, Group Housing & Apts 50' 32' Yes Alley 20' 16' No  
2.  Cul-De-Sac. A cul-de-sac will not be approved when a through street design is practicable. The width of right-of-way and paving shall be based upon the number of lots to be developed and fronting on the street. 
Radius turn around No. of lots Right-of-way Paving Right-of-way Paving 10 but not more than 20 50' 32' 50' 40' 9 or less 50' 24' 50' 40'  
Where the installation of a turn around would cause undue hardship in land planning, a "T" shaped turn around designed in accordance with DelDOT's "Rules and Regulations for Subdivision Streets" may be approved. 
e.  Intersections. 
1.  Right-of-way lines shall intersect at right angles wherever practicable and shall be rounded by a tangential arc having a minimum radius of 13 feet. 
2.  Curb lines shall be rounded by a tangential arch having a minimum radius of which shall be 25 feet. 
3.  Intersections with arterial street shall be kept to a minimum. 
4.  Multiple intersections (i.e., more than two intersecting streets) shall be avoided. 
f.  Grade and alignment. 
1.  The maximum grade shall be ten percent although wherever possible grades in excess of five percent should be avoided. The minimum grade shall be one percent. 
2.  The grade through and within 50 feet of any side of an intersection shall not exceed three percent. 
3.  A combination of minimum radius horizontal curves and maximum grades will not be approved. 
4.  Horizontal curves: 
a.  All horizontal curves shall be designed using the most current addition of AASHTO's "Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets" for the following design speeds: 
Street type Design speed Arterial 45 Collector or boulevard 35 Residential and group housing and apartments 25 Alley 15 Cul-de-sac 25  
b.  One continuous radius is preferred over a series of smaller radii. Use of minimum radius curves at the end of long tangents shall be avoided. 
5.  Vertical curves: 
a.  All horizontal [vertical] curves shall be designed using the most current addition of AASHTO's "Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets" for the following design speeds: 
Street type Design speed Arterial 45 Collector or Boulevard 35 Residential and Group Housing and Apartments 25 Alley 15 Cul-de-Sac 25  
b.  A vertical curve shall be required, wherever the percent of grade change is greater than one percent. 
6.  Street names. Street names shall be approved by council. Lot number shall be assigned by the engineer. 
7.  Street lights. Street lighting is considered a requirement and will be installed as part of the development. 
Installation of the street lights shall be at the expense of the owner and/or developer. All street lights shall be serviced by underground conduits and cables. 
8.  Utilities: 
a.  Prior to placing of curb, base course material or hot-mix bituminous concrete, all utility systems located within the proposed street right-of-way shall be installed, properly backfilled with suitable material, inspected and tested per the respective utility regulations. 
b.  No utility mains or laterals shall be installed in newly constructed streets for a period of five years after date of acceptance by the town. 
c.  All utility systems shall be installed per the respective utility standards and details. 
d.  Refer to appendix 2, standard details for requirements to install temporary bituminous concrete ramps around manhole and valve boxes located in streets under construction. 
9.  Street construction: 
a.  All streets shall be constructed in strict accordance with "The Town of Smyrna's Standard Specifications and Details for Streets and Roads Dated July 1957" except those under DelDOT's jurisdiction. Then DelDOT's rules and regulations will govern the design and construction of same. 
b.  All streets shall be designed based upon the existing subgrade (i.e, soil) conditions, the number of lots served by the street and the required pavement structural number. 
Structural number Number of lots Good soil Poor soil 1-50 1.70 2.70 51-100 2.00 2.90 101-200 2.50 3.30 201-300 2.90 3.70 Over 300 3.30 4.10  
c.  Structural numbers: 
Hot-mix hot-laid bituminous concrete, type B ..... 0.40 
Hot-mix hot-laid bituminous concrete, type C ..... 0.40 
Select borrow ..... 0.08 
Graded aggregate base course ..... 0.14 
Hot-mix hot-laid bituminous concrete, base course ..... 0.32 
d.  Soil classification: 
1.  Good soil-AASHTO soil classification A-1, A-2 and A-3. 
2.  Poor soil-AASHTO soil classification A-4, A-5, A-6 and A-7. 
e.  The streets will be constructed with a minimum of two layers of hot-mix hot-laid bituminous concrete. One layer shall be a minimum of one and one-quarter inches of type C material, which will be the wearing course. 
The binder course shall be placed within six months of installation of the graded aggregate base course. The wearing course can not be placed until a minimum of 75 percent of the dwellings fronting on the street have "certificates of occupancy" issued, unless approved by town council. 
10.  Cost of construction. The total cost, including but not limited to, all grading, curb and gutter, pavement and sidewalks shall be borne by the owner and/or developer. 
11.  Installation procedure: 
a.  The owner and/or developer will construct the streets in accordance with the town specifications and these standards. 
b.  All street construction will take place in the presence of a town inspector, who will notify the engineer of the acceptance or rejection of the construction. Any construction that is rejected by the town's inspector and concurred with by the engineer shall be removed and reconstructed at the owner and/or developer's sole expense. 
c.  Refer to section 5.10.a. concerning limits of street construction in phased developments. 
12.  Maintenance. The owner and/or developer will be responsible for the streets until the following conditions have been satisfied: 
a.  The streets are approved by the engineer and certified that installation was made according to town's specifications and under town's inspection services. 
b.  The streets must be dedicated to town for public use. 
c.  Refer to section 3.09.f. for those items of maintenance required prior to acceptance by the town. 
13.  Revisions to approved plans. No field changes can be made without the written consent of the designated representative of the town manager's office. Field changes made prior to this approval are subject to rejection, which will require the owner and/or developer at his sole expense to remove same and reconstruct the system per the approved plans. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 5.02. - Sidewalks and pedestrian ways. 
a.  General. 
1.  Sidewalks constructed of Portland cement concrete shall be installed in the street right-of-way for all subdivisions and land developments, except when approved by council brick or concrete pavers can be used. 
2.  Sidewalks shall be located within the right-of-way and 1 foot off the right-of-way line, on both sides of the street and run paralleled to the curb line. 
3.  Minimum width of sidewalk shall be four feet. 
4.  All sidewalks shall have barrier free access designs at all street intersections. 
b.  Existing streets and lot frontage. 
1.  Sidewalks shall be constructed along the entire property frontage, when it abuts an existing street. Factors which council may consider in making such a determination include, whether or not such installation will create abrupt changes in elevation or unreasonable cross slopes, will create a likelihood of drainage problems. 
2.  In addition to the sidewalk, Portland cement concrete curb will be constructed to provide protection from vehicular traffic. 
c.  Timing of installation. 
1.  The town manager shall have reasonable discretion to establish the timing, location and sequence of sidewalk and/or curbing installation within the development after due consideration of those areas within the development which have been issued "certificates of occupancy", those lots which are occupied by persons having special and immediate need for sidewalks (e.g., small children, elderly or disabled person), the location of those lots in relation to other streets and/or sidewalks. 
2.  The installation of curb and sidewalk along existing streets shall occur prior to 51 percent of the building permits for the development or in the approved phase, in the case of a phased development, being issued by the town. 
d.  Pedestrian way. 
1.  The planning commission and council shall have the right to require the owner and/or developer to provide Portland cement concrete sidewalks and bituminous concrete pedestrian/bikeways outside proposed street right-of-ways to provide access to open spaces, adjoining existing developments or other existing public facilities (i.e. schools, libraries, shopping centers, etc.). 
2.  The planning commission and council shall have the right to require the owner and/or developer to provide Portland concrete cement curb and sidewalks along existing streets beyond the limits of the property to provide access to adjoining existing developments or other existing public facilities (i.e., school, libraries, shopping centers, etc.). 
3.  Minimum width of bituminous concrete pedestrian ways is five feet and eight feet, if a combined pedestrian/bikeway. 
4.  Pedestrian ways located outside of the street right-of-way shall be located a minimum of 15 feet from any proposed or existing lot lines. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 016-04, § 1, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 5.03. - Monuments. 
a.  Monuments of stone or concrete shall be placed at angle points, points of curve and intermediate points, as may be necessary, to define and locate the street right-of-way and perimeter boundary of the entire property. 
b.  Monuments of stone or concrete or other suitable permanent markers, approved by the town manager, shall be placed at all corners of improved building lots prior to the issuance of any certificates of occupancy. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 5.04. - Hedges, fences and walls. 
    Hedges shall not be planted and fences, walls and other obstructions shall not be erected within the street right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 5.05. - Blocks. 
a.  Block design shall give consideration to the existing topography and natural features, innovative layout, safety of vehicular and pedestrian movements and adequacy of lot widths for the housing styles to be constructed. 
b.  Length: Blocks shall not exceed 1,200 feet in length. 
c.  Crosswalks: In blocks over 800 feet long, a crosswalk not less than 35 feet wide may be required at or near the middle of the block with a Portland cement concrete sidewalk five feet wide. Crosswalks may also be required to give pedestrian access to schools, churches, business sections and similar community features. 
d.  Width: The width of blocks shall be such as to allow two tiers of lots. Where a block is subdivided into lots larger than the minimum required by the zoning ordinance, additional lot depth may be required to provide for eventual widening of the streets and other public improvements, if these lots are further subdivided. The minimum building setback shall be increased to accommodate this widening. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 5.06. - Lots. 
a.  Conformance to zoning. Lots shall conform to the requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
b.  Depth. Excessive depth in relation to width shall be avoided. A proportion of two and one-half to one shall normally be considered a desirable maximum for widths of 60 feet or more. 
c.  Frontage or access. Each lot shall have frontage on and access to a street. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 5.07. - Open space requirements. 
a.  Open space shall be required in all major subdivisions and land development plans. Ownership of open space shall be transferred to a Homeowners Association or government body. Open space shall not be further developed and shall serve one or more of the following functional needs: 
1.  Protection and preservation of natural resources and sensitive site features; 
2.  Provision of active and passive recreation areas; 
3.  Greenways and trail corridors; 
4.  Wildlife habitats and migration corridors; 
5.  Storm water management; 
6.  Preservation of historic and cultural resources; 
7.  View shed and vista preservation; and 
8.  Buffer yards and landscaped areas. 
b.  All major residential subdivisions and land development plans shall contain open space designated as common open space. In designating common open space or landscaped surfaces as part of a subdivision or land development plan, the following criteria and standards shall be adhered to by the applicant: 
1.  Open space shall be separate parcels of land exclusive of streets and residential lots. 
2.  An existing principal dwelling unit and a maximum of one existing out building, where such structures are deemed historically and/or architecturally significant by the town, may be included within open space area. 
3.  Open space designated for recreation may contain a clubhouse used for recreational purposes, parking areas and access drives accessory to the open space and other such complementary structures and improvements that are necessary and appropriate for the benefit of the residents utilizing the land for recreation purposes. Such land shall be distributed through the development to best serve the residents. 
4.  Where the development is in phases, the town may require each phase to have open space. Alternatively, where a phase of development is being submitted for final subdivision or land development plan approval does not have designated open space of appropriate size or character to provide for active or passive recreation, and where it reasonably appears that the remainder of the tract will eventually be submitted for subdivision or land development plan approval in subsequent phases, the council will require the owner and/or developer to set aside an appropriate portion of the remainder of the larger tract for future use as public open space under this subsection by written covenant in recordable form which shall bind and run with the land. In such case, council will, as a condition of any subsequent subdivision or land development plan approval for any remaining portion of the original tract, require the dedication of such and equal to the acreage accumulated and "set aside" under this subsection from prior subdivision or land development plan approvals within that tract. 
5.  All residential subdivisions and land development plans shall provide open space as provided in the open space minimum requirements table. 
Open Space Minimum Requirements Zone Description Minimum Lot Square Footage Minimum Percentage of Gross Tract Area R-1 Single lots (11,000 s. ft.) 14% minimum R1-A Single lots (7,700 s. ft.) 16% minimum R-2 Single lots (6,600 s. ft.) 17% minimum R2-A Single lots (5,500 s. ft.) 20% minimum R-3 Single lots (5,500 s. ft.) 20% minimum R-2 Semi-detached (5,500 s. ft.) 22% minimum R2-A Semi detached (3,300 s. ft.) 23% minimum R-3 Semi-detached (3,300 s. ft.) 23% minimum R2-A Townhouse (2,200 s. ft.) 25% minimum R-3 Townhouse (2,200 s. ft.) 25% minimum R2-A Multi-family 25% minimum R-3 Multi-family 25% minimum  
6.  All residential subdivisions and land development plans of 20 units or more shall provide active recreation open space of not less than one quarter acre plus an additional 275 square feet per unit for every unit greater than 20. 
7.  Active recreation open space shall be centrally located, highly visible, and unconstrained by floodway areas, critical natural areas, or wetlands. Additionally, the area shall be graded in such a manner to render it useable for active recreation purposes and shall not have slopes greater than ten percent. This provision does not require active recreation open space in addition to the requirements of this provision, but provides that a portion of the required open space shall be designed in such a way to render it useable for active recreation purposes. 
8.  Open space shall be interconnected with open areas or greenways on abutting parcels whenever possible and may provide provisions for pedestrian pathways for general public use, to create linked pathway systems within the town, where appropriate. 
9.  Open space may be used for stormwater management but stormwater management areas may not be included as active open space. 
10.  Open space areas are to be contiguous as much as practically possible. There is to be no area less than 20 feet in width and 2,500 square feet in area. 
11.  A landscape plan/open space management plan specifying the landscaping/open space management requirements shall be required for all subdivisions and land development plans involving the creation of active recreation open space. Each plan must show with specificity a depiction of phasing, details of proposed facilities, equipment, landscaping, specifications, and designs. 
c.  Design guidelines for active recreation. 
1.  Land areas shall be at least 20 feet in width; 
2.  Active recreation areas shall be offset not less than ten feet from the closest structure or lot line; 
3.  Selective clearing of natural vegetation may be permitted to form trails and clearings within woodland areas in accordance with the provisions of chapter 74 of the Town Code of the Town of Smyrna; 
4.  Linked open spaces shall attempt to be contiguous and designed with linkages to existing and planned public walkways and with other existing or planned recreation areas. 
d.  Exemptions for small developments. 
1.  For all minor subdivisions, minor land development plans and re-subdivisions, a cash contribution shall be made by the owner and/or developer in lieu of other active open space requirements. This provision does not exempt owners and/or developers from any other subdivision ordinance requirements such as, but not limited to setback requirements. 
2.  For all development is the central residential district, a cash contribution shall be made by the owner and/or developer in lieu of other active open space requirements. This provision does not exempt owners and/or developers from any other subdivision ordinance requirements such as, but not limited to setback requirements. 
3.  Residential developments with fewer than 20 units may be exempt from the one quarter acre minimum requirement for active recreation areas. A lesser amount may be recommended by the planning commission. A full or partial donation in lieu of the full or partial minimum active open space requirement shall be made. 
e.  Improvement and completion: 
1.  Prior to the transfer and dedication of any lands to the town or homeowners association under this section, any lands dedicated under this section shall be graded and seeded, and shall have installed whatever drainage may be necessary, at the owner and/or developer's expense and subject to the town's engineer and manager approval. Such land shall be completed in accordance with the following schedule: 
a.  Building permits will be issued to correspond with the completion of the active open space as follows: 
i.  Up to 25 percent of the required permits will be issued on approval of the final subdivision plans or land development plans. 
ii.  No additional permits will be issued until 75 percent of the active open space is completed. The owner or developer shall provide a bond for all recreation areas, with surety acceptable to the town, in an amount equal to ten percent of the cost of the improvements which bond shall continue for a period of one year following the date of the acceptance of the improvements by the Homeowner's Association or the town or other entity as agreed. Such bond shall guarantee the quality and performance of those improvements against any necessary repairs or replacements that are discovered to be necessary following the acceptance thereof. 
iii.  At that time, up to but not to exceed 75 percent of the required number of permits will be issued. 
iv.  No further permits or certificates of occupancy will be issued until 100 percent of the active recreation open space is completed and approved by the town. 
v.  Upon such acceptance, the remaining 25 percent of the permits will be issued. 
2.  Whenever installation of recreational equipment is part of the improvement construction plan and final subdivision plan or land development plan approvals, the owner and/or developer shall install the necessary equipment per the schedule noted in section 5.07.b.1. All such equipment will be listed and made a part of the subdivision or land development plan specifications and shall be bonded as described in subsection e.1.a.ii. and iv. of this section. 
3.  Maintenance of the public open space, and the repair and replacement of equipment within these areas set aside for parks, playgrounds or recreational areas will be the responsibility of the owner and/or developer until final acceptance of the completed project by the Homeowner's Association, at which time the areas will be transferred to the Homeowner's Association and the responsibility will then be assumed by the Homeowner's Association. Public open space may be offered to the town for dedication, at which time the town may under no obligation accept dedication and subsequent maintenance responsibilities for the open space. 
f.  Cash donations in lieu of land dedication. 
1.  The amount of the cash donation for full or partial cash in lieu of open space shall be determined by Appendix 1 of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 
2.  All cash contributions shall be deposited in a separate account maintained by the town to be used for parks, playgrounds, or recreational purposes which will serve and act as a benefit to the future property owners of the subdivision or land development plan or the town as a whole. 
3.  All cash in lieu of land dedication payments must be paid in full prior to the issuance of any building permits. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 005-07, § 1, 7-2-07, Ord. No. 004-16, § 1, 6-20-16) 
Sec. 5.08. - School sites or sites for other public uses. 
    Council may also require an owner and/or developer to set aside such areas as it may deem to be required for a school or other public use. Upon failure of the proper authorities to purchase such site within one year after the date of the approval of the final subdivision plan, the owner and/or developer, upon application to the town and approval of such application shall be relieved of the responsibility of reserving such land for public purposes. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 5.09. - Preservation of natural features. 
    Owner and/or developers shall give consideration in the planning of their project to the preservation of all natural features, which add value to the proposed development and to the community, such as large trees or forests, water courses and historic landmarks and similar irreplaceable assets. It is recommended that the owner and/or developer contact the town manager to determine if these natural features are present on the property. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 5.10. - Driveways. 
a.  Driveways for corner lots shall take access off the lower classification of street type (i.e., residential street over collector street). The owner and/or developer shall be required to construct the public streets fronting on the lot (i.e., corner lot both streets) prior to receiving a "certificate of occupancy" for the lot. 
b.  Driveways shall be a minimum of 40 feet from the right-of-way line at an intersection. 
c.  Driveways grades shall be limited to four percent within the street right-of-way and 14 percent on lot. 
d.  Driveways located off arterial, collector and boulevard streets shall be provided with an on lot driveway turnaround paving to allow for vehicles to exit the lot moving in a forward motion. 
e.  The number of lots sharing a common driveway shall be two. Where common driveways are used, a cross access and maintenance agreement must accompany the plan approvals and be recorded in the recorder of deeds office for the county. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 5.11. - Mailbox location and parking. 
a.  In these developments where the U.S. Postal Service requires the use of outdoor gang mail boxes, the owner and/or developer shall construct one off-street parking space for every ten individual mail boxes at that location. In no case shall more than five off-street parking spaces be provided at one location, even if the number of individual mail boxes exceed 50. 
b.  The owner and/or developer shall provide a written approval letter from the post master serving the area, that the design and location of the gang mail boxes is acceptable to them. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 5.12. - Sanitary sewer disposal. 
a.  No subdivision or land development will be approved unless connection to a public sanitary sewer main is provided. 
b.  The total cost, including but not limited to, extending all sanitary sewer facilities required to support the subdivision or land development shall be borne by the owner and/or developer. This includes sanitary sewers, manholes, laterals, pumping stations, if required, etc. 
c.  The owner and/or developer shall prepare detailed plans for the sanitary sewer system in strict accordance with provisions of appendix 3, sanitary sewer standards, and in accordance with town specifications. The improvement construction plans must be approved by the engineer before any work can be started. 
d.  The sanitary sewer standards contained in appendix 3 are considered supplemental documents to the subdivision ordinance and can be modified by the engineer and/or manager with the approval of council. No public hearing is required to modify or revise these standards. 
e.  Revisions to approved plans. No field changes can be made without the written consent of the designated representative of the town manager's office. Field changes made prior to this approval are subject to rejection, which will require the owner and/or developer at his sole expense to remove same and reconstruct the system per the approved plans. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 5.13. - Water supply. 
a.  No subdivision or land development will be approved unless connection to a public water main is provided. 
b.  The total cost, including but not limited to, extending all town water facilities required to support the subdivision or land development shall be borne by the owner and/or developer. This includes installation of all water mains and associated appurtenances such as valves, hydrants, service lines, booster pump stations, etc. 
c.  The owner and/or developer shall prepare detailed plans for the water system in strict accordance with provisions of appendix 4, water supply standards and in accordance with town specifications. The improvement construction plans must be approved by the engineer before any work can be started. 
d.  The water supply standards contained in appendix 4 are considered supplemental documents to the subdivision ordinance and can be modified by the engineer and/or manager with the approval of council. No public hearing is required to modify or revise these standards. 
e.  Revisions to approved plans. No field changes can be made without the written consent of the designated representative of the town manager's office. Field changes made prior to this approval are subject to rejection, which will require the owner and/or developer at his sole expense to remove same and reconstruct the system per the approved plans. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 5.14. - Storm drainage system. 
a.  No subdivision or land development will be approved until storm drainage requirements have been determined by the owner and/or developer and approved by the engineer and the county conservation district. 
b.  The total cost, including but not limited to, installing all storm drains, stormwater management facilities and appurtenances within the subdivision or land development shall be borne by the owner and/or developer. 
c.  The owner and/or developer shall prepare detailed plans for the storm sewer and stormwater management system in strict accordance with provisions of appendix 5, storm drainage standards, and in accordance with town specifications. The improvements construction plans must be approved by the engineer before any work can be started. 
d.  The storm drainage standards contained in appendix 5 are considered supplemental documents to the subdivision ordinance and can be modified by the engineer and/or manager with the approval of council. No public hearing is required to modify or revise these standards. 
e.  Revisions to approved plans. No field changes can be made without the written consent of the designated representative of the town manager's office. Field changes made prior to this approval are subject to rejection, which will require the owner and/or developer at his sole expense to remove same and reconstruct the system per the approved plans. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 5.15. - Erosion and sediment control measures. 
a.  All sediment and erosion control measures shall be designed using the latest edition of the "Delaware Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook." 
b.  The owner and/or developer shall prepare detailed plans for the erosion and sediment control measures to be implemented during construction of the project. The improvement construction plans must be approved by the engineer and/or the county conservation district before any work can be started. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 5.16. - Utility easements. 
a.  All storm drainage piping, structures and swales shall be located within an easement when located outside a street right-of-way. The minimum easement width shall be 20 feet, centered on the pipe or swale and preferably located on the rear and side lot property lines. No structures or trees shall be located within the easement. 
b.  All sanitary sewer and/or water main easements for piping and appurtenances located outside a street right-of-way shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide. The easement shall be centered in the pipe and preferably located on the rear or side lot property lines. No structures or trees shall be located within the easement. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 5.17. - Tree planting standards and requirements. 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish standards and requirements for the protection and planting of trees in all non-residential site and residential subdivision plans requiring the approval of the town of Smyrna because it is recognized that trees are not only desirable, but are essential to the health, safety, and welfare of the population. Trees provide oxygen, stabilize soil, cleanse the air by removing carbon dioxide and airborne pollutants, cleanse water passing into the ground through the root system, provide a natural habitat for wildlife, provide shade, reduce visual and noise pollution, increase property values, and provide an important physical, aesthetic, and psychological balance to the built environment. 
b.  Tree planting plan required. All non-residential site and residential subdivision plans requiring the approval of the Town of Smyrna shall be required to submit, with its application and plans, a tree planting plan as set forth in section 5.17(g). 
c.  Tree density. On each property for which a tree planting plan is required by this section, existing trees may be retained and new trees shall be planted such that the lot(s) shall attain or exceed a tree density of one tree per 3,000 square feet of lot area or fraction thereof. Trees needed to meet buffer requirements shall not be counted towards tree density. 
d.  Minimum standards for new trees. For new trees to be counted towards the required tree density, they must have a minimum caliper of two inches. 
e.  Recommended trees for new planting: The following characteristics shall be considered in selecting new trees to plant: size, tolerance to pollution, pest and disease resistance, non-invasiveness, ability to withstand drought and soil conditions, and landscape and ornamental value. It is recommended that new trees be selected from the tree list provided by the Delaware Urban and Community Forestry website ( http://delawaretrees.com/publications-2/recommended-trees/ ). Individuals should contact the Smyrna Shade Tree Commission at ShadeTreeCommission@smyrna.delaware.gov for assistance in identifying which tree species would be most appropriate for the area. 
f.  Minimum standards for existing trees. For existing trees to be counted toward the required tree density, the tree shall have a minimum caliper dimension of two inches. No trees over eight inches in caliper shall be removed unless within an area of 30 feet from the proposed building foundation, off-street parking lot, utility placement and/or is classified as a hazard tree. 
g.  Tree plan specifications . A tree plan, prepared by or in conjunction with a design professional, shall be shown on a copy of a preliminary plat, sketch, or site plan, as appropriate to the proposed development, drawn to the same scale and covering the same area as the other plan documents prepared for town review. The plan may be combined with a required buffer and landscape plan for the project, at the option of the developer. The plan shall comply with the requirements found in Chapter 74 ("Vegetation"), Article III ("Trees") of the Town Code and shall provide sufficient information and detail to clearly demonstrate that all applicable requirements and standards of this section and Chapter 74, Article III will be fully satisfied. The plan shall contain, but need not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Project name, zone, parcel number, north arrow and scale. 
(2)  Developer's name, address and telephone number. 
(3)  Name, address, and telephone number of the design professional responsible for the preparation of the plan. 
(4)  Delineation of all lot lines, minimum yard areas, buffers, and landscape areas as required by the zoning ordinance. 
(5)  Total acreage of the site and total lot area for each lot delineated. 
(6)  Delineation of all wetlands and woodlands. 
(7)  Designation and delineation of all lots in areas expected to retain existing trees to meet the tree density requirement. 
(8)  Designation of any tree(s) having an historic value, as determined by the state historic preservation officer, or that are of an outstanding nature due to type or species, age, or other criteria as determined by the Delaware Forest Service, if applicable. 
(9)  The location, spacing, caliper, and species of new trees proposed to meet tree density requirements. 
(10)  A summary table of the number of new trees to be planted and minimum number of existing trees to be retained to meet the tree density requirement, if any, along with calculations showing that the tree density requirement has been achieved. Groupings of trees may be keyed to the summary table by area rather than having each tree individually labeled on the plan. 
(11)  There shall be a note on the plan indicating that a one-year full price replacement guarantee on all new trees planted is held by the applicant. 
h.  Commission waiver . The Smyrna Shade Tree Commission may grant up to a ten (10%) percent waiver of the provisions of section 5.17(c), Tree Density, when doing so will mitigate the removal of existing trees located within the non-residential or residential subdivision plan. A waiver request shall be heard and decided by the Smyrna Shade Tree Commission prior to a subdivision plan being presented to the Planning and Zoning Commission for consideration. 
The applicant shall demonstrate the following: 
1.  A physical hardship related to the land which would otherwise prohibit compliance on the subject lot(s). 
2.  The mitigation plan proposed by the applicant is superior in terms of environmental benefits, tree quantity or aesthetic qualities compared to compliance with this section. 
3.  It is in the interest of preserving, protecting and promoting the public health, safety, welfare and/or public convenience. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 011-12, § 1, 10-1-12; Ord. No. 014-17, §§ 1-3, 2-5-18) 
APPENDIX 1. - FEES 
    To obtain a copy of the current fee schedule for all fees assessed by the town, contact the Town of Smyrna Planning and Inspection Department at 27 South Market Street Plaza; P.O. Box 307; Smyrna, Delaware 19977. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
APPENDIX 2. - STANDARDS DETAILS 
    [Appendix 2, standards details is included herein by reference and is available for public inspection in the office of the town clerk.] 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
APPENDIX 3. - SANITARY SEWER STANDARDS 
1.  The following are the minimum design standards to be followed and installation requirements. 
2.  Installation procedure. 
a.  The owner and/or developer will install the sanitary sewer mains in accordance with the town specifications and these standards. 
b.  All main and appurtenance construction will take place in the presence of a town inspector, who will notify the engineer of the acceptance or rejection of the construction. Any construction that is rejected by the town's inspector and concurred with by the engineer shall be removed and reconstructed at the owner and/or developer's sole expense. 
c.  All mains must be tested according to the town standards before the laterals are constructed except for the main wye connection. 
d.  Refer to appendix 2 for ramping requirements to protect manholes prior to placement of hot-mix surface. 
3.  Maintenance. The owner and/or developer will be responsible for the sanitary sewer system until the following conditions have been satisfied: 
a.  Sanitary sewer system is approved by the engineer and certified that installation was made according to town's specifications and under town's inspection services. 
b.  Sewer mains and laterals within public streets must be dedicated to town for public use. 
4.  Location. The location of sewer mains, laterals and appurtenances shall be located within street right-of-way wherever practical. The sanitary sewer system located outside street right-of-way will require the approval of the engineer. 
5.  Size. 
a.  Sewer mains: 
1.  The required size of the sewer main will vary with the character and size of the development. 
2.  The minimum diameter for sewer mains is eight inches with a minimum pipe slope of 0.5 percent. 
3.  If the town requires a portion of the proposed development's collection system to be larger than eight inches or at a greater depth to accommodate other properties not under the control of the owner and/or developer. The cost will be shared per section 4.05.b. 
4.  The main shall be designed using the following average daily flows: 
Unit type Average daily flow in gals/day Single family detached 300 Single family attached 250 Apartments 200 Mobile home 200 Non-residential To be determined by town engineer  
b.  Lateral connection: 
1.  The minimum diameter of house connections is six inches. The diameter of lateral connections to apartment, commercial or industrial buildings shall be designed to accommodate the anticipated sewer flows and approved by the engineer. Each individual dwelling unit, with exception of apartment and multiple dwellings structures, shall have an individual lateral installed. 
2.  The clean-out shall be located eight feet behind the face of curb. The face of the curb shall have the letter "S" stamped in it. 
6.  Materials. All materials used for sewer mains, laterals and appurtenances must be equal to or better than the minimum standards and specifications established by the engineer for sewer construction work. A copy of the specifications are on file at the town manager's office. 
7.  Pumping stations. The manufacturer of the pumping station shall be as specified by the town. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
APPENDIX 4. - WATER SUPPLY STANDARDS 
1.  The following are the minimum design standards to be followed and installation requirements. 
2.  Installation procedures: 
a.  The owner and/or developer will install the water mains in accordance with the town specifications and these standards. 
b.  All main and appurtenance construction will take place in the presence of a town inspector, who will notify the engineer of the acceptance or rejection of the construction. Any construction that is rejected by the town's inspector and concurred with by the engineer shall be removed and reconstructed at the owner and/or developer's sole expense. 
c.  All mains must be pressure tested and chlorinated before any taps are made. 
d.  Refer to appendix 2 for ramping requirements to protect valve boxes prior to placement of hot-mix surface. 
3.  Maintenance. The owner and/or developer will be responsible for the water main distribution system until the following conditions have been satisfied: 
a.  Water main distribution system is approved by the engineer and certified that installation was made according to town's specifications and under town's inspection services. 
b.  Water mains and services within public streets must be dedicated to town for public use. 
4.  Location. The location of water mains, services and appurtenances shall be located within street right-of-ways where practical. The water main distribution system located outside street right-of-ways will require the approval of the engineer. 
5.  Size. 
a.  Water mains: 
1.  The required size of the water mains will vary with the character and size of the development. In no case shall the proposed mains be of less diameter than the existing main being extended. 
2.  The minimum diameter for water mains is six inches with a cover of 42 inches. 
3.  If the town require a portion of the proposed development's primary distribution system to be larger than eight inches, to accommodate other properties not under the control of the owner and/or developer, the cost will be shared per section 4.05.b. 
4.  Use 75 gallons per day per capita to determine water needs. 
b.  Service connections: 
1.  The minimum diameter of house connections is one inch. The diameter of service connections to apartment, commercial or industrial buildings shall be designed to accommodate the anticipation water needs and approved by the engineer. Each individual dwelling unit, with the exception of apartment and multiple dwellings structures, shall have an individual service connection installed. 
2.  The curb stop shall be located eight feet behind the face of curb. The face of curb shall have the letter "W" stamped in it. 
6.  Materials. 
a.  Water mains. All water mains shall be class 50 ductile iron pipe conforming to AWWA C151. The pipe shall be cement lined and bituminous coated inside and out in accordance with AWWA C104. 
b.  Service connections. All service connections up to two inches in diameter shall be Type K, copper tubing. All service connections over two inches in diameter shall be cast or ductile iron pipe. 
c.  Fittings, valves and fire hydrants. All water main fittings shall be ductile or cast iron with mechanical joint, which should conform to AWWA C110. All valves shall be cast iron gate type conforming to AWWA C500. All fire hydrants shall be dry barrel break away type which conform to AWWA C502. The hydrants shall include a six-inch inlet, a one-half-inch pumper nozzle and two two and one-half inch hose nozzle with threads specified by the local fire company and manufactured by the Mueller Company. 
7.  Valves. Sectionalizing valves shall be installed at all main branch connections, and at points designated by the engineer to sectionalize long continuous runs. All fire hydrants shall have isolation valves. 
8.  Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed at points designated by the engineer and concurred with by the local fire company. They shall be placed at intersections where possible, if not possible, then they will be located at property lines. The maximum spacing of fire hydrants shall be no more than 600 feet apart as measured along curb lines. The engineer may designate additional hydrants be installed, if the need for additional protection is apparent. 
9.  Water meters. The cost of water meters required for commercial apartment or other buildings, where water is used to cool air conditioners or other mechanical equipment, will be borne by the owner and/or developer. 
10.  Dead-end mains. No systems shall be designed with dead-end mains. All water main systems shall be looped, including developments that are phased. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
APPENDIX 5. - STORM DRAINAGE STANDARDS 
1.  The following are the minimum design standards to be followed and installation requirements. 
2.  Installation procedures. 
a.  The owner and/or developer will install the storm drainage system in accordance with the town specifications and these standards. 
b.  All drainage pipe, stormwater management facilities and appurtenance construction will take place in the presence of a town inspector, who will notify the engineer of the acceptance or rejection of the construction. Any construction that is rejected by the town's inspector and concurred with by the engineer shall be removed and reconstructed at the owner and/or developer's sole expense. 
c.  Refer to appendix 2 for ramping requirements to protect manholes prior to placement of hot-mix surfaces. 
3.  Maintenance. The owner and/or developer will be responsible for storm drainage and stormwater management systems until the following conditions have been satisfied: 
a.  Storm drainage and stormwater management systems are approved by the engineer and certified that installation was made according to town's inspection services. 
b.  Storm drainage system within public streets and storm drainage easements must be dedicated to the town for public use. 
c.  All pipe must be tested according to town standards. 
4.  Location. 
a.  The location of all storm sewers, open swales and appurtenances shall be located within street right-of-ways or storm drainage easements. 
b.  The location of all stormwater management facilities (i.e., wet or dry ponds) shall be located within private open space with a homeowner's association established to maintain these facilities. 
c.  All locations shall be approved by the engineer and council. 
5.  Size. 
a.  Drainage pipe. 
1.  The minimum diameter for drainage pipe shall be 15 inches with a minimum pipe slope of 0.5 percent. 
2.  If the town requires a portion of the proposed development's storm drainage system, including stormwater management facilities, to be oversized or at a greater depth to accommodate other properties not under the control of the owner and/or developer, the cost will be shared per section 4.05.b. 
3.  Refer to appendix 2 for open pipe ingress barrier requirements for pipe sizes larger than 24 inches. 
b.  Stormwater management facilities. All wet or dry ponds will be designed in accordance with the latest edition of the "Natural Resources Conservation Services Small Pond Code 378." 
c.  Drainage swales shall be designed to accommodate a ten-year storm event with a minimum flow velocity of 2.0 fps. No common swales can be located on rear property lines serving more than three lots. If four lots or more are involved, a closed storm drainage pipe system must be used. 
d.  All in line pipe collection systems shall be designed for a ten-year storm event. All sump collection systems shall be designed for a 25-year storm event, as well as, any pipe collection systems downstream from the sump. 
e.  All bridges or box culverts shall be designed for a 50-year storm event. 
6.  Manholes. Manholes shall be not be more than 300 feet apart on sizes up to 24 inches and not more than 450 feet apart on greater sizes. When approved by the engineer, inlets may be substituted for manholes. 
7.  Materials. All materials used for the storm drainage system and appurtenances must be equal to or better than the minimum standards and specifications established by the engineer for storm drainage construction work. Copy of specifications are on file at the town manager's office. 
8.  Storm water roof drains. Storm water roof drains shall not discharge water over a sidewalk. They shall extend under the sidewalk to the gutter. If a storm sewer is accessible, connection shall be made therewith. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
APPENDIX 6. - GENERAL NOTES 
1.  Subdivision streets are constructed within the limits of the right-of-way dedicated to the public use shown on this plan are to be maintained by the town following the completion of the streets by the developer to the satisfaction of the town. The town assumes no maintenance responsibilities within the dedicated street right-of-way until the streets have been accepted by the town. 
2.  In addition to easements shown on this plan, a six-foot strip is hereby reserved as an easement for utilities on each lot, around the entire perimeter of each lot. 
3.  All proposed right-of-ways shown on this plan are hereby dedicated to public use. All rights-of-way shall be dedicated as public utility easements immediately upon recordation, regardless of status of dedication to the town. 
4.  Owner and/or developer will be responsible for maintenance of sediment and stormwater controls during construction and for long-term maintenance of stormwater controls until all lots have been sold. At that time, responsibility for long-term maintenance of stormwater controls shall be assumed by the homeowners/commercial lot owners association. 
5.  All lots shall access internal subdivision streets only. 
6.  Ground control survey by _______ of _______, _______. Vertical controls are referenced, benchmarks as noted on plans. 
7.  A wetland delineation was performed by _______, an Army Corps of Engineers and/or society of wetlands scientists certified delineator, during the month of _______, in accordance with the 1987 code delineation manual and associated guidance. The site is/is not impacted by federally regulated wetlands. The owner and/or developer submitted the delineation for jurisdictional determination to the appropriate federal agency on _______. The owner and/or developer shall obtain all necessary permits that may be required for construction on or near lands classified as wetlands regulated by the Army Corps of Engineers or the Natural Resources Conservation Service. 
8.  Upon completion of the development shown herein, the owner and/or developer shall convey unto homeowner's association, a Delaware corporation (hereinafter the "association"), for the association's perpetual ownership, (1) all common areas, (2) all open space, (3) all recreational areas, and (4) the stormwater management area. The association, upon receiving such title shall thereafter have full responsibility and expense for maintenance. 
9.  All lots and open space areas shall be provided with at least six inches of topsoil upon completion of grading and construction of individual lots and open space areas. All such areas shall be seeded, sodded or otherwise landscaped. 
10.  Delaware regulations prohibit the burial of construction/demolition debris, including trees and stumps on construction sites. Any solid waste found during excavation must be removed and properly discarded off-site at an approved land fill. 
(Ord. of 12-17-01(2), §§ 1, 2) 
APPENDIX C - FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL PROVISION 

Sec. 1.1. - Findings. 
    The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has identified special flood hazard areas within the boundaries of the Town of Smyrna. Special flood hazard areas are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. Structures that are inadequately elevated, improperly flood proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. 
    The Town of Smyrna, by resolution, agreed to meet the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program and was accepted for participation in the program on June 1, 1977. As of that date or the initial effective date of the Town of Smyrna Flood Insurance Rate Map, all development and new construction as defined herein, are to be compliant with these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 010-14, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 1.2. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of these regulations to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to: 
(A)  Protect human life, health and welfare; 
(B)  Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future; 
(C)  Minimize flooding of water supply and sanitary sewage disposal systems; 
(D)  Maintain natural drainage; 
(E)  Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental units and its residents, by discouraging unwise design and construction of development in areas subject to flooding; 
(F)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(G)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(H)  Minimize damage to public facilities and other utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges; 
(I)  Reinforce that those who build in and occupy special flood hazard areas should assume responsibility for their actions; 
(J)  Minimize the impact of development on adjacent properties within and near flood prone areas; 
(K)  Provide that the flood storage and conveyance functions of the floodplain are maintained; 
(L)  Minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial functions of the floodplain; 
(M)  Prevent floodplain uses that are either hazardous or environmentally incompatible; and 
(N)  Meet community participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 C.F.R. section 59.22. 
(Ord. No. 010-14, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 1.3. - Areas to which these regulations apply. 
    These regulations shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the town of Smyrna, as identified in section 1.4. 
(Ord. No. 010-14, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 1.4. - Basis for establishing special flood hazard areas. 
    For the purposes of these regulations, the following are adopted by reference as a part of these regulations and serve as the basis for establishing special flood hazard areas: 
(A)  The FEMA Flood Insurance Study for Kent County, Delaware and Incorporated Areas dated July 7, 2014, and the FEMA Flood Insurance Study for New Castle County Delaware and Incorporated Areas dated January 17, 2007, and all subsequent amendments and/or the most recent revision thereof. 
(B)  The FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map for Kent County, Delaware and Incorporated Areas dated July 7, 2014, and FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map for New Castle County Delaware and Incorporated Areas dated January 17, 2007, and all subsequent amendments and/or the most recent revision thereof. 
(C)  Other hydrologic and hydraulic engineering studies and/or maps prepared pursuant to these regulations or for other purposes, and which establish base flood elevations, delineate 100-year floodplains, floodways or other areas of special flood hazard. 
(D)  The town of Smyrna may identify and regulate new local flood hazard or ponding areas. These areas should be delineated and adopted on a "Local Flood Hazard Map" using best available topographic data and locally derived information such as flood of record, historic high water marks or approximate study methodologies. 
(E)  Where field surveyed topography indicates that ground elevations are below the closest applicable base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard area on a flood hazard map, the area shall be considered as special flood hazard area. 
    Maps and studies that establish special flood hazard areas are on file at the Planning and Inspections Department for the town of Smyrna, Town Hall, 27 South Market Street Plaza, Smyrna, Delaware 19977. 
(Ord. No. 010-14, § 1, 6-2-14; Ord. No. 012-14, § 1, 7-21-14) 
Sec. 1.5. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    These regulations are not intended to repeal or abrogate any existing ordinances including subdivision regulations, zoning ordinances or building codes. In the event of a conflict between these regulations and any other ordinance, the more restrictive shall govern. These regulations shall not impair any deed restriction, covenant or easement, but the land subject to such interests shall also be governed by these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 010-14, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 1.6. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of these regulations, all provisions shall be: 
(A)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(B)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; 
(C)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes; and 
(D)  Where a provision of these regulations may be in conflict with a state or Federal law, such state or Federal law shall take precedence, where more restrictive. 
(Ord. No. 010-14, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 1.7. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by these regulations is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. These regulations do not imply that land outside of the special flood hazard areas or uses that are permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. These regulations shall not create liability on the part of the town of Smyrna, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damage that results from reliance on these regulations or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 010-14, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 1.8. - Severability. 
    Should any section or provision of these regulations be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the regulations as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 010-14, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 1.9. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in these regulations shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give these regulations the most reasonable application. 
    Accessory structure: A structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal structure. 
    Area of shallow flooding: A designated Zone AO on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map with a one percent annual chance or greater of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Base flood: The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year; the base flood also is referred to as the 100-year flood (or the 1%-annual-chance flood). 
    Base flood discharge: The volume of water resulting from a base flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in cubic feet per second (cfs). 
    Base flood elevation: The water surface elevation of the base flood in relation to the datum specified on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map. In areas of shallow flooding, the base flood elevation is the natural grade elevation plus the depth number specified in feet on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, or at least two feet if the depth number is not specified. 
    Basement: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Development: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, placement of manufactured homes, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Dry flood proofing: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Elevation certificate: The National Flood Insurance Program, Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-33), used to document building elevations and other information about buildings. When required to be certified, the form shall be completed by a licensed professional land surveyor. 
    Enclosure below the lowest floor: An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement. 
    Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA): The federal agency with the overall responsibility for administering the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    FEMA technical bulletin: A series of guidance documents published by FEMA to provide guidance concerning building performance standards of the National Flood Insurance Program. See sections where specific TBs are identified. 
    Flood or flooding: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters, and/or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood Damage-Resistant Materials: Any construction material capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair. See FEMA Technical Bulletin #2 - Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements and FEMA Technical Bulletin #8 - Corrosion Protection for Metal Connectors in Coastal Areas. 
    Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): An official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated special flood hazard areas to indicate the magnitude and nature of flood hazards, and to designate applicable flood zones. 
Zone A: Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 1% annual chance flood; base flood elevations are not determined. 
Zone AE: Special flood hazard areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance flood; base flood elevations are determined; floodways may or may not be determined. 
Zone AO: Areas of shallow flooding, with or without a designated average flood depth. 
Zone X (shaded): Areas subject to inundation by the 500-year flood (0.2% annual chance); areas subject to the 1% annual chance flood with average depths of less than 1 foot or with contributing drainage area less than 1 square mile; and areas protected by levees from the base flood. 
Zone X (unshaded): Areas determined to be outside the 1% annual chance flood and outside the 500-year floodplain. 
Zone VE: Special flood hazard areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance flood and subject to high velocity wave action (also referred to as coastal high hazard areas). 
    Limit of Moderate Wave Action (LiMWA): The inland limit of the area affected by waves greater than 1.5 feet during the base flood. Base flood conditions between the Zone VE and the LiMWA will be similar to, but less severe than, those in the Zone VE. 
    Flood insurance study: The official report in which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has provided flood profiles, floodway information, and the water surface elevations. 
    Floodplain: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see "Flood" or "Flooding"). 
    Floodproofing Certificate: The National Flood Insurance Program, Floodproofing Certificate for Non-Residential Structures (FEMA Form 86-0-34), used by registered professional engineers and architects to certify dry flood proofing designs. 
    Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to pass the base flood discharge such that the cumulative increase in the water surface elevation of the base flood discharge is no more than a designated height. 
    Floodway fringe area: Portion of the special flood hazard area that is adjacent to and landward of a designated floodway shown on a Flood Insurance Rate Map. 
    Freeboard: A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood elevation for the purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams, and the hydrologic effect of urbanization in a watershed. 
    Functionally dependent use: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water; the term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure: Any structure that is: 
(1)  Individually listed in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
    Hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis: An analysis performed by a professional engineer, licensed in the State of Delaware, in accordance with standard engineering practices as accepted by FEMA, used to determine the base flood, other frequency floods, flood elevations, floodway information and boundaries, and flood profiles. 
    Letter of map change: A letter of map change is an official FEMA determination, by letter, to amend or revise an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map, Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and Flood Insurance Study. Letters of Map Change include: 
Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA): An amendment based on technical data showing that a property was inadvertently included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective Flood Insurance Rate Map and establishes that a specific property is not located in a special flood hazard area. 
Letter of Map Revision (LOMR): A revision based on technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features. One common type of LOMR, a Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F), is a determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer exposed to flooding associated with the base flood; in order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance with these regulations. 
Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project complies with the minimum National Flood Insurance Program requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not amend or revise effective Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps, or Flood Insurance Studies; upon submission to and approval of certified as-built documentation, a Letter of Map Revision may be issued. 
    Lowest floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) of a structure. This definition excludes an "enclosure below the lowest floor" which is an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, provided that such enclosure is built in accordance with the applicable design requirements specified in these regulations for enclosures below the lowest floor. 
    Manufactured home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
    New construction: Buildings and structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after June 1, 1977, including any subsequent improvements to such structures 
    Person: An individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity, including state and local governments and agencies. 
    Recreational vehicle: A vehicle which is built on a single chassis, 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Special flood hazard area: The land in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in Flood Insurance Studies and on Flood Insurance Rate Maps as Zones A, AE, AO, and Zone VE. The term includes areas shown on other flood hazard maps that are specifically listed or otherwise described in section 1.4. 
    Start of construction: The date of issuance of permits for new construction and substantial improvements, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory structures, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure (or building): For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified prior to the application for a development permit by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
    Violation: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's flood plain management regulations. A structure or other development without the Elevation Certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in these regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 010-14, § 1, 6-2-14) 
ARTICLE 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 2.1. - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
    The Manager of the Department of Building and Inspections is hereby appointed to administer and implement these regulations and is referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator is authorized to: (A) Fulfill the duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations, (B) Delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and other employees, or (C) Enter into a written agreement or written contract with another jurisdiction or agency, or private sector entity to administer specific provisions of these regulations. Administration of any part of these regulations by another entity shall not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to the participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 C.F.R. section 59.22. 
(Ord. No. 010-14, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 2.2. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
    The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include but are not limited to: 
(A)  Review applications for permits to determine whether proposed activities will be located in special flood hazard areas. 
(B)  Interpret floodplain boundaries and provide flood elevation and flood hazard information. 
(C)  Review applications to determine whether proposed activities will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(D)  Review applications to determine whether all necessary permits have been obtained from those Federal, state or local agencies from which prior or concurrent approval is required. 
(E)  Verify that applicants proposing to alter or relocate a watercourse have notified adjacent communities and the Delaware Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control (Division of Watershed Stewardship), and have submitted copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(F)  Issue permits to develop in special flood hazard areas when the provisions of these regulations have been met, or disapprove the same in the event of noncompliance. 
(G)  Inspect buildings and lands to determine compliance with these regulations or to determine if noncompliance has occurred or violations have been committed. 
(H)  Review submitted Elevation Certificates for completeness. 
(I)  Submit to FEMA data and information necessary to maintain flood hazard maps, including hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses prepared by or for the town of Smyrna, corrections to labeling or planimetric details, etc. 
(J)  Maintain and permanently keep all records for public inspection that are necessary for the administration of these regulations including Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Letters of Map Amendment and Revision, records of issuance and denial of permits, determinations of whether development is in or out of special flood hazard areas for the purpose of issuing permits, elevation certificates, other required certifications, variances, and records of enforcement actions taken for violations of these regulations. 
(K)  Enforce the provisions of these regulations. 
(L)  Assist with and coordinate flood hazard map maintenance activities. 
(M)  Conduct determinations as to whether existing buildings and structures damaged by any cause and located in special flood hazard areas, have been substantially damaged. 
(N)  Make reasonable efforts to notify owners of substantially damaged buildings and structures of the need to obtain a permit prior to repair, rehabilitation, or reconstruction, and to prohibit the non-compliant repair of substantially-damaged buildings except for temporary emergency protective measures necessary to secure a property or stabilize a structure to prevent additional damage. 
(O)  Undertake, as determined appropriate by the Floodplain Administrator due to the circumstances, other actions which may include but are not limited to: issuing press releases, public service announcements, and other public information materials related to permit requests and repair of damaged structures; coordinating with other Federal, state, and local agencies to assist with substantial damage determinations; providing owners of damaged structures materials and other information related to the proper repair of damaged structures in special flood hazard areas; and assisting owners with National Flood Insurance Program claims for Increased Cost of Compliance payments. 
(P)  Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency when the corporate boundaries of the town of Smyrna have been modified. 
(Ord. No. 010-14, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 2.3. - Permits required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to begin construction or other development which is wholly within, partially within, or in contact with any identified special flood hazard area, as established in section 1.4, including but not limited to: subdivision of land, filling, grading, or other site improvements and utility installations; construction, alteration, remodeling, improvement, replacement, reconstruction, repair, relocation, or expansion of any building or structure; placement or replacement of a manufactured home; recreational vehicles; installation or replacement of storage tanks; or alteration of any watercourse, until a permit is obtained from the town of Smyrna. No such permit shall be issued until the requirements of these regulations have been met. 
(Ord. No. 010-14, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 2.4. - Application required. 
    Application for a permit shall be made by the owner of the property or his/her authorized agent, herein referred to as the applicant, prior to the actual start of construction. The application shall be on a form furnished for that purpose. 
(A)  Application Contents. 
    At a minimum, applications shall include: 
(1)  Site plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, existing and proposed topography of the area in question, the limits of any portion of the site that was previously filled, and the location of existing and proposed structures, excavation, filling, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and other proposed activities. 
(2)  Elevation of the existing natural ground where structures are proposed, referenced to the datum on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, and an Elevation Certificate that shows the ground elevation and proposed building elevations (identified in section C of the Elevation Certificate as "Construction Drawings"). 
(3)  Delineation of special flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries, flood zones, and base flood elevations. Where surveyed natural ground elevations are lower than the base flood elevations, base flood elevations shall be used to delineate the boundary of special flood hazard areas. If proposed, changes in the delineation of special flood hazard areas shall be submitted to and approved by FEMA in accordance with section 3.4(B). Where special flood hazard areas are not delineated or base flood elevations are not shown on the flood hazard maps, the Floodplain Administrator has the authority to require the applicant to use information provided by the Floodplain Administrator, information that is available from other sources, or to determine such information using accepted engineering practices. The applicant may submit analyses and studies that determine base flood elevations and delineate flood hazard areas. Analyses and studies shall be submitted to and approved by FEMA prior to recordation. 
(4)  For subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50 lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, and where base flood elevations are not shown on Flood Insurance Rate Maps, hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses and studies as required by section 4.2(D). Analyses and studies shall be submitted to and approved by FEMA prior to recordation. 
(5)  For subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50 lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, and that are contiguous to streams with upstream watershed areas greater than one square mile and without FEMA-delineated special flood hazard areas, hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses as required by section 4.2(E). 
(6)  Elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, or elevation of the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member, as applicable to the flood zone, of all proposed structures, referenced to the datum on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps. 
(7)  Drawings, diagrams, or descriptions of the proposed foundation in sufficient detail to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(8)  Drawings, diagrams, or descriptions of the proposed location of service equipment and utilities in sufficient detail to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of section 3.4(D) or (E). 
(9)  Where the placement of fill is proposed, the amount, type, and source of fill material; compaction specifications; a description of the intended purpose of the area to be filled; and evidence that the proposed fill is the minimum necessary to achieve the intended purpose. 
(10)  Such other material and information as may be requested by the Floodplain Administrator necessary to determine conformance with these regulations. 
(11)  For work on an existing structure, including any improvement, addition, repairs, alterations, rehabilitation, or reconstruction, sufficient information to determine if the work constitutes substantial improvement, including: 
(a)  Documentation of the market value of the structure before the improvement is started or before the damage occurred. 
(b)  Documentation of the actual cash value of all proposed improvement work, or the actual cash value of all work necessary to repair and restore damage to the before damaged condition, regardless of the amount of work that will be performed. 
(12)  Certifications and/or technical analyses prepared or conducted by an appropriate design professional licensed in the State of Delaware, as appropriate to the type of development activity proposed and required by these regulations: 
(a)  Floodproofing Certificate for dry flood proofed non-residential structures, as required in section 4.3. 
(b)  Certification that flood openings that do not meet the minimum requirements of section 4.2(B)(3)(b) are designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces. 
(c)  Technical analyses to document that the flood carrying capacity of any watercourse alteration or relocation will not be diminished and documentation of maintenance assurances as required in section 4.5(C). 
(d)  Hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses demonstrating that the cumulative effect of proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot in special flood hazard areas where the Federal Emergency Management Agency has provided base flood elevations but has not delineated a floodway, as required by section 4.5(B). 
(e)  Hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses of any development proposed to be located in an identified floodway, as required by section 4.5(A). 
(f)  Hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses to develop base flood elevations for subdivisions and large-lot developments, as required by section 3.2(D) or otherwise required by the Floodplain Administrator. 
(B)  Right to Submit New Technical Data 
(1)  The applicant has the right to seek a Letter of Map Change and to submit new technical data to FEMA regarding base maps, topography, special flood hazard area boundaries, floodway boundaries, and base flood elevations. Such submissions shall be prepared in a format acceptable by FEMA and the Floodplain Administrator shall be notified of such submittal. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(2)  New technical data, including topography based on previous placement of fill or proposed placement of fill to raise the ground level, shall not be deemed to remove from the special flood hazard area any portion of the filled area that is less than 18 inches above the base flood elevation. 
(C)  Requirement to Submit New Technical Data 
    The Floodplain Administrator shall notify FEMA of physical changes affecting flood hazard areas and flooding conditions by submitting technical or scientific data as soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information becomes available. The Floodplain Administrator has the authority to require applicants to submit technical data to FEMA for Letters of Map Change. 
(Ord. No. 010-14, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 2.5. - Review, approval or disapproval. 
(A)  Review 
    The Floodplain Administrator shall: 
(1)  Review applications for development in special flood hazard areas to determine the completeness of information submitted. The applicant shall be notified of incompleteness or additional information required to support the application. 
(2)  Review applications for compliance with these regulations after all information required in section 2.4 or identified and required by the Floodplain Administrator has been received. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining such permits, including but not limited to: 
(a)  Permits issued by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act and section 404 of the Clean Water Act, and the Delaware Environmental Protection Agency under section 401 of the Clean Water Act. 
(b)  Permits required by the State of Delaware. 
(B)  Approval or Disapproval 
    The Floodplain Administrator shall approve applications that comply with the applicable requirements of these regulations. The Floodplain Manager shall disapprove applications for proposed development that does not comply with the applicable provisions of these regulations and shall notify the application of such disapproval, in writing, stating the reasons for disapproval. 
(C)  Expiration of Permit 
    A permit is valid provided the actual start of construction occurs within 180 days of the date of permit issuance. If the actual start of construction is not within 180 days of the date of permit issuance, requests for extensions shall be submitted in writing. Upon reviewing the request and the permit for continued compliance with these regulations, the Floodplain Administrator may grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. 
(Ord. No. 010-14, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 2.6. - Inspections. 
    The Floodplain Administrator shall make periodic inspections of development permitted in special flood hazard areas, at appropriate times throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance. Such inspections may include: 
(A)  Stake-out inspection, to determine location on the site relative to the special flood hazard area and floodway. 
(B)  Foundation inspection, upon placement of the lowest floor and prior to further vertical construction, to collect information or certification of the elevation of the lowest floor. 
(C)  Enclosure inspection, including crawlspaces, to determine compliance with applicable provisions. 
(D)  Utility inspection, upon installation of specified equipment and appliances, to determine appropriate location with respect to the base flood elevation. 
(E)  Storage of materials. 
(Ord. No. 010-14, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 2.7. - Submissions required prior to foundation inspection and prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
    The following certifications are required to be submitted by the permittee for development that is permitted in special flood hazard areas prior to the foundation inspection and prior issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy: 
(A)  For new or substantially improved residential structures or nonresidential structures that have been elevated, the applicant shall: 
(1)  As part of the foundation inspection and placement the lowest floor, and prior to further vertical construction, submit an Elevation Certificate that shows the ground elevation and floor elevation (identified in section C of the Elevation Certificate as "Building Under Construction"). 
(2)  Prior to Issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy, submit an Elevation Certificated (identified in section C of the Elevation Certificate as "Finished Construction"). 
(B)  For nonresidential structures that have been dry flood proofed, a Floodproofing Certificate based on "Finished Construction" (identified in section II). 
(C)  For all development activities subject to the requirements of section 2.4(B), a Letter of Map Revision shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. 010-14, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 2.8. - Flood insurance rate map use and interpretation. 
    The Floodplain Administrator shall make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of special flood hazard areas, floodplain boundaries, and floodway boundaries. The following shall apply to the use and interpretation of special flood hazard maps and data: 
(A)  In FEMA-identified special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and floodway data have not been identified and in areas where FEMA has not identified special flood hazard areas, any other flood hazard data available from a federal, state, or other source shall be reviewed and reasonably used with the approval of the Floodplain Administrator. When a Preliminary Flood Insurance Rate Map has been provided by FEMA to identify base flood elevation where such elevations were not previously shown, the base flood elevations on the Preliminary Flood Insurance Rate Map shall be used. 
(B)  Special flood hazard area delineations, base flood elevations, and floodway boundaries on FEMA maps and in FEMA studies shall take precedence over delineations, base flood elevations, and floodway boundaries by any other source that reflect a reduced special flood hazard area, reduced floodway width and/or lower base flood elevations, unless, with the approval of the Floodplain Administrator, such data are submitted to and approved by FEMA. 
(C)  Other sources of data shall be reasonably used, with the approval of the Floodplain Administrator, if they show increased base flood elevations and/or larger floodway areas than are shown on FEMA flood maps and studies and if such data are submitted to and approved by FEMA. 
(D)  Where field surveyed topography indicates that ground elevations are below the base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard on a flood hazard map, the area shall be considered as special flood hazard area. 
(Ord. No. 010-14, § 1, 6-2-14) 
ARTICLE 3. - REQUIREMENTS IN ALL SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS 

Sec. 3.1. - Application of requirements. 
    The general requirements of this section apply to all development proposed within special flood hazard areas identified in section 1.4. 
(Ord. No. 010-14, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 3.2. - Subdivisions and developments. 
(A)  All subdivision and development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and are subject to all applicable standards in these regulations. 
(B)  All subdivision and development proposals shall have utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(C)  All subdivision and developments proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. 
(D)  All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50 lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in FEMA-delineated special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood elevations and floodway delineations. The analyses shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision or Letter of Map Revision. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(E)  All subdivisions proposals and development proposals containing at least 50 lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, that are contiguous to streams with upstream watershed areas greater than one square mile and without FEMA-delineated special flood hazard areas, shall be supported by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood elevations. The analyses shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer in accordance with FEMA flood study criteria. 
(F)  Except in special flood hazards areas prone to flooding from coastal sources, each lot in major subdivisions, as defined by the community, shall have sufficient buildable area for planned buildings to be located outside of the special flood hazard area. Portions of lots not identified for planned buildings may be located in special flood hazard areas. In such major subdivisions, only water-dependent structures such as docks, boat launches, boat ramps, and boat storage buildings shall be permitted in special flood hazard areas. 
(Ord. No. 010-14, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 3.3. - Protection of water supply and sanitary sewage systems. 
(A)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems. 
(B)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into systems and discharges from systems into floodwaters. 
(C)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to or contamination from them during conditions of flooding. 
(Ord. No. 010-14, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 3.4. - Buildings and structures. 
    All new construction of buildings and structures, including placement of manufactured homes and substantial improvements to existing buildings and structures, that are to be located, in whole or in part, in special flood hazard areas, and buildings and structures to be located on previously filled areas where the filled ground surface is less than 18 inches above the base flood elevation, shall meet the following requirements. 
(A)  Be designed (or modified) and constructed to safely resist flood loads. The construction shall provide a complete load path capable of transferring all loads from their point of origin through the load-resisting elements to the foundation. Buildings and structures shall be designed, connected and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or permanent lateral movement due to structural loads and stresses from flooding equal to the design flood elevation, including hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads and the effects of buoyancy. 
(B)  Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(C)  Use flood damage-resistant materials below the elevation of the lowest floor. See FEMA Technical Bulletin #2 - Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements and FEMA Technical Bulletin #8 - Corrosion Protection for Metal Connectors in Coastal Areas. 
(D)  Have electrical systems, equipment and components, and heating, ventilating, air conditioning, and plumbing appliances, plumbing fixtures, duct systems, and other service equipment located at or above the elevation of the lowest floor. Electrical wiring systems are permitted to be located below the elevation of the lowest floor provided they conform to the provisions of the electrical part of this code for wet locations. If replaced as part of a substantial improvement, electrical systems, equipment and components, and heating, ventilation, air conditioning, and plumbing appliances, plumbing fixtures, duct systems, and other service equipment shall meet the requirements of this section. See FEMA Technical Bulletin #4 - Elevator Installation. 
(E)  As an alternative to section 3.4(D), electrical systems, equipment and components, and heating, ventilating, air conditioning, and plumbing appliances, plumbing fixtures, duct systems, and other service equipment are permitted to be located below the elevation of the lowest floor provided that they are designed and installed to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components and to resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses, including the effects of buoyancy, during the occurrence of the base flood. 
(F)  In special flood hazard areas and previously-filled areas where the filled ground surface is less than 18 inches above the base flood elevation, meet the specific requirements of section 4. 
(G)  In a special flood hazard area with more than one designation (Zones A, AE, and AO, floodway), meet the requirements of the most restrictive designation. 
(Ord. No. 010-14, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 3.5. - Fill. 
(A)  Disposal of fill, including but not limited to rubble, construction debris, woody debris, and trash, shall not be permitted in special flood hazard areas. 
(B)  Where permitted by section 4 (Zones A, AE, and AO), fill placed for the purpose of raising the ground level and to support a building or structure shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Extend laterally from the building footprint to provide for adequate access, as a function of use; the Floodplain Administrator may seek advice from the State Fire Marshal's Office and/or the local fire services agency. 
(2)  Placed and compacted to provide for stability under conditions of rising and falling floodwaters and resistance to erosion, scour, and settling. 
(3)  Consist of soil or rock materials only. 
(4)  Sloped no steeper than one vertical on two horizontal, unless approved by the Floodplain Administrator. 
(5)  Designed with provisions for adequate drainage and no adverse effect on adjacent properties. 
(C)  Fill placed for a purpose other than to support a building or structure shall meet the requirements of sections 3.5(B)(2) through (B)(5). 
(Ord. No. 010-14, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 3.6. - Historic structures. 
    Repair, alteration, or rehabilitation of historic structures shall be subject to the requirements of these regulations unless a determination is made that compliance with these regulations will preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and a variance is granted in accordance with section 6 and such variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 010-14, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 3.7. - Recreational vehicles. 
(A)  Recreational vehicles in special flood hazard areas shall be fully licensed and ready for highway use, and shall be placed on a site for less than 180 consecutive days. 
(B)  Recreational vehicles that are not fully licensed and ready for highway use, or that are to be placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days, shall meet the requirements of section 4.2(C) for manufactured homes. 
(Ord. No. 010-14, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 3.8. - Gas or liquid storage tanks. 
(A)  Underground tanks in special flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the base flood. 
(B)  Above-ground tanks in special flood hazard areas shall be elevated and anchored to a minimum of 18 inches above the base flood elevation or shall be anchored at- grade and designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the base flood. 
(C)  In special flood hazard areas, tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be: 
(1)  At or above the base flood elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tanks during conditions of the base flood. 
(2)  Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the base flood. 
(Ord. No. 010-14, § 1, 6-2-14) 
ARTICLE 4. - SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 4.1. - General requirements. 
    In addition to the general requirements of section 3, the requirements of this section apply to all development proposed in special flood hazard areas. 
(Ord. No. 010-14, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 4.2. - Residential structures and residential portions of mixed use structures. 
(A)  Elevation requirements. 
(1)  The lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated to a minimum of 18 inches above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  In areas of shallow flooding (Zone AO), the lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least as high above the highest adjacent grade as the depth number specified in feet on the Flood Insurance Rate Map plus 18 inches, or at least two feet plus 18 inches if a depth number is not specified; adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from the structure. 
(3)  Enclosures below the lowest floor shall meet the requirements of section 4.2(B). 
(B)  Enclosures below the lowest floor. 
(1)  Enclosures below the lowest floor shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, crawlspaces, or limited storage. 
(2)  Enclosures below the lowest floor shall be constructed using flood damage-resistant materials. See FEMA Technical Bulletin #2 - Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements. 
(3)  Enclosures below the lowest floor (including crawlspaces) shall be provided with flood openings which shall meet the following criteria (see FEMA Technical Bulletin #1 - Openings in Foundation Walls and Walls of Enclosures): 
(a)  There shall be a minimum of two openings on different sides of each enclosed area; if a building has more than one enclosed area below the design flood elevation, each area shall have openings on exterior walls. 
(b)  The total net area of all openings shall be at least one square inch for each square foot of enclosed area, or the openings shall be designed and certified by a registered engineer or architect to provide for equalization of hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(c)  The bottom of each opening shall be one foot or less above the adjacent ground level. 
(d)  Any louvers, screens or other opening covers shall allow the automatic flow of floodwaters into and out of the enclosed area. 
(e)  Where installed in doors and windows, openings that meet requirements of section 4.2(B)(3)(a) through (d), are acceptable; however, doors and windows without installed openings do not meet the requirements of this section. 
    Crawlspaces shall have the finished interior ground level equal to or higher than the outside finished ground level on at least one entire side of the foundation wall. 
(C)  Manufactured homes. New or replacement manufactured homes, including substantial improvement of existing manufactured homes, shall: 
(1)  Be elevated on a permanent, reinforced foundation that raises the lowest floor to a minimum of 18 inches above the base flood elevation and is otherwise in accordance with section 4.2(A). 
(2)  Be installed in accordance with the anchor and tie-down requirements of the building code or the manufacturer's written installation instructions and specifications. 
(3)  Have enclosures below the elevated manufactured home, if any, meet the requirements of section 4.2(B). 
    For the purpose of this requirement, the lowest floor of a manufactured home is the bottom of the lowest horizontal supporting member of the lowest floor. 
(Ord. No. 010-14, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 4.3. - Nonresidential structures and nonresidential portions of mixed use structures. 
(A)  Elevation requirements 
(1)  The lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated to a minimum of 18 inches above the base flood elevation or the structure shall be dry flood proofed in accordance with section 4.3(B). 
(2)  In areas of shallow flooding (Zone AO), if not dry flood proofed, the lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least as high above the highest adjacent grade as the depth number specified in feet on the Flood Insurance Rate Map plus 18 inches, or at least two feet plus 18 inches if a depth number is not specified; adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from the structure. 
(3)  Enclosures below the lowest floor, if not dry flood proofed, shall meet the requirements of section 4.2(B). 
(B)  Dry floodproofing requirements 
    Dry flood proofed structures, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall: 
(1)  Be designed to be dry flood proofed such that the structure is watertight with walls and floors substantially impermeable to the passage of water to the level of the base flood elevation plus 18 inches. In areas of shallow flooding (Zone AO), the structure shall be dry flood proofed at least as high above the highest adjacent grade as the depth number specified in feet on the Flood Insurance Rate Map plus 18 inches, or at least two feet plus 18 inches if a depth number is not specified. 
(2)  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  Be certified by a licensed professional engineer or licensed professional architect with a Floodproofing Certificate, that the design and methods of construction meet the requirements of this section. Refer to FEMA Technical Bulletin #3 - Non-Residential Floodproofing - Requirements and Certification for guidance. 
(Ord. No. 010-14, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 4.4. - Accessory structures. 
    Accessory structures shall meet the requirements of these regulations. Accessory structures that have a footprint of no more than 200 square feet may be allowed without requiring elevation or flood proofing provided such structures meet all of the following requirements: 
(A)  Useable only for parking or limited storage; 
(B)  Constructed with flood damage-resistant materials below the base flood elevation; 
(C)  Constructed and placed to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of flood waters; 
(D)  Firmly anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement; 
(E)  Electrical service and mechanical equipment elevated to a minimum of 18 inches above the level of the base flood elevation; and 
(F)  Equipped with flood openings that meet the requirements of section 5.2(B). 
(G)  For guidance, see FEMA Technical Bulletin #7 - Wet Floodproofing Requirements. 
(Ord. No. 010-14, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 4.5. - Protection of flood-carrying capacity. 
(A)  Development in floodways. Within any floodway area designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other development shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. Such technical data shall be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator and to FEMA. The analyses shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision or Letter of Map Revision. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
The proposed development activity may be permitted if the analyses demonstrate that the activity: 
(1)  Will not result in any increase in the base flood elevation; or 
(2)  Will result in an increase in the base flood elevation and the compensatory storage requirements of section 4.5(D) are met and a Conditional Letter of Map Revision has been issued by FEMA; or 
(3)  Will result in an increase in the base flood elevation, provided a Conditional Letter of Map Revision has been issued by FEMA and the applicant completes all of the following: 
(a)  Submits technical data required in section 2.4(A)(12)(d); 
(b)  Evaluates alternatives which would not result in increased base flood elevations and an explanation why these alternatives are not feasible; 
(c)  Certifies that no structures are located in areas which would be impacted by the increased base flood elevation; 
(d)  Documents that individual legal notices have been delivered to all impacted property owners to explain the impact of the proposed action on their properties; 
(e)  Requests and receives concurrence of the Town Manager of the town of Smyrna and the Chief Executive Officer of any other community impacted by the proposed actions; and 
(f)  Notifies the Delaware Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control (Division of Watershed Stewardship). 
(B)  Filling in floodway fringe areas. For development activities that involve the placement of fill in floodway fringe areas, the applicant shall develop hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses and technical data reflecting the proposed activity and shall submit the analyses and data to the Floodplain Administrator. The analyses shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer. 
The proposed development activity may be permitted if the analyses demonstrate that the cumulative effect of the proposed development activity, when combined with all other existing and potential flood hazard area encroachments will not increase the base flood elevation more than one-tenth foot at any point; compensatory storage in compliance with section 4.5(D) may be provided to meet this requirement. 
(C)  Development in areas with base flood elevations but no floodways. For development activities in a special flood hazard area with base flood elevations but no designated floodways, the applicant shall develop hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses and technical data reflecting the proposed activity and shall submit such analyses and data to the Floodplain Administrator and to FEMA. The analyses shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision or Letter of Map Revision. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
The proposed development activity may be permitted if the analyses demonstrate that the cumulative effect of the proposed development activity, when combined with all other existing and potential special flood hazard area encroachments will not increase the base flood elevation more than one-tenth foot at any point; compensatory storage in compliance with section 4.5(D) may be provided to meet this requirement. 
(D)  Compensatory storage [proposed standard 14]. If the compensatory storage alternative in section 4.5(A)(2) or section 4.5(B) is selected to compensate for the loss of storage volume due to development, the following requirements shall apply: 
(1)  Compensatory storage shall be hydraulically equivalent and such equivalency shall be demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses; 
(2)  Compensatory storage areas shall be designed to drain freely to the watercourse; and 
(3)  A restriction against modification of the compensatory storage area shall be recorded on the deed of the property where it is located and the restriction shall be binding on future owners. 
(E)  Deliberate alterations of a watercourse. For the purpose of these regulations, a watercourse is deliberately altered when a person causes a change to occur within its banks. Deliberate changes to a watercourse include, but are not limited to: widening, deepening or relocating of the channel; installation of culverts; construction of bridges, and excavation or filling of the channel or watercourse banks. 
For any proposed deliberate alteration of a watercourse, the applicant shall develop hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses and technical data reflecting such changes and submit such technical data to the Floodplain Administrator and to FEMA. The analyses shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision or Letter of Map Revision. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
The proposed alteration of a watercourse may be permitted upon submission, by the applicant, of the following: 
(1)  Documentation of compliance with section 4.5(A) if the alteration is in a floodway or section 4.5(C) if the alteration is in a watercourse with base flood elevations but no floodway. 
(2)  A description of the extent to which the watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development. 
(3)  A certification by a licensed professional engineer that the bankful flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be diminished. 
(4)  Evidence that adjacent communities, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the Delaware Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control (Division of Watershed Stewardship) have been notified of the proposal and evidence that such notifications have been submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(5)  Evidence that the applicant shall be responsible for providing the necessary maintenance for the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity will not be diminished. The Floodplain Administrator may require the permit holder to enter into an agreement with the town of Smyrna specifying the maintenance responsibilities; if an agreement is required, the permit shall be conditioned to require that the agreement be recorded on the deed of the property which shall be binding on future owners. 
(Ord. No. 010-14, § 1, 6-2-14) 
ARTICLE 5. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 5.1. - Variances. 
    The Town of Smyrna's Board of Adjustment shall have the power to authorize, in specific cases, such variances from the requirements of these regulations, not inconsistent with Federal regulations, as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions of the lot or parcel, a literal enforcement of the provisions of these regulations would result in unnecessary hardship. 
(A)  Application for a variance. 
(1)  Any owner, or agent thereof, of property for which a variance is sought shall submit an application for a variance to the Floodplain Administrator. 
(2)  At a minimum, such application shall contain the following information: Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant; legal description of the property; parcel map; description of the existing use; description of the proposed use; location of the floodplain; description of the variance sought; and reason for the variance request. Each variance application shall specifically address each of the considerations in section 5.1(B) and the limitations and conditions of section 5.1(C). 
(B)  Considerations for variances. In considering variance applications, the Board of Adjustment shall consider and make findings of fact on all evaluations, all relevant factors, requirements specified in other sections of these regulations, and the following factors: 
(1)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others. 
(2)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage. 
(3)  The susceptibility of the proposed development and its contents (if applicable) to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner. 
(4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed development to the community. 
(5)  The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to, or are subject to less, flooding or erosion damage. 
(6)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable, or if the facility is a functionally dependent use. 
(7)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development. 
(8)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area. 
(9)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles. 
(10)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site. 
(11)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
(C)  Limitations for variances. 
(1)  An affirmative decision on a variance request shall only be issued upon: 
(a)  A showing of good and sufficient cause. A "good and sufficient" cause is one that deals solely with the physical characteristics of the property and cannot be based on the character of the planned construction or substantial improvement, the personal characteristics of the owner or inhabitants, or local provisions that regulate standards other than health and public safety standards. 
(b)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the property. 
(c)  Increased cost or inconvenience of meeting the requirements of these regulations does not constitute an exceptional hardship to the applicant. 
(d)  A determination that the granting of a variance for development within any designated floodway, or special flood hazard area with base flood elevations but no floodway, will not result in increased flood heights beyond that which is allowed in these regulations. 
(e)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in additional threats to public safety; extraordinary public expense, nuisances, fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws. 
(f)  A determination that the structure or other development is protected by methods to minimize flood damages. 
(g)  A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Upon consideration of the individual circumstances, the limitations and conditions, and the purposes of these regulations, the Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions to variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of these regulations. 
(3)  The Board of Adjustment shall notify, in writing, any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building or structure with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation that the variance is to the floodplain management requirements of these regulations only, and that the cost of federal flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk. 
(Ord. No. 010-14, § 1, 6-2-14) 
ARTICLE 6. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 6.1. - Compliance required. 
(A)  No structure or land development shall hereafter be located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, repaired, extended, converted, enlarged or altered without full compliance with these regulations and all other applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of these regulations. 
(B)  Failure to obtain a permit shall be a violation of these regulations and shall be punishable in accordance with section 6.3. 
(C)  Permits issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the Floodplain Administrator authorize only the specific activities set forth in such approved plans and applications or amendments thereto. Use, arrangement, or construction of such specific activities that is contrary to that authorized shall be deemed a violation of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 010-14, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 6.2. - Notice of violation. 
    The Floodplain Administrator is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person or corporation responsible for a violation of this Code, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation and shall be in accordance with the notice provisions found in the Town of Smyrna Housing Code. 
(Ord. No. 010-14, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 6.3. - Violations and penalties. 
(A)  Any person or corporation who shall hereafter develop any land or locate, erect, construct, reconstruct, repair, extend, convert, enlarge, alter, use, or occupy any structure or equipment regulated by this Code or knowingly cause same to be done contrary to or in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this Code without full compliance with these regulations and all other applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of these regulations shall be in violation. 
(B)  Any person or corporation who shall violate any provision this code or who fails to comply with any order issued by the Floodplain Administrator or code official pursuant to the provisions of this Code shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-11 of the Town of Smyrna Code. 
(C)  In case any violation order is not promptly complied with, the code official or flood plain administrator shall institute an appropriate action or proceed at law to seek the penalty provided in subsection (B) of this section. Also, the code official may ask such legal representative to proceed at law or in equity against the person responsible for the violation for the purpose of ordering that person to: 
(1)  Restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain from any further execution of work. 
(2)  Restrain or correct the erection, installation or alteration of such structure. 
(3)  Require the removal of work in violation. 
(4)  Prevent the occupancy or use of the property or structure, or part thereof erected, constructed, installed or altered in violation of, or not in compliance with, the provisions of this article, or in violation of a plan or specification under which an approval, permit or certification was issued. 
(Ord. No. 010-14, § 1, 6-2-14) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - GENERAL ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the General Ordinances compilation, as updated through January 6, 1992, which are included herein. Sections of the General Ordinances compilation, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
Gen. Ords. Article Title Section  Section 
this Code I 11 1, 2 66-103 3 66-106, 66-107 4-6 66-106 7 66-106 
66-108 8 66-108 9-11 66-106 10 66-107, 66-108 12, 13 66-108 14 66-106 
66-108, 66-109 15 66-108, 66-109 16 66-97 12 1, 2 66-41 13 1-5 66-26 15 1, 2 66-27 16 1, 2 66-102 17 1, 2 66-98 18 1, 2 66-28 19 1 66-51 20 1 66-52 21 1-4 66-1 22 1, 2 66-100 23 1-6 66-101 24 1 66-107 2, 3 66-105 25 1 66-108 2 66-96 26 1 66-108 27 1 66-108 28 1-4 66-146-66-149 5 66-131 6 66-132, 66-133 29 3 42-42, 42-43 3A 42-44 4-10 42-45-42-51 11 42-41 30 1, 2 66-66 31 1, 2 66-76 32 2-4 66-104 7 66-104 33 2, 3 66-99 34 1-16 66-171-66-186 II 12 1-6 58-46-58-51 8 58-52 III 11 1.1, 1.2 70-46, 70-47 2 70-61 3.1, 3.2 70-62 3.3, 3.4 70-63, 70-64 4 70-27 5.1 70-76 5.2.1-5.2.4 70-77-70-80 5.3 70-81 6.2 70-82 7.2 70-97 8.2 70-112 8.3 70-26 
70-113 8.4-8.6 70-114-70-116 9.1-9.3 70-126-70-128 10, 11 70-28, 70-29 12.1 70-26 13, 14 70-30, 70-31 16 70-32 13 70-151 70-171-70-174 1-19 70-152-70-170 ex. no. 5 70-175 IV 11 2 58-26 12 1, 2 42-122 3 42-121 14 1 50-2 2 50-1 3-7 50-26-50-30 8 50-3 9 50-31 15 2 42-1 16 1 74-27 2 74-26 3, 4 74-28, 74-29 17 1-6 70-1 18 1-4 42-26-42-29 19 1, 2 30-2 23 1-4 38-27-38-30 5 38-26 24 1 18-136 2-5 18-138-18-141 6 18-137 7-11 18-142-18-146 26 1-6 18-191-18-196 27 1 54-26 2, 3 54-28, 54-29 4.1-4.7 54-41-54-47 5 54-30 6 54-27 29 1-5 1-12 30 1-12 31 1 42-146 34 1, 2 18-216, 18-217 3, 4 18-218 5-7 18-219-18-221 36 1 30-1 37 1 14-2 3 14-2 38 1, 2 42-196 40 3 2-66 41 1-3 58-107-58-109 4 58-106 5 58-109 42 1-3 42-108 43 1, 2 6-1 44 1-3 42-106 45 1-4 10-36-10-39 46 1-3 46-56-46-58 4, 5 46-60, 46-61 6 46-59 8 46-62 47 1 14-26 2, 3 14-28, 14-29 4 14-1 
14-30 5 14-31, 14-32 6 14-33 7 14-32 8, 9 14-34, 14-35 10 14-27 48 1 62-26 3-5 62-27-62-29 52 1-7 22-26-22-32 53 1-4 74-51-74-54 54 2 18-242 55 1-4 58-77-58-80 5, 6 58-78 7, 8 58-81, 58-82 9 58-76 56 1-4 58-1 57 1 54-68 2 54-66 3 54-69 4 54-67 58 1-12 26-56-26-67 59 1, 2 42-82, 42-83 3 42-81 60 2-10 26-26-26-34 61 2 2-77 62 1 42-109 63 1, 2 46-26, 46-27 3(A), 3(B) 46-28, 46-29 4 46-30 5 46-31, 46-32 64 2-76 65 1-3 26-1 66 1-4 54-1 68 1 42-61 2 42-63 2.1-2.3 42-64-42-66 3 42-62 4 42-67 69 1-3 46-76-46-78 VII 11 101.1 18-51 101.2 18-53 101.3 18-52 101.4(1) 18-55 101.5-101.15 18-66-18-76 101.16(1), (2) 18-77 101.16(3)-101.16(6) 18-78-18-81 101.17, 101.18 18-82, 18-83 201.1-201.11 18-106-18-116 301.1 18-54  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the General Ordinances compilation, as updated through January 6, 1992, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the General Ordinances compilation, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede January 6, 1992, but which were never included in the General Ordinances compilation, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since January 6, 1992, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
 Date Section  Section 
this Code  3- 6-89 1-8 2-36-2-43 11-19-90 App. A, § 5  9-21-92 App. A, § 6 App. A, § 19 10-19-92 App. A, § 5 12-21-92 1 70-111  1-19-93(1) 1 18-166, 18-167 2, 3 18-168  2-16-93(1) 1 54-47  2-16-93(2) 1 70-64  2-16-93(3) 1 70-114  3-15-93(1) 1 18-27  3-15-93(2) App. A, § 5.8., 5.10.  4- 5-93(1) 1 App. A, § 5.12.e.(2)(c) 2 App. A, § 5.12.e.(2)(b) 3       Dltd App. A, § 7.8.b.(1), (2), (3) 4       Added App. A, § 7.8.a.(2)(e) 5 App. A, § 7.8.a 6-8 App. A, § 7.8.b(1) 9 App. A, § 7.8.b.(3)(c) 10       Dltd App. A, § 7.10 11 App. A, § 7.9 12       Added App. A, § 7.8.h.(7) 13 App. A, § 7.2  4- 5-93(2) App. A, § 7 App. A, § 9  4-19-93 1 App. A, § 19  5-17-93 App. A, § 5  8-16-93(1) 1 App. A, § 5.1.a.(1)  8-16-93(2) 1 App. A, § 8 2 App. A, § 8.2 3 App. A, § 9.3.a.(1) 4 App. A, § 5.13.m. 5 App. A, § 6.1.a. 6 App. A, § 6.9.e.2. 7 App. A, § 6.13.b. 8 App. A, § 19  8-16-93(3) 1 App. A, § 19  9-21-93 1-3 70-173(e) 10 4-93 1, 2 70-111 11-15-93 1       Added 18-140(10) 2 18-142(1) 12-20-93(1) 1-5       Added 2-67 12-20-93(2) 1, 2       Added 2-68 12-20-93(3) 1 66-52  1- 3-94 1 2-43  1-18-94(1) 1, 2 58-49, 58-50  1-18-94(2) 1 70-114  2-22-94 1, 2 26-29  3- 7-94 1 66-107(9)  3-21-94 1       Added 70-176  5- 2-94 1-4 70-162(d)  6-20-94(1) 1 70-116  6-20-94(2) 1-4 App. A, § 5.6.G.(2)b., c., (3)b., c.  7- 5-94 70-157(j)  8- 1-94 1 70-172(l)  9-19-94 1       Added 70-112(c) 11- 7-94 1, 2 70-172(d)(1) 12-19-94 1 66-52  2-21-95(1) 1 66-52  2-21-95(2) 1 66-52  3- 6-95 1 66-52  4- 3-95(1) 1-5       Added App. A, §§ 5.2.-6.E.(2), (3)  4- 3-95(2) 1 App. A, § 5.11.g.(6) 2 App. A, § 5.11.g.(7)  4-25-95(1) 1-3       Added 2-68(e)-(g)  4-25-95(2) 1 70-172(d)(2) 2, 3 70-172(d)(1)  4-25-95(3) 1 70-175(e)  6- 5-95(1) 1       Added App. A, § 5.10.a.(19) 2       Added App. A, § 5.11.c.(3) 3       Added App. A, § 5.14.a.(5)  6- 5-95(2) 1 App. B, § II, B.1.  7- 3-95(1) 1 
2 18-26 
18-28  7- 3-95(2) 1 18-271 4 18-272  7- 3-95(3) 1 18-301 3 18-302  7- 3-95(4) 1, 2 70-111  8- 7-95(1) 1-5 App. A, § 5.3.-6.B.(1)  8- 7-95(2) 1 App. A, § 12  8-21-95 1 42-41-42-51  9- 5-95(1) 1 70-64  9- 5-95(2) 1 70-165  9-18-95 1-8 Adopting ord., p.ix 10- 2-95(1) 1 66-52 10- 2-95(2) 1 70-172(d)(1) 2 70-171(d) 11- 6-95(1) 1 18-52 2 18-110(j) 11- 6-95(2) 1 18-302 11- 6-95(3) 1       Dltd App. A, § 5.11.d. 11- 6-95(4) 1 App. B, § VII, B.4.d. 2       Added App. B, § VII, B.4.e. 11-20-95(1) 1 70-174(j) 2 70-171(h)(1) 11-20-95(2) 1       Dltd 74-26-74-29       Added 74-26-74-31 11-22-95 1 App. A, § 5.8.b.(6) 2 App. A, § 5.9.a.(14) 3 App. A, § 5.10.a.(16) 4 App. A, § 5.11.b.(5) 5       Added App. A, § 5.11.d. 12- 4-95 1 70-111 12- 5-95 1 66-52 12-18-95 1 Ch. 54, Art. II, Div. 2(title) 2 54-41(b)  4-15-96(1) 1       Added 54-84-54-88  4-15-96(2)       Added 66-77-66-79  5- 6-96(1) 1       Added 1-12(n)(4), (5)  5- 6-96(2) 1       Rnbd 2-43       as 2-44 2       Added 2-43  5- 6-96(3) 1 70-156(a)(10) 2       Added 70-177  5- 6-96(4) 1 70-175(e)  5- 6-96(5) 1 App. A, § 5.14.c 2 App. A, § 5.14.f(1)  6-17-96(1) 1 70-115(c) 2 70-157(e) 3       Added 70-128(c), (d)  6-17-96(2) 1 70-172(d)(2) 2 70-174(d) 3       Rltd 70-174(i)-(l)       as 70-174(j)-(m)       Added 70-174(i)  6-17-96(3) 1       Added App. A, § 5.14.a.(6)  7-15-96 1 18-27  9- 3-96 App. B, § I  9-16-96(1) 1 18-302  9-16-96(2)       Added 18-401-18-408 10-21-96 2 App. B, § VII, E.5. 3       Rltd App. B, § VII, F.       as App. B, § VII, H. 4       Added App. B, § VII, F., G. 12-16-96(1) 1 66-52 12-16-96(2) 1       Rltd App. A, § 5.5.B.(1)-(3)       as App. A, § 5.5.B.(2)-(4) 2       Added App. A, § 5.5.B.(1) 3       Rltd App. A, § 5.5.G.(1), (2)       as App. A, § 5.5.G.(2), (3) 4       Added App. A, § 5.5.G.(1)  2-18-97(1) 1, 2 2-44 3-5 2-43  2-18-97(2) 1 66-1(a) 2 66-1(b), (c)       Added 66-1(e) 3 66-26(b) 4 66-41 5 66-51, 66-52 6 66-66 7 66-100 8-11 66-106-66-109  2-18-97(3) App. A, § 13  4-21-97(1) App. A, § 3 1.  4-21-97(2) App. B, § VI E.  6-16-97(1) 1 54-46(b)  6-16-97(2) 6 70-155(b)(1) 7       Added 70-155(b)(3) 8 70-157(d)  7- 7-97 1, 2 46-58(c), (d) 3-5 46-58(h)-(j) 11- 3-97(1)       Added 35-26-35-32 11- 3-97(2) 1       Added App. A, § 5 8.c., d. 2       Added App. A, § 5 9.c., d. 3       Added App. A, § 5 10.d., e. 4 App. A, § 5, 8.b. 5 App. A, § 5, 9.b. 6 App. A, § 5, 10.b. 11- 3-97(3) 1 App. A, § 5 13.e. 2-4 App. A, § 5 13.f. 5 App. A, § 5 13.k. 11-17-97 1, 2 70-165(c)(3) 3       Added 70-165(c)(3)a. 12-15-97(1) 1 18-402(d) 2 18-404(a)(2) 3 18-404(a)(4) 12-15-97(2) 1 54-47(c)  3-16-98(1) 1       Added 2-69 2 2-68(g) 3       Added 2-68(h)  3-16-98(2) 1       Dltd 46-26(i)       Rltd 46-26(h) as 46-26(i) 2       Added 46-26(j) 3       Added 46-26(h) 4       Dltd 46-32  3-16-98(3) 1 42-45(b)(1) 2 42-46(b)  4- 6-98(1)       Added 58-27  4- 6-98(2) 1 18-191(a) 2 18-195  6- 1-98 1-7       Added 62-51-62-57  7-20-98(1) 1 18-26 4 18-27  7-20-98(2) 18-407  7-20-98(3)       Added 70-126(7)  7-20-98(4)       Added 70-165(b)(7)  7-20-98(5) 1-5 App. A, § 5 13. l. 6 App. A, § 5 13. n.  7-20-98(6) 1       Dltd App. A, § 5 14. a. (5) 2       Rnbd App. A, § 5 14. a. (6)       as App. A, § 5 14. a. (5) 3       Added App. A, § 5 14. a. (5) (3)  7-20-98(7) 1       Added App. A, § 5 18. 2 App. A, § 19  8-17-98(1) 1, 2 58-27  8-17-98(2) 1       Dltd 70-114(b), (c) 2       Added 70-115 3, 4       Rnbd 70-115, 70-116       as 70-116, 70-117  8-17-98(3) 1 62-26 2 62-29 10- 5-98 18-27 10-19-98(1) 1 70-111 10-19-98(2) 1       Dltd App. A, § 6 11. 2       Rnbd App. A, § 6 12.-15.       as App. A, § 6 11.-14. 3 App. A, § 5 12. b. 4 App. A, § 5 12. d. 11- -2-98 1 14-26 2 14-27 3       Added 14-36 11-16-98(1) 1       Added 35-33 11-16-98(2) 1 18-301 4 18-302 11-16-98(3) 1 18-271 4 18-272 12-21-98 1       Added 2-68(i)  3-15-99(1) 1, 2 App. A, § 5  3-15-99(2) 1 App. A, § 5  3-15-99(3) 1 App. A, § 6  4- 5-99 1 70-157  4-19-99 1 70-172 2 70-174  7- 6-99 1 54-26 2 54-29 3, 4 54-42 5 54-43 6 54-44 7 54-45 8 54-84 9, 10 54-88 11 54-85  7-19-99 1 18-302  8-16-99(1) 1 70-171  8-16-99(2) 1, 2 App. A, § 5 10-18-99       Added 32-1-32-8 11- 1-99(1) 1, 2 70-162 11- 1-99(2) App. B, § VII 11-15-99(1) 1 App. A, § 7 11-15-99(2) 1 App. B, § I 2 App. B, § II 11-15-99(3) 1, 2 App. B, § II  1- 3-00 1, 2 70-111 3 70-113  3- 6-00(1) 1 App. A, § 5  3- 6-00(2) 1 App. A, § 5 2 App. A, § 6  4-17-00(1) 1 62-53  4-17-00(2) 1, 2 App. B, § VII 3 App. B, § IX  5- 1-00 1 70-82  5-15-00 1, 2 18-27 3 18-402  6-19-00 1, 2 74-53  7- 3-00(1) 1 26-26  
 Date Section  Section 
this Code 2 26-29  7- 3-00(2) 1 26-29 2 26-30  7- 3-00(3) 1 26-58 2, 3 26-59  7-17-00 1       Rpld 50-1-50-3 50-26-50-31  8- 7-00 1 74-27 2 74-30 10- 2-00(1) 1 18-27 10- 2-00(2) 1 35-29 10-16-00(1) 1 18-27 10-16-00(2)       Added 74-71-74-76 10-16-00(3) 1 App. A, § 5 10-16-00(4) 1 App. A, § 5 11- 6-00 1       Rnbd 62-28-62-30       as 62-29-62-31 2       Added 62-28 11-20-00 1-3 18-27 12- 4-00 1 18-27 12-18-00(1) 1 18-27 12-18-00(2) 1 18-27 12-18-00(3) 1, 2 18-403 12-18-00(4) 1 18-403 12-18-00(5) 1 70-111 12-18-00(6) 1-3 70-171 12-18-00(7) 1 App. A, § 6 12-18-00(8) 1 App. A, § 7  1-16-01(1) 1 58-27  1-16-01(2) 3, 4 70-128  1-16-01(3) 1 App. A, § 5 14.  2- 5-01 1a. App. A, § 5 11. 1b. App. A, § 5 13. 1c. App. A, § 5 14. 1d. App. A, § 5 15. 1e. App. A, § 5 16. 1f. App. A, § 5 17. 2       Added App. A, § 6 15.  2-20-01(1)       Added 2-91-2-93  2-20-01(2) 1, 2 18-27  2-20-01(3) 1, 2 App. A, § 5 14.  3- 5-01(1) 1       Rpld 14-1, 14-2 14-26-14-36       Added 14-1, 14-2 14-26-4-35  3- 5-01(2) 1, 2 18-27  3- 5-01(3) 1 70-159  3-19-01 1 App. A, § 5 16.  5- 7-01(1) 1       Added 58-28  5- 7-01(2) 1 App. B, § II  6- 4-01(1) 1, 2 1-11  6- 4-01(2) 1 18-138  7-16-01(1) 1-3 70-171  7-16-01(2) 1-6 App. A, § 5 17.  8-20-01 1, 2       Added 30-3, 30-4  9-17-01 1 42-62 10-15-01 1-7       Added 2-1 11- 5-01(1) 1, 2 18-27 11- 5-01(2) 1, 2 18-27 11-19-01 1 42-196 12- 3-01 1 66-105 12-17-01(1) 1, 2 App. A, § 5 8. 12-17-01(2) 1       Rpld App. B, §§ I-X 2       Added App. B, §§ 1.00-1.05 App. B, §§ 2.00-2.02 App. B, §§ 3.00-3.11 App. B, §§ 4.00-4.07 App. B, §§ 5.00-5.17 App. B, Apps. 1-6  1- 7-02 1 70-111  1-22-02(1) 1 18-403  1-22-02(2) 1 70-174  4- 1-02 1, 2 30-3  4-15-02(1) 1 70-76  4-15-02(2) 1 App. A, § 19 2 App. A, § 5  5-20-02 1 App. A, § 19 2 App. A, § 5  8- 5-02(1) 1-4 1-11 5, 6 1-12 7 6-1 8 14-27 9 42-28 10 42-51 11 42-62 12 42-81 13-16 42-106-42-109 17 42-121 18 42-196 19 54-67 20 58-1 21 58-26 22 58-76 23 58-106 24 62-57 25 66-27 26 66-28 27 66-66 28 66-78 29 66-101 30 66-105 31 70-1 32 70-30 33 74-26 34 74-73 35 74-76 36, 37 18-27 38, 39 18-272 40 18-302  8- 5-02(2)       Added 66-29  8- 5-02(3) 1 App. A, § 5  8-19-02(1) 1 32-4  8-19-02(2) 1 66-105  8-19-02(3) 1 70-155  9-16-02 1-5       Added 42-84 10-21-02 1, 2 App. A, § 5 12- 2-02(1) 1, 2 2-67 3,4 2-68 12- 2-02(2)       Added 2-70 12- 2-02(3) 1-4 App. A, § 5 12-16-02(1) 1       Rnbd 18-194-18-196       As 18-195-18-197 2       Added 18-194 12-16-02(2) 1       Added 66-97 2       Rnbd 66-97       As 66-98 3       Rnbd 66-103       As 66-99 4-6       Rnbd 66-107-66-109       As 66-100-66-102 7       Rnbd 66-99       As 66-103 8       Rnbd 66-100       As 66-105 9       Rnbd 66-101       As 66-106.5 10, 11       Added 66-107, 66-108 12       Rnbd 66-98       As 66-109 13       Rnbd 66-102       As 66-110 14       Rnbd 66-105       As 66-111  
Ordinance 
Number Date Section  Section 
this Code 003-03  1- 6-03 1 26-27 2 26-29 004-03  1- 6-03 1 32-4 005-03  2-18-03 1-6 32-4 006-03  3- 3-03 1       Rpld 74-51-74-54       Added 74-41-74-67 007-03  3- 3-03 1 70-1 2 70-167 008-03  3- 3-03       Rpld 54-84-54-88       Added 54-84-54-91, 54-93 002-03  3-18-03 1 App. A, § 6 009-03  4- 7-03 1, 2 70-162 010-03  4-21-03 1 App. A, § 6 011-03  4-21-03 1 70-159 012-03  5- 5-03 1 18-193 013-03  5- 5-03       Added 42-85 2       Added 42-86 016-03  6- 2-03 1 66-98 015-03  6-16-03 1 App. A, § 14 2 App. A, § 5 020-03  6-16-03 1       Added 70-33 2, 3 70-30 021-03  6-16-03 1       Added 14-40-14-45 017-03  7- 7-03 1, 2 70-155 014-03  7-21-03 1       Added 19-1-19-8 018-03  7-21-03 1 App. B, § 3.04 022-03  7-21-03 1, 2       Added 46-32 026-03  9-15-03 1       Rpld 14-40-14-45 030-03 11- 3-03 1, 2 18-27 031-03 11-17-03 1       Added 70-190-70-196 032-03 11-17-03 1       Rnbd 32-3-32-8       As 32-8-32-13 2-6       Added 32-3-32-7 033-03 12- 1-03 1, 2 32-4 036-03 12-15-03 1       Rpld 2-69 2       Rnbd 2-70       As 2-69 034-03  1-20-04 1 70-111 035-03  1-20-04 1 App. A, § 5 001-04  2-17-04 1       Rnbd 26-1       As 26-3 2       Added 26-1 002-04  4- 5-04 1 66-104 003-04  3-15-04 1       Added 26-2 004-04  3-15-04 1-4 26-26-26-29 5 26-32 6 26-34 005-04  3- 1-04 1       Rpld 70-174 2       Rpld 70-176 007-04  4- 5-04 1       Rnbd 66-111       As 66-112       Added 66-111 008-04  5- 3-04 1       Added 70-200 009-04 11-15-04 1 App. B, § 4.02 010-04  6- 7-04 1 18-137 2-8 18-138 9-16 18-140 17-21 18-141 22 18-143 23 18-144 24 18-146 011-04  6-21-04 1       Added 18-501-18-504 18-601-18-605 012-04  6-21-04 1 66-97 2 66-99 013-04  7-19-04 1-5       Added 2-51-2-55 014-04  8-16-04 1-3 App. A, § 5 015-04 10-18-04 1, 2 App. A, § 5 016-04 10-18-04 1 App. B, § 5.02 017-04 10-18-04 1-3 26-60 4, 5 26-63 6, 7 26-65 8 26-66 9       Rpld 26-67 018-04 11-15-04 1 App. A, § 5 019-04 11-15-04 1 App. A, § 6 020-04 10-18-04 1 32-1 2 32-2 3 32-4 4 32-5 5 32-8 6 32-9 7 32-10 8 32-11 021-04 11-15-04 1-3 App. A, § 5 023-04 11- 1-04 1, 2 70-200 024-04 12-20-04 1       Rpld 18-26, 18-27 18-51-18-55 18-66-18-83 18-106-18-116 18-136-18-146 18-166-18-168 18-191-18-197 18-216-18-221 18-241, 18-242 18-271, 18-272 18-301, 18-302 18-401-18-408 18-501-18-504 18-601-18-605       Added 18-1-18-11 18-15-18-20 18-30-18-39 18-41, 18-42 18-50-18-61 18-70, 18-71 18-80, 18-81 18-90, 18-91 18-100, 18-101 18-110-18-113 18-150-18-160 18-161-18-167 001-05  2- 7-05 1 App. B, § 2.01 2 App. B, § 3.02 3 App. B, § 4.03 002-05  1- 3-05 1 70-162 003-05  1-18-05 1 App. A, § 5 004-05  1- 3-05 1, 2 32-9 005-05  3-21-05 1 App. A, § 5 006-05  3-21-05 1       Added 18-701-18-712 007-05  3-21-05 1-11 19-1 12-16 19-2 17-25 19-3 26       Rpld 19-4       Rnbd 19-5-19-8       As 19-4-19-7 27-68 19-4 69-71 19-5 72 19-6 73 19-7 008-05  8-15-05 1-11 App. A, § 5 011-05  5-16-05 App. B, § 3.06 012-05  3- 7-05 1 54-46 2, 3       Added 54-48, 54-49 013-05  3- 7-05 1 70-111 2       Added 70-301, 70-302 014-05  4- 4-05 1       Added 18-801 016-05  8-15-05 1 ch. 18 3       Added 18-1-18-7 4       Added 18-15-18-37 5       Added 18-38-18-44 6, 7       Rnbd 18-26, 18-27       As 18-45, 18-46 8       Added 18-47 9 18-108 10, 11 18-110 12, 13 18-113 14 18-166 15       Added 18-169 16 18-241 17 18-271 18 18-272 19       Added 18-273 20 18-301 21 18-302 22       Added 18-303 23 18-403 24       Added 18-901-18-903 25       Added 18-1001-18-1003 26       Added 18-1101-18-1103 27       Added 18-1201-18-1203 28       Added 18-1301-18-1303 29       Added 18-1401-18-1403 30       Added 18-1501-18-1503 18-1551-18-1555 017-05 10- 3-05 1-4 14-27 018-05 11- 7-05 1 App. A, § 6 2, 3 App. A, § 19 020-05 12-19-05 1 26-60, 26-63 26-65-26-67 2 26-58, 26-59 26-63 021-05  1-17-06 1 18-140 2 18-141 001-06  2- 6-06 1 70-64 2 70-111 002-06  2- 6-06 1-3 70-165 003-06  2- 6-06 1, 2 70-171 3-5 70-172 6 70-173 7 70-175 004-06  2-21-06 1-4 App. A, § 9 005-06  2-21-06 1 70-160 006-06  3- 6-06 1, 2 18-15 3 18-31 4 18-272 008-06  2-21-06       Added 2-221-2-227 010-06  4- 3-06 1       Added 26-68 013-06  5-15-06 1, 2 70-157 014-06  7- 5-06 1 70-116 2 70-116, 70-157 015-06  8- 7-06 1, 2 70-76 016-06  8-21-06 1 App. B, § 3.06 017-06  9-18-06 1, 2       Added 70-178, 70-179 018-06  9-18-06 1, 2 32-9 021-06 11- 6-06 1       Added 2-200-2-208 023-06 12- 4-06 1       Added 18-37.5 024-06  1-16-07 1, 2 32-9 3 32-12 001-07  4-16-07 1       Added 18-1556, 18-1557 003-07 10-15-07 1 App. A, § 5 2 App. A, § 6.15 004-07  7- 2-07 1 App. A, § 5 2       Added App. A, § 6.18 005-07  7- 2-07 1 App. B, § 5.07 006-07  8- 6-07 2 32-9(f) 007-07  7-16-07 1 App. A, § 5 2       Added App. A, § 6.19 008-07  7-16-07 1 App. B, § 2.01 2       Added App. B, § 3.04.c.1.k. 3 App. B, § 3.10.a. 4       Added App. B, § 3.10.d. 009-07  9- 4-07 I-XIV       Added 70-184-70-189.8 010-07  9- 4-07 I-IV       Added 70-180-70-183 012-07 11-19-07 1       Rpld 70-157 2       Rpld 70-165 3       Added 70-165 4 70-171(d) 5 70-171(f) 6 70-171(h) 7 70-111(1), (2) 8 70-113(1), (2) 9 70-116 10       Rpld 70-126(1), (2)       Rnbd 70-126(3)-(7)       as 70-126(1)-(5) 11       Rpld 70-127 12       Rpld 70-128 13, 14       Added 70-2, 70-3 013-07 11- 5-07 1       Added App. A, § 5.10.b.(2) 2 App. A, § 9.2.b. 015-07 12-17-07 1 2-1(c) 001-08  1- 7-08 1       Rnbd App. A, § 5.10.c.-f.       as App. A, § 5.10.d.-g. 2       Added App. A, § 5.10.c. 3       Rnbd App. A, § 5.17.D.-H.       as App. A, § 5.17.E.-I. 4       Added App. A, § 5.17.D. 5 App. A, § 19 002-08  1-22-08 1       Added App. B, § 3.10.e. 003-08 10- 6-08 1 App. A, § 6.1 004-08  5-19-08 1 App. A, § 5.1.a.(12)(a) App. A, § 5.1.a.(12)(c) App. A, § 5.2.B. 
(c), (d) App. A, § 5.3.B. 
(5)(c), (d) App. A, § 5.4.B.(4)(b) App. A, § 5.4.B.(4)(e) 2 App. A, § 6.19 005-08  4- 7-08 1       Rpld 18-136-18-146       Added 18-136-18-152 007-08  4- 7-08 1 2-69(b) 009-08 11-17-08 1 18-706(a) 2 18-712 010-08  2-17-09 1 30-3(d)(1) 011-08 12-15-08 1       Rpld 70-155(c) 2       Rnbd 70-155(d), (e)       as 70-155(c), (d) 012-08 12-15-08 1 18-402(d) 013-08 12-15-08 1, 2 62-53(a) 001-09  6- 1-09 1       Rnbd 19-4-19-7       as 19-5-19-8 2       Added 19-4 002-09  4-20-09 1       Rpld 26-34 003-09  9- 8-09 1       Added App. A, § 5.17.C.(5) 004-09  8- 3-09 1       Added 42-123 005-09  9-21-09 1       Added App. A, § 5.2.D.(3) 2       Added App. A, § 5.3.D.(3) 3       Added App. A, § 5.4.D.(3) 4       Added App. A, § 5.5.D.(3) 5       Added App. A, § 5.6.D.(3) 006-09  2- 1-10 1       Added 50-1-50-12 007-09 10-19-09       Added 22-33-22-39 009-09  2- 1-10 1 70-172(d)(1) 2 70-172(d)(2) 009-10  2-16-10 1       Added 70-174 001-10  3- 1-10 1 18-4 002-10  3- 1-10 1 18-45 2 18-46 003-10  3- 1-10 1, 2 18-271, 18-272 004-10  3- 1-10 1, 2 18-301, 18-302 005-10  3- 1-10 1, 2 18-901, 18-902 006-10  3- 1-10 1, 2 18-1001, 18-1002 007-10  3- 1-10 1 18-3 18-4 18-5 18-20 18-27       Added 18-28(4), (5)       Rnbd 18-29       as 18-28.1       Rpld 18-30, 18-31       Rnbd 18-32-18-36       as 18-29-19-33       Rnbd 18-37.5       as 18-34       Rnbd 18-37       as 18-34.1       Added 18-35-18-37 18-41 008-10  3- 1-10       Added App. B, § 3.08 d.4. 008-09  4- 5-10 1       Added 1-14 010-10  5-17-10 1 App. A, § 9 3.a. 2 App. A, § 11  
Ord. No. Date Section  Section 
this Code 3 App. A, § 19 011-10  5-17-10 1       Added 70-116 013-10  6- 7-10 1 46-57(a) 2 46-57(b) 4       Added 46-57(c) 015-10 12- 6-10 1, 2 66-112(a) 016-10 12- 6-10 1 5401 2 54-26 3 54-41(a) 4 54-42(a) 5 54-42(d) 6 54-43 017-10 12-20-10 1 70-166(b) 001-11  2- 7-11 1 2-1(c) 002-11  4-18-11 1       Rpld 54-1, 54-26-54-30, 54-41-54-49       Added 54-1-54-4, 54-26-54-35 2       Rnbd Ch. 54, Art. III       as Ch. 54, Art. II 3       Rnbd Ch. 54, Art. IV       as Ch. 54, Art. III 003-11  7- 5-11       Added 47-1-47-4 004-11  8- 1-11 1, 2 App. B, § 3.10 c. 3 App. B, § 3.10 d.3. 4 App. B, § 3.10 d.3.b. 5       Added App. B, § 3.10 d.4. 005-11  8- 1-11 1       Added 62-60, 62-61 006-11  8- 1-11 1       Added 62-1 007-11 10- 3-11 1       Added App. A, § 5 14.(a)(9)(8) 008-11 10-17-11 1 58-27(b) 2 58-27(d)(1) 3 58-27(f) 001-12  2-21-12 1 App. A, § 5 18. 002-12  2-21-12 1       Added App. A, § 5 14.a.(5.5) 003-12  5- 7-12 1       Added 62-58 004-12  6- 4-12 1 66-1(e) 006-12  7-16-12 1       Rnbd 2-67-2-69       as 2-68-2-70 2       Added 2-67 007-12  7-16-12 1 66-106.5(a) 008-12  8-20-12 1 70-177 009-12  8-20-12 1       Added 18-1557(n) 010-12  8- 6-12 1       Added App. A, § 5 20. 011-12 10- 1-12 1 App. B, § 5.17 012-12 12- 3-12 1 App. A, § 5 9. 001-13  2- 4-13 1-5 App. A, § 5 004-13  7-15-13 1 14-26 2       Added 14-36 3 14-27(a) 005-13  8-19-13 1-3 74-30 006-13 10-21-13 1 2-70 001-14  3-10-14 1 70-172(d)(1), (2) 2 70-175 002-14  3-17-14 1 66-103(a), (c) 2 66-104(g) 3 66-112(a), (b) 004-14  4- 7-14 1 App. A, § 5 14. 005-14  6- 2-14 1 App. A, § 5 14. 008-14  5- 7-14 1       Added App. A, § 5 21. 009-14  6-16-14 1-4 18-501-18-504 010-14  6- 2-14 1       Added App. C, §§ 1.1-1.9, 2.1-2.8, 3.1-3.8, 5.1, 6.1-6.3 011-14  7- 7-14 1-4 App. A, § 5 8-10. 012-14  7-21-14 1 App. C, § 1.4 015-14 11- 3-14 1       Added App. A, § 5.22 016-14 12-15-14 1       Added 70-65 017-14  1- 5-15 1 32-1 2 32-8 3, 4 32-9, 32-18 5       Added 32-14 018-14 12- 1-14 1       Added App. A, § 5.4.C(4) 2       Added App. A, § 5.5.C(8) 3       Added App. A, § 5.6.C(7) 4 App. A, § 19 020-14 12-15-14 1 App. A, § 5.5.B(3) 2       Rpld App. A, § 5.5.F(3) 3       Added App. A, § 5.5.H 4       Added App. A, § 5.5.I 5 App. A, § 5.6.B(2) 6 App. A, § 5.6.B(3) 7       Rpld App. A, § 5.6.F(3) 8       Added App. A, § 5.6.H 9       Added App. A, § 5.6.I 10 App. A, § 6.1.A(9)(a) 11, 12 App. A, § 19 021-14  1-20-15 1 App. A, § 5.9 2, 5 App. A, § 19 3 App. A, § 5.4.C 4 App. A, § 5.21.N 001-15  2-2-15 1 32-1 2 32-8 3, 4 32-9 5 32-12 6 32-13 7       Added 32-14 002-15  4- 6-15 1 Ch. 18, Art. XII, Div. 3(title) 18-701-18-709 18-711 004-15  4-20-15 1 62-53 2 62-2 3 70-302 4 74-29 005-15  5- 6-15 1 74-29 2 74-32 3 74-65 74-71-74-74 006-15  6- 1-15 1 70-161(c) 012-15  8- 3-15 1       Added 70-157 013-15  9-21-15 1 App. A, § 5.10(21)(a), (b) 2 App. A, § 5.9(8)(d) 014-15 10- 5-15 1 18-401 2 18-404, 18-405 017-15 11-16-15 1 Ch. 58, Art. V(title) 58-106-58-109 018-15  1- 4-16 1       Added 42-197 019-15  1- 4-16 1       Added 49-1-49-11 001-16  2-16-16 1       Added 70-34 2 70-30 3 70-61 003-16  3-21-16 1       Added App. A, § 5.7.a.(7) 2       Added App. A, § 5.8.f 3       Added App. A, § 5.9.a.(14)(f) 4       Rpld App. A, § 5.14.a.(9)(8) 5       Rpld App. A, § 5.21.n 6       Rpld App. A, § 5.22.N 004-16  6-20-16 1 App. B, § 5.07.b.3 005-16  6-20-16 1 App. A, § 5.14a.(10) 006-16 10- 3-16 1       Added 51-1-51-4 2 50-1 3 49-8 003-17  3- 6-17 1 App. A, § 5(12) 2 App. A, § 5(14) 004-17  5-15-17 1 18-4 2 18-33(b) 3 18-45, 18-46 4 18-71(e) 5 18-107(b) 6 18-110(j), (k), (m) 7 18-112(a) 8 18-114(i) 9 18-271       Rpld 18-272, 18-273 10 18-301, 18-302 11 18-901, 18-902 12 18-1001, 18-1002 13       Added 18-1600-18-1602 005-17  8-21-17 1 App. A, § 5 007-17 11-20-17 1 App. A, § 6 008-17 11-20-17 1, 2 App. A, § 5 009-17 11-20-17 1 54-26 2 54-27(a) 3 54-29(c) 4 54-32(a) 010-17 12-18-17 1, 2 18-1556, 18-1557 011-17 12-18-17 1 App. A, § 5 012-17  1-16-18 1 2-222       Rpld 2-223       Rnbd 2-224       as 2-223       Rpld 2-225       Rnbd 2-226, 2-227       as 2-224, 2-225 014-17  2- 5-18 1-3 App. B, § 5.17 001-18  2- 5-18 1 74-41 2 74-60 007-18  8- 6-18 1 74-26 2 74-29 3 74-32 008-18  8- 6-18 1       Rpld 70-190-70-196 009-18  7-16-18 1, 2 App. A, § 5 3-6 App. A, § 6 014-18 11- 5-18 1       Rpld 46-27 2 46-30(a) 3 46-32 4 47-2 5       Rpld 66-146-66-149 002-19  2-19-19 1 18-191(a) 2 18-192(3) 3 18-193 004-19  4-15-19 1-11 App. A, § 5 12 App. A, § 19 005-19  4-15-19 1-3 App. A, § 6 4 App. A, § 5  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Delaware Code. 
Del. C. 
Title Section  Section 
this Code 1 101 1-2 301 et seq. 1-2 302(15), 302(16) 1-2 501 1-4 4 512(c) App. A, § 5 512(e) App. A, § 5 512C App. A, § 5 512E(c)(5) App. A, § 5 525 App. A, § 5 904(f) 6-1 7 1701 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. II 1701(a) Ch. 14, Art. II 4701 et seq. Ch. 46 6053 54-28 7101 et seq. Ch. 42, Art. II, Div. 4 7124 Ch. 42, Art. II, Div. 4 9 4401 et seq. Ch. 18 4403 Ch. 18 4413 Ch. 18 8701 et seq. Char., § 8 8705(d) Char., § 8 9106 1-4 10 4002, 4003 2-76 4010(a) 2-77 4013(c) 2-77 ch. 61 18-605 11 462-471 42-196 1107 42-146 1112(b)(4) 42-123 1257 42-109 1321 Ch. 42, Art. III, Div. 2 1441 42-197 1441A 42-197 15 4942 26-3 5501 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. III 16 Ch. 49A App. A, § 5 1701 et seq. Ch. 54 17 171-180 1-2 20 3108 Ch. 22 Pt. II, Ch. 31 22-33 22-34 21 2134 66-104 2135 66-104 4169b 66-66 4183 66-104 4190-4196 66-133 21135 66-104 22 ch. 3 Char., § 2 301 et seq. App. A App. A, § 1 App. A, §§ 10, 11 321 et seq. App. B, § 5 802 Ch. 42 825 Char., § 21 836 Char., § 21 1004 62-1 62-58 ch. 13 App. A, § 5 23 46-58(d) 24 1433 70-159 1806 18-46 25 ch. 29 58-27 ch. 39 42-49 66-185, 66-186 2901(a)(1) 74-29 26 202 Ch. 70 363(4) 70-178 29 ch. 69, subch. II Char., § 20 ch. 100 2-223 2-225 10002 2-222 30 ch. 54 Char., § 2 2113 Ch. 10, Art. II 5401 et seq. 62-26 5401(8) 62-28 5401(8)(b), (c) 62-28 62-30 5405-5408 62-30 5410 
5412 
5414, 5415 62-30 
62-30 
62-30 31 18-501 ch. 45 18-501-18-504 18-701, 18-703 4106 18-110 4501 18-502 4502 18-502, 18-701 4503 18-503 4504 18-502  
