CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF APOPKA, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Published in 2018 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
 
> 


CITY OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Bryan Nelson 
Mayor 
____________ 
Douglas Bankson 
Kyle Becker 
Alexander Smith 
Alice Nolan 
City Council 
____________ 
Edward Bass 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Clifford Shepard 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Linda F. Goff, CMC 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a publication of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Apopka, 
Florida. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1993 Code, as supplemented through 
February 17, 2016, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section 
is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note 
indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use 
of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 
1993 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The Code is divided into Part II Code of Ordinances and Part III Land Development Code and has 
been further divided into chapters, articles, etc., and the various sections within each chapter have been 
catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing 
the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in Part II of the Code is the same system used in 
many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. 
The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the 
position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the 
first section of chapter 6 is numbered 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, 
and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for 
amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between 
sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles 
and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end 
of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article 
embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New 
chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the 
alphabetical arrangement of chapters in Part II is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon 
are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon 
represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the 
left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter 
immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of 
codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding 
prefixes: 
CHARTER 
CHT:1 
CODE 
CD1:1 
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE 
LDC100:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
CHTCT:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 
CCT:1 
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE COMPARATIVE 
TABLES 
LDCCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 
CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 
CDi:1 
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE INDEX 
LDCi:1 
 
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed 
under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and 
still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous 
cross-references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the 
particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of 
the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory 
legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will 
be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new 
pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. 
As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the 
amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher 
that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, 
that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Alyce A. Whitson, Senior Code Attorney, and 
Rebecca D. Evans, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully 
given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance 
throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Linda F. Goff, CMC, City Clerk, and the other members of the city 
staff for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped 
that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the 
active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day 
administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City 
of Apopka, Florida. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; 
section catchlines; pre-chapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross-references; state law references; 
numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not 
be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code 
Corporation and the City of Apopka, Florida. 
©?Copyrighted material.  
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Apopka, Florida. 2018. 


PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter of the City of Apopka, Florida, as adopted by Ordinance 
Number 781 on July 7, 1993, and by referendum on September 14, 1993. Amendments to the Charter 
are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note 
indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and 
punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of 
headings, catchlines, citations to state statutes and expression of numbers in text has been used. 
Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule powers, F.S. ch. 166. 


ARTICLE I. - CORPORATE EXISTENCE, FORM OF GOVERNMENT, BOUNDARY, AND POWER 


Sec. 1.01. - Corporate name, corporate existence, form of government, and Charter. 
    The municipality hereby established shall be known as the City of Apopka, Florida (the city). 


Sec. 1.02. - Corporate boundary. 
    The corporate limits of the city shall consist of the boundaries of the city as established by [the] 
preceding Charter and Laws of Fla., ch. 73-402, or as enlarged or contracted pursuant to law, including, 
but not limited to, procedures to be followed in the annexation or contraction of property as set forth in 
F.S. ch. 171, as it now exists or as it may be renumbered or amended. 
    All ordinances of annexation of the city heretofore adopted and as may be adopted prior to the 
effective date of this Charter are hereby incorporated herein, and the lands described in such ordinances, 
together with the boundaries of the city as described in Laws of Fla., ch. 73-402, are hereby declared to 
be the corporate limits of the city. 
State Law reference— Boundaries, F.S. § 171.011 et seq.; annexation or contraction, F.S. § 
171.011 et seq. 


Sec. 1.03. - General powers of city. 
    The city shall have all governmental, corporate, and proprietary powers possible for a city to have 
under the constitution and laws of the State of Florida as though they were specifically enumerated in this 
Charter to enable it to conduct municipal government, perform municipal functions and render municipal 
services, and the city may exercise any power for municipal purposes except as expressly prohibited by 
law or this Charter. 
State Law reference— Home rule powers, F.S. ch. 166. 


Sec. 1.04. - Construction. 
    The powers of the city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city, limited only by the constitution 
and general and special laws of the State of Florida and specific limitations in this Charter. 


ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Code of ethics, F.S. § 112.311 et seq.; municipal home rule powers, F.S. § 
166.021; open meetings, F.S. § 286.011. 


Sec. 2.01. - Composition of city council. 
    A mayor and four city commissioners shall constitute the city council of the city (the city council). 


Sec. 2.02. - Election and terms. 
(a) ?The regular election of the mayor and city commissioners shall be held in the manner now provided 
by laws and ordinances for holding municipal elections or as may be hereafter provided for by law or 
ordinance for a term of four years. All elections shall be for a four-year term of office, except as 
provided in section 2.02(c) of this Charter. 
(b) ?The city council seats are hereby designated as seats one, two, three and four. The present 
members of the city council elected to serve on the city council shall serve as the first city council 
until expiration of their current terms. 
(c) ?A mayor and two city councilmembers shall be elected to serve for four years from the date of the 
expiration of the term of office of the present mayor and two city councilmembers holding seats 
designated as one and two, and said election every four years thereafter shall be held as is now or 
may be hereafter provided by law or ordinance; thus maintaining a five-member city council; two city 
councilmembers being elected at one time and a mayor and two city councilmembers at another 
time. 
    Councilmembers holding seats designated herein as seats three and four, whose terms expire 
on December 31, 1993, will face election in 1993 for one three-year term. Thereafter, the mayor and 
city commissioners will face election for four-year terms. 
    When there is only one candidate qualified for an available seat, the name of the candidate 
shall not be printed on the election ballot, and such candidate shall be declared elected to the seat. 
State Law reference— Florida Election Code, F.S. chs. 97—106. 


Sec. 2.03. - Compensation; expenses of council. 
    The mayor and all members of the city council shall receive a salary as now provided by law and 
ordinance or as hereafter provided by the city council by law or ordinance. No change in the 
compensation ordinance for a city commissioner shall become effective until the duties of 
commencement of the terms of commissioners elected at the next regular election, provided that such 
election follows the adoption of such law or ordinance by at least six months. The mayor and each city 
commissioner shall be reimbursed from the city treasury to cover the expenditures naturally and 
necessarily incurred in the performance of their duties of office and said reimbursement procedure shall 
be established by ordinance and/or resolution. 
    The mayor shall receive the salary established for the mayor in the annual budget. 


Sec. 2.04. - Mayor. 
    The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city and shall be responsible to the electorate for 
the administration of all city affairs placed in his/her charge by or under this Charter. The mayor shall: 
(a) ?Appoint, and, when the mayor deems it necessary for the good of the city, suspend or 
terminate all city employees and appointive administrative officers provided for by or under this 
Charter. Department heads shall be appointed by the mayor and ratified by the city council. The 
mayor may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to the mayor's direction and 
supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, 
office, or agency. 
(b) ?Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the city, 
except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law. 
(c) ?Chair and be a voting member of the city council. 
(d) ?See that all laws, provisions of this Charter and acts of the city council subject to enforcement 
by the mayor or by officers subject to the direction and supervision of the mayor are faithfully 
executed. 
(e) ?Prepare, or have prepared, and submit the annual budget, budget message and capital 
program to the city council as provided by law or ordinance. 
(f) ?The vice-mayor will be the senior commissioner and shall serve as chair of city council 
meetings in the absence of the mayor. In the event the senior commissioner declines the vice-
mayor position, the city council will elect the vice-mayor from among the remaining members of 
the city council. 


Sec. 2.05. - General powers of city council. 
    All powers of the city shall be vested in the city council except those powers specifically reserved by 
this Charter to the electors of the city. 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule powers, F.S. ch. 166. 


Sec. 2.06. - Council-employee relationship. 
    No city commissioner shall in any manner dictate the appointment or removal of any city employee, 
nor shall a city commissioner give orders to any employee other than orders by action of the city council 
to the city clerk and/or city attorney. Nothing herein shall be construed to deny a city commissioner 
access to records or information maintained by city employees. 


Sec. 2.07. - Vacancies; filling of vacancies. 
(a) ?Vacancies. The offices of mayor and city commissioner shall become vacant in accordance with 
general law, or by absence from four consecutive regular city council meetings without being 
excused by the city council prior to the fourth consecutive absence. 
(b) ?Filling of vacancies. If any vacancy occurs on the city council, except for extraordinary vacancies, 
and the unexpired term is less than one year, the remaining members of the said city council shall 
appoint a person to fill such vacancy on or before the second regular meeting of the city council 
following the office becoming vacant. If the unexpired term exceeds one year, the remaining 
members shall call an election to be held within 60 days, or as soon thereafter to comply with state 
election laws, to fill such vacancy. The person so elected shall hold office for the unexpired term. 
(c) ?Extraordinary vacancies. In the event that a member of the city council is removed temporarily from 
office, the remaining members of the city council shall appoint an interim city councilmember to serve 
until the councilmember being replaced returns to office or until the next city general election, 
whichever first occurs. 
State Law reference— Filling of vacancies in candidacy, F.S. § 166.031(6). 


Sec. 2.08. - City council meetings. 
(a) ?Time and place. The city council shall meet regularly at such times and places as the city council 
may prescribe by rule. Special meetings may be held at the call of the mayor, or, in the mayor's 
absence, at the call of the vice-mayor, or at the request of a majority of the city council; and, 
whenever practicable, [the city council] shall provide for not less than 12 hours' notice to the public. 
(b) ?Quorum. A majority of the city council shall constitute a quorum. No action of the city council shall 
be valid unless adopted by the affirmative vote of a majority of the city council present and voting. 
(c) ?Rules. The city council shall determine its own rules and order of business. 
State Law reference— Open meetings law, F.S. § 286.011. 


ARTICLE III. - CLERK AND CITY ATTORNEY AND CITY ADMINISTRATOR 


Sec. 3.01. - Appointment and duties of clerk and city attorney. 
    The city clerk and city attorney shall be appointed by the mayor and ratified by the city council. The 
city clerk and city attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 2(B), 10-16-2013; Ord. No. 2337, § 2(B), 11-6-2013) 


Sec. 3.02. - Appointment and duties of city administrator. 
    The city administrator shall be appointed by the mayor and be responsible for coordinating and 
integrating the administrative and executive functions of the city as directed by the mayor and consistent 
with the policy approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 2(C), 10-16-2013; Ord. No. 2337, § 2(C), 11-6-2013) 
Editor's note— Ordinance Number 2337, § 2(A), adopted November 6, 2013, amended the title 
of Article III to read as herein set out. Formerly, said Article III was entitled "Clerk and City 
Attorney." 


ARTICLE IV. - ELECTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Florida Election Code, F.S. chs. 97—106. 


Sec. 4.01. - Electors. 
    Any person who is a resident of the city, who has qualified as an elector of the State of Florida, and 
who registers in the city in the manner prescribed by law shall be an elector of the city. 
State Law reference— Qualifications and registration of electors, F.S. ch. 97; municipal 
electors, F.S. § 166.032. 


Sec. 4.02. - Nonpartisan elections. 
    All elections for the offices of mayor and city commissioner shall be conducted on a nonpartisan 
basis without any designation of political party affiliation. 


Sec. 4.03. - Qualifying. 
    Candidates for the offices of mayor and city commissioner shall qualify by filing a written notice of 
candidacy with the city clerk at such time and in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance. Each 
member of the city council, which includes the mayor, shall be a resident of the City of Apopka, Florida, 
for a period of one year next preceding his or her election to office and shall be a registered voter 
pursuant to Florida law. 


Sec. 4.04. - Schedule and notice of elections. 
    Elections within the city shall be held on the first Tuesday in December in those years when required 
for the election of a city official, or as amended by ordinance or law at least six months prior to the city 
general election. 


Sec. 4.05. - Recall. 
    Any member of the city council may be removed from office by the electors of the city following the 
procedures for recall established by general law and ordinances of the city. 
State Law reference— Recall of municipal officials, F.S. § 100.361. 


ARTICLE V. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 


Sec. 5.01. - Charter amendments. 
    This Charter may be amended pursuant to the home rule powers in the Municipal Home Rule 
Powers Act, F.S. ch. 166, or its successor, and/or pursuant to the home rule powers granted under the 
Constitution of the State of Florida. 
State Law reference— Charter amendments, F.S. § 166.031. 


Sec. 5.02. - Oath of officers. 
    After election or appointment, and before taking office, the mayor and each commissioner of the city 
shall swear or affirm: 
"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support, protect and defend the Constitution and 
Government of the United States and of the State of Florida; that I am duly qualified to hold office 
under the constitution of the state and under the Charter of the City of Apopka; and I will well and 
faithfully perform the duties of (title of office) on which I am now about to enter, so help me God." 
State Law reference— Oath, F.S. § 876.05. 


Sec. 5.03. - Budget adoption. 
    The city council shall adopt an annual budget for the city by ordinance or resolution before October 1 
of each year in accordance with Florida law. An ordinance or resolution adopting an annual budget shall 
constitute appropriations of the amounts specified as expenditures. 
State Law reference— Adoption of budget, F.S. § 200.065. 


Sec. 5.04. - Annual audit. 
    The city shall have an annual audit in accordance with Florida law. 
State Law reference— Annual audit required, F.S. §§ 166.241, 218.32. 


Sec. 5.05. - Initiative, generally. 
(a) ?Any proposed ordinance may be submitted to the city council by a petition signed by 25 percent of 
the total number of votes cast at the last preceding general election of the city. Procedure and format 
for petitions will be as established by general law or ordinances of the city. 
(b) ?Prior to submission to city council, any such proposed ordinance will be reviewed by the city 
attorney as to form and compliance with state law and the constitution. 
(c) ?Within 60 days of submission of the petition to city council, or as soon thereafter to comply with state 
law, the city council may adopt the ordinance or shall call a special election to be held within 60 
days, or as soon thereafter to comply with state law, at which the adoption or rejection of such 
ordinance shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the city. 
(d) ?If a majority of the qualified voters voting on the proposed ordinance shall vote in favor thereof, the 
ordinance shall thereupon become a valid ordinance in the city. 
(e) ?Any number of proposed ordinances may be voted upon at the same election according to the 
provisions of this section. 


ARTICLE VI. - TRANSITION SCHEDULE 


Sec. 6.01. - Repeal of former charter provisions. 
    All Charter provisions in effect prior to the effective date of this Charter are repealed except those 
provisions which established the municipal corporation known as the City of Apopka, Laws of Fla., ch. 67-
1080, and the city boundary, Laws of Fla., ch. 73-402. 


Sec. 6.02. - Ordinances preserved. 
    All ordinances in force on the effective date of this Charter, to the extent not inconsistent with it, shall 
remain in force until repealed or amended. 


Sec. 6.03. - City official continuation in office. 
    All elected city officials shall retain their respective positions until expiration of their current terms of 
office. 


Sec. 6.04. - Pending matters. 
    No rights, claims, actions, contracts, taxes, or legal or administrative proceedings existing on the 
effective date of this Charter and involving the city shall be affected by the adoption of this Charter as 
allowed by law. 


Sec. 6.05. - Provision for referendum; form of ballots. 
    The city council shall submit to a referendum election the question as to the adoption of this 
amended Charter. Such election shall be held at the next regularly scheduled election of the city or at a 
special election to be held within 90 days of the passage of the ordinance amending this Charter by the 
city council and shall be held in conformity with the laws and ordinances in force relating to elections in 
the city. The ballot to be used in the referendum election shall be substantially in the following form: 
    CITY CHARTER AMENDMENT: 
    PROPOSING A REVISED AND UPDATED  
??CITY CHARTER 
    Should the Apopka City Charter be amended, as proposed in Ordinance Number 781, 
amending the entire city Charter except for boundaries, providing for corporate existence, form of 
government, boundary, and power; providing for a mayor-council form of government; providing 
duties of mayor as chief executive officer; updating and modernizing the Charter; providing four-year 
terms for mayor and commissioners; providing for change in general provisions; and providing for [a] 
transition schedule, effective date and severability? 
    Yes for Approval 
    No for Rejection 


Sec. 6.06. - Effective date. 
    Provided a majority of the registered voters of the city voting in the referendum election vote "For 
Adoption," then this amended Charter shall immediately be filed with the Department of State pursuant to 
Florida law, and the provisions hereof shall become operative and be in full force and effect on October 1, 
1993. 


Sec. 6.07. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this Charter is held invalid, the other provisions of the Charter shall not be affected 
thereby. If the application of the Charter or any of its provisions to any person or circumstances is held 
invalid, the application of the Charter and its provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be 
affected thereby. 


CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
    The Charter of the City of Apopka, Florida, was adopted by Ordinance Number 781 on July 7, 1993, 
and by referendum on September 14, 1993. This table shows the location of amendments to the Charter. 
Ord
ina
nce  
Nu
mb
er 
Ado
pte
d  
Dat
e 
Ref
ere
ndu
m  
Dat
e 
Sec
tion 
Sec
tion  
this 
Cha
rter 
781 
7-7-
199
3 
9-
14-
199
3 
— 
Cha
r. 
(no
te) 
233
6 
10-
16-
201
3 

2(B
) 
3.0
1 



2(C
) 
3.0
2 
233
7 
11-
6-
201
3 

2(A
) 
Art. 
III 



2(B
) 
3.0
1 



2(C
) 
3.0
2 
 


Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 


Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated 
the "Code of Ordinances, City of Apopka, Florida," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1983, § 1-1; Code 1993, § 1-1) 


Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, 
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Apopka as printed in part I of this 
volume. 
    City. The term "city" means the City of Apopka, Florida, and shall extend to and include its several 
officers, agents and employees. 
    City council and council. The terms "city council" and "council" mean the city council of the City of 
Apopka, Florida. 
    Code. The term "Code" refers to the Code of Ordinances, City of Apopka, Florida, as established 
and designated in section 1-1. 
    Commissioner. The term "commissioner" means a member of the city council other than the mayor. 
    Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by ordinance, the day of 
the act, event or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The 
last day of the period so computed shall be included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, in 
which event, the period shall run until the end of the next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal 
holiday. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, 
Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
    County. The term "county" means the County of Orange in the State of Florida. 
    F.S. The abbreviation "F.S." means the official Florida Statutes and any amendments adopted by the 
state legislature. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to 
firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
    Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, firms, 
associations, corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, 
agent or employee. 
    May. The term "may" is permissive and not mandatory. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Must. The term "must" is always mandatory and not merely permissive. 
    Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common 
and approved usage of the language; however, technical words and phrases and such others as may 
have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to 
such meaning. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons 
and things as well as to one person and thing. 
    Oath, swear, sworn, affirm, affirmed. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in 
all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the words 
"swear" and "sworn" shall include the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Officers. The title of any office or officer shall be used as though the words "of the City of Apopka" 
were added. Whenever a provision appears authorizing or requiring a particular officer or employee of the 
city to do some act, it shall be construed to authorize the officer or employee to delegate, designate and 
authorize subordinates to do the act, unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. 
    Or; and. The word "or" may be read as "and," and the word "and" may be read as "or," if the sense 
requires it. 
    Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant 
in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such 
building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" includes individual natural persons, partnerships, joint adventures, 
societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts or corporations; and any officers, agents, employees or 
factors or any kind of personal representatives of any thereof, in any capacity, acting either for himself or 
for any other person, under either personal appointment or pursuant to law. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real 
property. 
    Public place. The term "public place" means the city hall, the post office or any park, cemetery, 
schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto, and all waterways. 
    Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Shall. The term "shall" is always mandatory and not merely permissive. 
    State. The term "state" means the State of Florida. 
    Street. The term "street" includes streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all 
other public highways in the city. 
    Tenant, occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person 
holding a written or oral lease, or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone 
or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Written and in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" include any representation of words, letters 
or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1983, § 1-2; Code 1993, § 1-2) 
State Law reference— Construction of Florida Statutes, F.S. § 1.01 et seq. 


Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere 
catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such 
sections, or any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any 
of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1983, § 1-4(a); Code 1993, § 1-3) 


Sec. 1-4. - References to chapters or sections. 
    All references in this Code to chapters or sections are to the chapters and sections of this Code, 
unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1983, § 1-4(b); Code 1993, § 1-4) 


Sec. 1-5. - Provisions considered continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this and the following chapters and sections, so far as they are the same 
as those of the Apopka Municipal Code, adopted by Ordinance Number 264, adopted March 16, 1983, or 
of ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of this Code, shall be considered as a continuation 
thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1983, § 1-3; Code 1993, § 1-5) 


Sec. 1-6. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance: 
(1) ?Adopting the budget or making appropriations; 
(2) ?Authorizing or otherwise relating to any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(3) ?Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city; 
(4) ?Authorizing the issuance of bonds or any evidence of indebtedness; 
(5) ?Granting a franchise or right, or any ordinance relating to cable television; 
(6) ?Contracting, extending or describing the boundaries of the city; 
(7) ?Imposing taxes which have not been codified in this Code; 
(8) ?Relating to personnel or the salaries of city employees; 
(9) ?Providing for local improvements or levying special assessments for local improvements; 
(10) ?Regulating subdivisions; 
(11) ?Accepting or dedicating any plat or subdivision; 
(12) ?Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening or 
establishing grades for any street, alley or sidewalk; 
(13) ?Regarding zoning or land use regulations; 
(14) ?Which is temporary although general in effect; 
(15) ?Relating to a traffic schedule, or any ordinance regulating stopping, standing or parking; 
(16) ?Dealing with personnel matters or pension, retirement or social security benefits for officers 
and employees; 
(17) ?Relating to any urban service areas created pursuant to F.S. ch. 180; 
(18) ?Which is special although permanent in effect; or 
(19) ?Whose purpose has been accomplished; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as 
if set out in this Code. 
(Code 1983, §§ 1-5, 2-16; Code 1993, § 1-6) 


Sec. 1-7. - Acts, penalties and rights not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or in the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed 
or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or occurring before the 
effective date of this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 1-6; Code 1993, § 1-7) 


Sec. 1-8. - Effect of repeal or amendment of ordinances. 
(a) ?The repeal or amendment of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the 
time the ordinance repealed or amended took effect, or the obligation of any contract entered into 
under the prior ordinance. 
(b) ?The repeal or amendment of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred 
before the repeal or amendment took effect, or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the 
time of the repeal or amendment, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the 
repealed or amended ordinance. 
(Code 1983, § 1-7; Code 1993, § 1-8) 


Sec. 1-9. - History notes. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any 
legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. 
(Code 1993, § 1-9) 


Sec. 1-10. - References and editor's notes. 
    References and editor's notes following certain sections of this Code are inserted as an aid and 
guide to the reader and are not controlling or meant to have any legal effect. 
(Code 1993, § 1-10) 


Sec. 1-11. - Amendments to Code. 
(a) ?Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the 
intention of the city council to make the addition or amendment a part of this Code, shall be deemed 
to be incorporated in this Code, so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to 
include such additions and amendments. 
(b) ?All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code 
may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in 
the Code. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, article, division, section or subsection, 
or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from 
reprinted pages. 
(c) ?Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by 
specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following language: "That 
section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Apopka, Florida, is hereby amended to read as 
follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d) ?If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be 
used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Apopka, Florida, is hereby amended by adding a section 
to be numbered _____, which section reads as follows:…." The new section may then be set out in 
full as desired. 
(e) ?All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically 
repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1983, § 1-9; Code 1993, § 1-11) 


Sec. 1-12. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a) ?By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever 
authorized or directed by the city clerk. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive 
permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and 
referendum during the period covered by the supplement, and all changes made thereby in the 
Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter and Land Development Code during the 
period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and 
will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new 
pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the 
date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b) ?In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be 
excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c) ?When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person, agency or 
organization authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in 
ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to 
embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1) ?Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2) ?Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the 
Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3) ?Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, 
where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision 
numbers. 
(4) ?Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this 
article," "this division" or "this section," as the case may be, or to "sections _____ through 
_____." The inserted section numbers will indicate the sections of the Code which embody the 
substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code. 
(5) ?Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance 
sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the 
meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the 
Code. 
(Code 1993, § 1-12) 


Sec. 1-13. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, 
clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or 
section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of 
competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, 
sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 1-8; Code 1993, § 1-13) 


Sec. 1-14. - General penalty; continuing violations; nuisances. 
(a) ?Whenever in this Code any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or 
whenever in this Code the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be 
unlawful or an offense, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such 
provision of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment for a term 
not exceeding 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. Each 
day any violation of any provision of this Code shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b) ?In addition to the penalties provided in subsection (a) of this section, any condition caused or 
permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed a public 
nuisance, and may be abated by the city as provided by law, and each day that such condition 
continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Code 1983, § 1-10; Code 1993, § 1-14) 
State Law reference— Penalty for violation of city ordinances, F.S. § 162.221; code 
enforcement, F.S. § 162.01 et seq.; municipal ordinance violations not a state law misdemeanor, 
F.S. § 775.08. 


Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Public Records Act, F.S. ch. 119; Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. ch. 166; 
open meetings requirements, F.S. ch. 286. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 2-1—2-18. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— City council, § 2.01 et seq. 
State Law reference— Code of ethics, F.S. § 112.311 et seq.; Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. 
ch. 166; open meetings law, F.S. § 286.011 et seq. 


Sec. 2-19. - Emergency powers of mayor. 
    The mayor, or in his absence the acting mayor, is hereby designated as the city official who shall be 
empowered to declare that a state of emergency exists within the city and to exercise the emergency 
powers conferred in F.S. §§ 870.041 through 870.047. 
(Code 1983, § 2-1; Code 1993, § 2-36) 
State Law reference— Designation of local official to exercise emergency powers, F.S. § 
870.042. 


Sec. 2-20. - Office of mayor to be full-time; salary of mayor. 
    The office of mayor of the city shall be a full-time job, and the mayor shall pursue no other 
occupation in such a manner while serving as mayor as to interfere with his official duties and obligations. 
The mayor shall receive the salary established in the annual budget, which shall be paid through the 
general employees' payroll. 
(Code 1983, § 2-17; Code 1993, § 2-37) 
Charter reference— Mayor, § 2.04. 


Sec. 2-21. - Salary of commissioners. 
    All commissioners shall receive the salary established for them in the annual budget. Such salaries 
shall be paid monthly. 
(Code 1983, § 2-18; Code 1993, § 2-38) 
Charter reference— City council powers, etc., §§ 2.05 through 2.08. 


Sec. 2-22. - Additional compensation for vice-mayor. 
    The senior commissioner is hereby authorized an extra $25.00 per month due to additional 
administrative duties required of this commissioner. 
(Code 1983, § 2-20; Code 1993, § 2-39) 
Charter reference— The senior commissioner as the vice-mayor, § 2.04(f). 


Sec. 2-23. - Determination of senior commissioner. 
    The senior commissioner is hereby defined to be the commissioner with the largest number of years 
of service on the council. If there should be two commissioners with the same number of years, the city 
council, by a simple majority vote, shall select the senior commissioner from these two. 
(Code 1983, § 2-20; Code 1993, § 2-39) 
Charter reference— The senior commissioner as the vice-mayor, § 2.04(f). 


Secs. 2-24—2-49. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— City clerk, § 3.01; city attorney § 3.01; city administrator § 3.02. 
State Law reference— Code of ethics, F.S. § 112.311 et seq.; Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. 
ch. 166; open meetings law, F.S. § 286.011 et seq. 


Sec. 2-50. - Personnel policy adopted. 
    There is hereby adopted by reference the personnel policy adopted by Resolution Number 2008-01 
on January 2, 2008, as amended from time to time by resolution adopted by the city council. 
(Code 1983, § 2-19; Code 1993, § 2-66) 


Sec. 2-51. - Administrative travel expense policy. 
(a) ?Adopted. The city council hereby adopts an administrative travel expense policy to govern payment 
for authorized travel expenses incurred by city officials, employees, and authorized persons as set 
forth in the city's administrative travel expense policy (see Administrative Policy 107.2). 
(b) ?Amendment. The administrative travel expense policy may be amended from time to time by 
resolution. 
(c) ?Supplemental effect. The provisions of this section are supplemental to any and all other laws and 
ordinances relating to the subject matter of this section. 
(Code 1993, § 2-67; Ord. No. 890, §§ 1—3, 10-18-1995) 
State Law reference— Travel expenses and per diem, F.S. § 112.061. 


Secs. 2-52—2-75. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal borrowing, F.S. § 166.101 et seq.; finance and taxation, F.S. § 166.201 
et seq.; financial matters, F.S. ch. 218. 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 2-76. - Investment/portfolio policy. 
(a) ?Investing. 
(1) ?When a sufficient amount of money has accumulated in the accounts or funds of the city, or 
when the city has accumulated monies by reason of the sale of its own securities, which, in 
either case, in the judgment of the finance director, warrants, consistent with the guidelines 
approved by the city council, purchase of investment securities, the finance director may then 
purchase investment securities at prevailing market rates on behalf of and in the name of the 
city in an appropriate amount thereof as set forth in the city's investment/portfolio policy. 
(2) ?The finance director, consistent with guidelines approved by the city council, is authorized to 
sell such obligations or securities purchased pursuant to this section at the prevailing market 
price and to place the proceeds of such sale into the proper accounts or funds of the city. 
(3) ?The finance director has developed and hereby submits to the city council for approval an 
investment/portfolio policy addressing the issues of investment objectives, maturity, risk and 
diversification, instruments used and other items. 
(4) ?The finance director shall develop and maintain lists of authorized institutions, issuers and 
dealers through whom investments can be carried out. All securities purchased shall be only 
those securities of authorized issuers of the various security types. Securities shall be 
purchased only from financial institutions which provide the services of a securities dealer or 
through primary securities dealers as designated by the Federal Reserve Bank. Certificates of 
deposit shall be purchased only from financial institutions which qualify as public depositories 
under Florida law and have a branch office within the city limits. 
(b) ?Compliance with state law. The city shall comply with all requirements of law, including, without 
limitation, F.S. ch. 280, Florida Security for Public Deposits Act. 
(c) ?Amendment of policy. The city investment/portfolio policy may be amended by resolution. 
(d) ?Bond issues. Nothing herein contained shall be interpreted or construed to abrogate any specific 
provision contained in any bond resolution or ordinance of the city relating to the investment of bond 
proceeds available in specific funds or accounts. 
(e) ?Supplement effect. The provisions of this section are supplemental to any and all other laws and 
ordinances relating to the subject matter of this section. 
(f) ?Liberal construction. Inasmuch as the provisions of this section are for the public welfare, this section 
shall be liberally construed to achieve its purposes and intent. 
(Code 1993, § 2-91; Ord. No. 873, §§ 1—7, 2-15-1995) 
State Law reference— Investment of surplus funds, F.S. § 218.40 et seq. 


Secs. 2-77—2-95. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - FEES 


Sec. 2-96. - Land development fees. 
(a) ?The fees listed in this section shall be paid to the city for the following services: 
(1) ?Application for annexation of property into the city limits (land use and zoning included): ..... 
$700.00 
(2) ?If city initiates: No charge. 
(3) ?Application for annexation, planned unit development: ..... ?850.00 
(4) ?Application for annexation, single lot owner: ..... ?300.00 
(5) ?Application for zoning change (except planned unit development): ..... ?500.00 
(6) ?Application for planned unit development zoning change: ..... ?750.00 
(7) ?Application for comprehensive plan change (land use): ..... ?700.00 
(8) ?Amendment to planned unit development: ..... ?400.00 
(9) ?Developer's agreement: ..... ?250.00 
(10) ?Amendment of conditions of approval of developer's agreement: ..... ?150.00 
(11) ?Planning commission application for special exception: ..... ?250.00 
(12) ?Zoning board of appeals application for variance: 
a. ?Single-family residential lot: ..... ?150.00 
b. ?All others: ..... ?300.00 
(13) ?Application for appeal to city council: ..... ?150.00 
(14) ?Application for abandonment (plat, easement, public right-of-way, street, alley, etc.): ..... ?
200.00 
(15) ?Development plans: 
a. ?Concept plan: None. 
b. ?Preliminary development plan: ..... ?500.00 
c. ?Final development plan and final plat or re-plat: $400.00; Plus, per lot: $15.00. 
d. ?Revision to approved development plan: ..... $100.00 
e. ?Resubmittal of development plans: One-half original fee per submittal after three 
submittals. 
f. ?Development plan, unplatted: 
1. ?Residential: ..... ?200.00 
2. ?Plus, per unit: ..... ??15.00 
g. ?Minor development plan (nonresidential less than 10,000 square feet): ..... ?250.00 
h. ?Major development plan (nonresidential 10,000 square feet or more): ..... ?400.00 
i. ?Redevelopment plan: 
1. ?Minor redevelopment plan (nonresidential less than 10,000 square feet): ..... ?100.00 
2. ?Major redevelopment plan (nonresidential 10,000 square feet or more): ..... ?200.00 
j. ?Resubmittal of redevelopment plans: One-half original fee per submittal after three 
submittals. 
(16) ?City engineer review of utility plans for county subdivision or site plans: 
a. ?Residential, per unit: ..... $?10.00 
b. ?Commercial, per unit: ..... ?100.00 
(17) ?City engineer review and consultation on specific projects, other than subdivision and site 
plan review, will be charged to the developer on an hourly basis after the first hour. Costs 
incurred will be calculated utilizing personnel costs times a multiplier of 2.2 (contact city 
engineer). 
(18) ?Engineering inspection fees: 
a. ?Engineering inspection fees will be based on the following percentage of the construction 
costs of public improvements for each subdivision project: 
1. ?$0.00 to $300,000.00: One percent. 
2. ?$300,001.00 and over: 0.8 percent. 
b. ?The fee for any and all other projects, including commercial, shall be one percent of 
construction costs of the work inspected. 
c. ?Any required oversizing amounts will be subtracted before the calculation pursuant to this 
subsection is made. 
(19) ?Residential driveway inspection: ..... $?20.00 
(20) ?Residential sidewalk inspection: ..... ??25.00 
(21) ?Right-of-way permit fee: A permit fee in the amount of $100.00 shall accompany the permit 
application. A check made payable to the city shall be the means by which the fee is paid. 
(22) ?Arbor permit: 
a. ?Specimen or historic tree removal, per tree: ..... $??5.00 
b. ?Protected tree removal other than specimen or historic tree, per tree: ..... ???0.00 
c. ?Specimen or historic tree trimming, per tree: ..... ???1.00 
d. ?Land clearing: 
1. ?Single-family residence: ..... ???5.00 
2. ?All other land clearing: ..... ???20.00 
Plus $5.00 per acre, or fraction thereof, up to a maximum of $250.00. 
e. ?Shoreline clearing: $15.00 per 500 linear feet, or increment thereof, measured at the 
normal water height, up to a maximum of $250.00. 
(23) ?Concurrency management fees: 
a. ?Concurrency verification letter (certification of de minimis statutes): ..... $?25.00 
b. ?Concurrency encumbrance letter: ..... ?250.00 
c. ?Capacity reservation certificate: Percentage of impact fee. 
d. ?Concurrency resolution fee: ..... $250.00 
e. ?Capacity waiting list application fee: ..... ?150.00 
f. ?Appeal of concurrency management opinion (CMO) determination: ..... ?150.00 
(24) ?Vested rights determination fee: $50.00; Plus attorney fees. 
(25) ?Excavation permit fee: ..... $?10.00 
(26) ?Garage sale permit fee: ..... ???1.00 
(b) ?The following shall apply with respect to the fees imposed by this section: 
(1) ?Costs incurred in addition to established fees for advertising, city attorney, postage or 
consultant expenses must be paid to the city. 
(2) ?Cancellation of a public hearing by the applicant will necessitate the applicant paying all re-
advertising costs. 
(3) ?Plans which require resubmittal and which are not submitted within 60 days of the review date 
will be considered expired. 
(4) ?There will be no refund of any fees once the application has been submitted to the city for 
processing. 
(Code 1983, § 2-3(a); Code 1993, § 2-111) 


Sec. 2-97. - Publication fees. 
    The fees listed in this section shall be paid to the city for the following documents: 
(1) ?Code of Ordinances, City of Apopka: $150.00. 
(2) ?Comprehensive plan: $125.00. 
(3) ?Land development code: $50.00. 
(4) ?Construction design standards manual: $10.00. 
(5) ?Document retention fee, per page: $2.00. 
(6) ?Code supplements: $30.00. 
(7) ?Land development code supplements: $20.00. 
(Code 1983, § 2-3(b); Code 1993, § 2-112) 


Sec. 2-98. - Fees for copies of documents. 
    Fees for copies of documents not provided for elsewhere in this article shall be paid to the city as 
follows: 
(1) ?Fees for copies of easily accessible documents are as follows: 
a. ?One-sided copies not more than 14 inches by 8½ inches in size (per one-sided copy): ..... $?
0.15 
b. ?Two-sided copies not more than 14 inches by 8½ inches in size (per two-sided copy): ..... ??
0.20 
c. ?Certified copies (per copy): ..... ??1.00 
(2) ?Traffic reports: 
a. ?Crash report (per copy): ..... ?10.00 
b. ?Homicide report (per copy): ..... ?25.00 
c. ?Uniform traffic citation/other citation (per copy): ..... ??0.50 
d. ?Each certified copy of a report: ..... ??1.00 
(3) ?Incident reports: 
a. ?One-sided copy; 14 inches by 8½ inches (per page): ..... ??0.15 
b. ?Two-sided copy; 14 inches by 8½ inches (per page): ..... ??0.20 
c. ?Each certified copy of an incident report: ..... ??1.00 
(4) ?Special service charge: pursuant to F.S. § 119.07. If the nature or volume of public records 
requested to be inspected or copied pursuant to this subsection is such as to require extensive 
use of information technology resources or extensive clerical or supervisory assistance by 
personnel of the agency involved, or both, this agency may charge, in addition to the actual cost 
of duplication, a special service charge, which shall be reasonable and shall be based on the 
cost incurred for such extensive use of information technology resources or the labor cost of the 
personnel providing the service that is actually incurred by the agency or attributable to the 
agency for the clerical and supervisory assistance required, or both. Labor costs are calculated 
in 30-minute increments, rounded up to the next 30 minutes. 
(Code 1983, § 2-3(c); Code 1993, § 2-113; Ord. No. 2205, § I, 12-15-2010) 
State Law reference— Fees for copying records, F.S. § 119.07(4). 


Sec. 2-99. - Fees for notary public services. 
(a) ?Fees for standard notary public services shall be paid to the city as follows: 

Res
ide
nt 
No
nre
sid
ent 
(1) 
Not
ary 
sign
atu
re 
and 
seal 
$5.
00 
$10
.00 
(2) 
Att
ach
me
nt 
of 
ne
w 
not
ary 
stat
em
ent 
$7.
50 
$10
.00 
(3) 
Not
ariz
atio
ns 
req
uiri
ng 
ext
end
ed 
tim
e 
and 
pap
erw
ork 
by 
not
ary 
$10
.00 
$10
.00 
 
(b) ?The fees set out in this section are per document. Additional signers on a document will be charged 
accordingly based on fees set out in this section. 
(Code 1983, § 2-3(d); Code 1993, § 2-114; Ord. No. 1677, § I, 7-21-2004) 


Sec. 2-100. - Illegal signs fees. 
    Illegal signs fees shall be assessed as follows: 
(1) ?A fee for illegal signs removed from the right-of-way by the city and redeemed by the owner will 
be assessed at a rate of $1.00 per square foot or portion thereof. 
(2) ?Signs not redeemed within 30 days of removal will be disposed of at the city's discretion. 
(Code 1983, § 2-3(e); Code 1993, § 2-115) 


Sec. 2-101. - Fees for police and public safety services. 
    The following rates shall apply to police and public safety services: 
(1) ?Fingerprinting, paper and live scan (electronic)*: 
a. ?City residents (inclusive of sales tax): $17.50. 
b. ?Nonresidents (inclusive of sales tax): $25.00. 
Fingerprinting fees are not inclusive of those fees that may be charged by another 
governmental organization for processing or licensing purposes. A technology fee of $5.00 per 
set of prints will be added to the above fee. Such technology fee will be maintained in a 
separate account and be used to replace or enhance technology within the police department. 
(2) ?Photographs (each)*: 
a. ?Photo identification provided by the city: $10.00. 
The applicant may be required to provide a current, color passport photograph for any 
identification document produced by the city. 
b. ?4-inch by 6-inch photographs (plus sales tax): $3.50. 
c. ?5-inch by 7-inch photographs (plus sales tax): $4.50. 
d. ?8-inch by 10-inch photographs (plus sales tax): $5.50. 
e. ?9-inch by 12-inch photographs (plus sales tax): $6.50. 
f. ?11-inch by 14-inch photographs (plus sales tax): $7.50. 
g. ?8½ by 11-inch contact/proof sheet (plus sales tax): $7.50. 
h. ?Photo CD/DVD base charge (plus sales tax): $7.00; Plus per each electronic image loaded 
to CD/DVD (plus sales tax): $1.50. 
Photographs include those images made by electronic or digital sources. 
(3) ?Background/records check, per individual name: $10.00. 
(4) ?Video and/or audio recordings, per tape, CD, DVD or other recording media: $7.00. 
(5) ?Bad/worthless check investigative fee: $25.00. 
(Code 1983, § 19-1; Code 1993, § 2-116; Ord. No. 853, § 1, 9-21-1994; Ord. No. 1410, § I, 12-
5-2001; Ord. No. 1678, § I, 7-21-2004; Ord. No. 2099, § I, 10-1-2008; Ord. No. 2205, § II, 12-
15-2010) 


Sec. 2-102. - Waiver of fees for nonprofit organizations and houses of worship. 
(a) ?The mayor or his designee may waive fees for nonprofit organizations and houses of worship upon 
request filed with the city on a form prescribed and furnished by the city. 
(b) ?The organization must submit a certificate of status as a not-for-profit group from the state, if 
applicable. Activities for which the fees are waived must be performed exclusively by the members 
thereof, and proceeds are used for charitable, religious or service activity of the nonprofit 
organization or houses of worship. 
(Code 1993, § 2-118; Ord. No. 1145, § 1, 12-17-1997) 


Sec. 2-103. - Employee screening for public safety. 
(a) ?All employees required by law to be screened shall be required to undergo background screening 
for the following: 
(1) ?As a condition of employment or appointment and continued employment, whether paid, 
unpaid, or contractual, which the city council finds is critical to security or public safety; 
(2) ?Any private contractor, employee of a private contractor, vendor, repair person, or delivery 
person who is subject to licensing or regulation by the city; or 
(3) ?Any private contractor, employee of a private contractor, vendor, repair person, for-hire 
chauffeur, or delivery person who has direct contact with individual members of the public or 
access to any public facility or publicly-operated facility in such a manner or to such an extent 
that the city council finds that preventing unsuitable persons from having such contact or access 
is critical to security or public safety. 
(b) ?Screenings may include any or all of the following, but may not be limited to: employment history 
checks, local criminal history checks through local police agencies, statewide criminal history checks 
through the state department of law enforcement, and/or national criminal history checks through the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation. 
(c) ?Each person applying for or continuing employment or appointment in any such position, applying 
for initial or continuing licensing or regulation, or having such contact or access shall be 
fingerprinted. This section is not intended to preempt or prevent any other background screening, 
including, but not limited to, criminal history background checks, that the city may lawfully undertake. 
Any prospective or current employee in a deemed critical position is required to submit to being 
fingerprinted (either on a hard copy fingerprint card or electronically on an approved live scan device) 
in order to obtain or continue employment in any such position or to obtain or continue access to any 
such facility. 
(1) ?The fingerprints shall be submitted to the state department of law enforcement for a state 
criminal history record check and to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for a national criminal 
history record check. 
(2) ?The information obtained from the criminal history records check conducted pursuant to this 
section may be used to determine an applicant's eligibility for employment or appointment or to 
determine an employee's eligibility for continued employment or appointment. 
(3) ?The fingerprint screening for prospective or current employment or appointment shall be 
obtained pursuant to F.S. § 166.0442 and F.S. ch. 435. 
(d) ?Fees and authority. 
(1) ?The city has an account with and will be charged a processing fee per submission by the state 
department of law enforcement. 
a. ?Prospective and continuing employees screened for positions critical to security or public 
safety shall have said fees incurred by the city. 
b. ?Private contractors, vendors, repair persons, and delivery persons who have access to city 
facilities or city-operated facilities that are critical to security or public safety shall remit to 
the city the said fee as set by the state department of law enforcement, plus a ten percent 
processing fee. 
(2) ?The city police department is the only recognized agency to obtain either on a hard copy 
fingerprint card or electronically on an approved live scan device the applicant's or employee's 
fingerprints. 
(3) ?The city communications division shall maintain the billing account with the state department of 
law enforcement, the originating agency identifier (ORI) number with the FBI, and will process 
all fingerprint submission requests for the city under this section. 
(Code 1993, § 2-119; Ord. No. 1563, § 1, 1-2-2003) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt criminal history record checks for certain employees 
and appointees, F.S. § 166.0442. 


Sec. 2-104. - Returned checks; fees and collection. 
(a) ?If a bank returns a customer's check the city has deposited for any reason, the city will redeposit it a 
second time. If it is returned again, a service fee will be added to the amount of the check. Cash or a 
cashier's check will be required for the payment, which shall include the service fee. The amount of 
the service fee for each check shall not exceed: 
(1) ?$25.00, if the face value does not exceed $50.00. 
(2) ?$30.00, if the face value is more than $50.00 but does not exceed $300.00. 
(3) ?$40.00, if the face value is more than $300.00. 
(b) ?The method of collection of returned checks and service fees provided in this section shall not be 
construed as limiting or in any way restricting the use of any other remedy or method of collection 
available to the city, to include civil action, to recover the monies due and any costs incurred by the 
city to recover such sums. 
(Code 1993, § 2-120; Ord. No. 1680, § I, 8-4-2004) 


Sec. 2-105. - Special service charges. 
    A fee of $35.00 shall be charged per research request for each parcel of real property requiring a 
search of the city's official records and production of a city lien verification identifying any outstanding 
liens, special assessments, fees and fines that are reasonably ascertainable. The form of the report shall 
be in the manner prescribed by the city clerk. 
(Code 1993, § 2-121; Ord. No. 2103, § 1, 1-21-2009; Ord. No. 2191, § 1, 9-1-2010) 


Sec. 2-106. - Reimbursement for extraordinary expenses. 
(a) ?Definitions. 
(1) ?An extraordinary expense shall be that expense, and those related costs and fees, that are 
incurred by the city for any extraordinary service, including, but not limited to, the city's actual 
cost of labor and materials associated with the use of any specialized extinguishing or 
abatement agent, chemical, neutralizer, or similar equipment (or equipment damage) or 
materials that are employed to extinguish, confine, neutralize, contain, or clean any hazardous 
material that is or may be involved in a fire, accidental spill, or the threat of any fire or accidental 
spill, or any equipment or materials (whether owned by the city, leased, rented, borrowed, or 
provided under mutual aid) that is used to mitigate any emergency caused by any person, firm, 
organization or corporation that is beyond the regular and initial response or any service 
provided by the city. 
(2) ?An extraordinary service is one performed by the city's police department, fire department, 
public services department, or any other city office, department, or division that, in the judgment 
of the respective department director and finance director, is additional to or above the normal 
services provided by such department or division, and shall include the time and expense of 
support services (engineering, finance, information technology, etc.) as they may be needed. 
Extraordinary services may include, but are not limited to, crowd safety, security, and traffic 
control; evacuation and emergency housing; the abatement and disposition of: hazardous 
materials, spills or the threat of spills of toxic chemicals; leaks or threats of leaks of toxic or 
hazardous gases; utility line breaks or leakages; other imminent, or perceived, or possible 
threats to the health, safety or welfare of the city residents, and those instances where a 
property owner has been previously warned about violations of this Code that, in the judgment 
of the city staff, are a particular threat to the health, safety or welfare of the city residents, and 
for which the owner (or owner's agent, or person in charge of the property) has neglected to 
comply or has refused compliance therewith. 
(3) ?The city reserves the right and ability to negotiate costs in advance for extraordinary expenses 
and/or extraordinary services for planned events, including, but not limited to, parades, 
concerts, fairs, rallies, sporting events, tournaments, or celebrations sponsored by entities other 
than the city proper, either in part or whole. 
(b) ?Administration. 
(1) ?The finance director shall collect all fees, as follows: 
a. ?Fees and costs shall encompass all personnel, equipment (or equipment damage), 
material, and maintenance expenses in such a form as to ensure the city's full 
reimbursement for charges for those services actually rendered. A particular cost or fee 
schedule need not be memorialized in this article, or elsewhere in this Code, or by further, 
formal action by the city council, the city council's approval of this article constituting an 
authorization for the finance director (or his designee) to collect all such fees and costs 
pursuant to his receipt of related expenditures or costs that are submitted to him by the 
affected city departments or divisions. 
b. ?Within 30 days of the date of the extraordinary or dangerous occurrence giving rise to the 
extraordinary service, the affected department or division shall submit its extraordinary 
service-related costs, fees, charges, expenses, or any of these things, or all of these things 
in combination, to the finance director for his review. At such time as all costs, fees, and so 
forth related to extraordinary services have been collected and reviewed by the finance 
director, but in any case, not later than 60 days from the date of the rendering of the 
extraordinary services, the finance director shall send a bill of consolidated costs, fees, and 
so forth to the property owner, agent, or manager with a demand that a full remittance be 
made within 30 days of receipt of the bill. 
(2) ?It is also contemplated that local, state, or federal agencies may bill, fine, or penalize the city 
for matters (including, but not limited to, a cleanup cost, fee, or expense) relating to an 
extraordinary or dangerous occurrence, and the finance director shall, if possible, include any 
and all such costs or fees in the consolidated bill sent to the property owner. The city shall not, 
however, waive any right to collect such local, state, or federal costs if they are not included with 
the consolidated bill, and are not charged to the property owner or his agent within the 
consolidated billing 60-day period. In this regard, the finance director shall expect 
reimbursement of all local, state, or federal costs within 30 days of the owner's (or his agent's) 
receipt of the bill for these particular costs, fees, and so forth. 
(3) ?In cases of hardship, or where circumstances are such that a full remittance cannot be made to 
the city within the 30-day period, the city council shall hereby authorize the chief administrative 
officer to enter into negotiations with the property owner or his agent for an extended payback 
period of time not to exceed six months, and for which the city may charge the state statutorily-
mandated interest payment on judgments, pursuant to F.S. §§ 55.03 and 55.04, and as they 
may be from time to time amended. 
(4) ?All monies received under the provisions of this article shall be placed in an account 
established for the express purpose of reimbursing the various city departments or divisions for 
those actual costs and expenses necessary to furnish fire, police, and other emergency or 
public safety services or protection provided by the city as outlined herein. 
(c) ?Litigation. The city may enforce the provisions of this article by civil actions in a court of competent 
jurisdiction, for the collection of any amounts due hereunder, plus attorney fees, or for any other 
relief that may be appropriate. 
(d) ?Municipal services not to be refused for non-payment. Nothing in this article shall authorize any city 
department or division or any city staff member to refuse or delay any municipal service to any 
person, firm, organization or corporation that has not reimbursed the city for an extraordinary 
municipal service as provided under this article. Furthermore, nothing in this article shall be 
construed to demand reimbursement to the city for those municipal services that are normally 
provided to city residents and others as a matter of the city's general operating procedures, and for 
which the levying of taxes or the demand for reimbursement is normally made. 
(Code 1993, § 2-122; Ord. No. 2205, § III, 12-15-2010) 
State Law reference— Hazardous spills, F.S. § 768.128. 


Sec. 2-107. - Pass-through fees. 
(a) ?Authority. The city is hereby authorized to assess and collect fees, deposits, costs and expenses 
relating or pertaining to the review, inspection, regulation and defense of development-related 
activities pursuant to this section. 
(b) ?Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the 
meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different 
meaning: 
    Applicant means an owner or an owner's authorized agent who submits an application, proposal, 
petition or project to the city. 
    Application, for purposes of this section, means an application, petition or proposal submitted to the 
city pertaining to development for which city approval is required, and shall be limited to the following, 
except as the provisions of subsection (c) of this section shall apply: 
a. ?Comprehensive plan amendment. 
b. ?Concurrency determination. 
c. ?Development agreement, formulation and review. 
d. ?Development of regional impact. 
e. ?Final subdivision plat, including any revisions to a previously approved or existing subdivision or 
plat. 
f. ?Special exception. 
g. ?Planned unit development. 
h. ?Preliminary development plan. 
i. ?Final development plan. 
j. ?Rezoning (with or without a comprehensive plan amendment). 
k. ?Variance request. 
l. ?Vesting determination. 
m. ?Impact fee agreements. 
n. ?Utility plans and agreements. 
o. ?Any other development application or development order not listed above. 
p. ?Substantial change in any of the above. 
    City consultant means those companies, private consultants, governments, individuals or other 
entities under contract with the city to provide services to or for the city or who provide services to or for 
the city or who provide technical or legal expertise to or for the city, including, but not limited to, attorneys, 
engineers, planners, environmental specialists, property appraisers and surveyors. 
    City staff means city employees. 
    Owner means an owner or group of owners of fee simple title to a particular lot, tract, or parcel of 
real property. 
    Owner's authorized agent means an agent of the owner duly authorized to submit and process an 
application. If the applicant is not the property owner, a proper authorization must accompany the 
application. Such authorization shall be evidenced by a power of attorney signed by the owner and 
notarized, specifically authorizing the agent to represent the owner in connection with the application and 
as to the owner's real property which is the subject of the application. The authorization shall include an 
agreement of the owner to be bound by the actions of the owner's authorized agent and the provisions of 
this section. 
    Review deposit means a deposit of money, as established by this section, to be paid by an applicant 
at the time of the filing of an application as defined above or, upon good cause shown, such other 
development-related application as determined by the city administrator or his designee as required in 
subsection (c) of this section. 
    Total development review amount means the total amount of the review deposit to be paid by an 
applicant pursuant to subsection (c) of this section and any fees authorized to be collected by the city 
pursuant to this Code. 
(c) ?Review deposits. 
(1) ?Required review deposits. A $5,000.00 review deposit, payable to the city by money order, 
personal or company check or cashier's check drawn on a financial institution authorized to do 
business in the county shall be delivered to and collected by the city at the time of submission of 
each application as defined in subsection (b) of this section. Said review deposit shall be utilized 
by the city to reimburse the city for the actual costs paid by the city incurred as a result of the 
review of the development activity. 
(2) ?Other types of development-related applications. Upon good cause shown, a review deposit, in 
an amount determined by the city administrator not to exceed $5,000.00, paid as set forth 
above in subsection (c)(1) of this section, shall be delivered to and collected by the city at the 
time of submission of such other types of development-related application as may be 
determined by the city administrator or at such other time as the city administrator may 
designate. The following factors, by way of example, not limitation, may be considered to 
support a finding of good cause for the imposition of a review deposit during the review and 
approval of a development-related application other than as described in subsection (b) of this 
section and for establishing the appropriate review deposit amount: information provided by the 
city staff and applicant about the complexity and scope of the proposed development-related 
application and the development project, the payment history of the applicant as it pertains to 
past dealings with the city, and the expected involvement of city consultants. 
(3) ?Waiver of review deposits. In all cases, the city administrator may waive the requirement of a 
review deposit if, based upon information from city staff and the applicant, the amount of the 
fees, costs and expenses relating to the review, processing, inspection and regulation of such 
as estimated by the city administrator will not exceed the application fee. Similarly, should the 
city administrator determine at any time thereafter, in his sole discretion, that requiring a review 
deposit is in the city's best interest, he may require one at that time. No review of an application 
pertaining or relating to subdivision plats, development agreements, planned unit developments, 
a development of regional impact or such other development-related application as determined 
by the city administrator shall commence until the application fee and review deposit, if 
applicable, are paid. The total development review amount shall be forwarded to the city 
administrator prior to the end of the second business day following the submittal of said 
application for review or approval. The balance of the review deposit, if any, shall be returned to 
the applicant as provided for in subsection (d) of this section. No interest shall be paid to the 
applicant on any review deposit on account with the city. 
(4) ?Administrative fee for review deposits. To mitigate the city's cost to administer and process a 
pass-through fee review deposit, an administrative fee equal to three percent of the actual costs 
of the review by the city consultant shall be paid to the city. This administrative fee shall be 
deducted from the review deposit. 
(d) ?Project account. 
(1) ?Once an application pertaining or relating to an application or, upon good cause shown, such 
other development-related application as determined by the city administrator, has been 
submitted to the city and the applicable total development application fee has been collected, 
the city administrator or his designee shall establish an individual project account through which 
all fees, expenses and costs incurred by the city which are associated with the applicable 
application will be monitored. The project account will be maintained throughout the entire 
review, processing, inspection, and regulation process until the latter of: 
a. ?Final action (after all appeal periods have run) by the city council has occurred with respect 
to the application; 
b. ?No further significant involvement of the city staff or city consultants is expected to occur; 
c. ?The city has been paid all of the amounts due under this section and this Code; or 
d. ?The expiration of any warranty period associated with the conveyance or dedication of 
improvements to the city. 
(2) ?Fees, costs and expenses for any city consultant time directly related to the review, processing, 
inspection or regulation of any application or development pursuant to this section, this Code 
and/or state statutes, and all other directly related expenses, including, but not limited to, 
advertising, legal, inspection and engineering costs, are to be charged to the project account. 
(e) ?City invoices. 
(1) ?Payment. 
a. ?The city administrator or his designee may periodically calculate the costs, expenses and 
fees incurred by the city for each application for which a review deposit is required and 
send an invoice to the applicant for payment. The applicant shall have ten days from the 
date of the invoice to pay to the city the invoiced amount. Thereafter, if payment is not 
received in the required time, the city administrator or his designee shall apply the review 
deposit toward payment for the invoiced amounts. If the total of the costs, expenses, and 
fees incurred by the city for an application for which a review deposit is required exceeds 
the review deposit, and payment is not received in the required time after invoicing, then 
the city administrator or his designee shall apply the review deposit to the unpaid portion of 
the invoice and send a notice of non-payment to the applicant for the remaining amount of 
the invoice. The city administrator or designee shall also send a notice to the applicant and 
to all city staff and city consultants associated with the subject application or project, 
instructing them to cease all work relating to such application or project unless and until 
further notified by the city administrator or his designee. A copy of such notice shall be sent 
to the applicant. 
b. ?Upon receipt of the notice, work by the city staff and city consultants on the application or 
project shall cease, and neither building permits, certificates of completion, temporary 
certificates of occupancy, nor certificates of occupancy will be issued with respect to such 
real property. Continuation of the review of the application or project with respect to the 
real property for which payment was not made will not be undertaken by the city until such 
time as all outstanding fees, costs and expenses due under this section are paid in full and 
a new review deposit is paid to the city. 
c. ?Unless otherwise provided for in this section, if an applicant receives or is granted approval 
on an application or project or is issued a building permit, certificate of completion, 
temporary certificate of occupancy, certificate of occupancy, occupational license or other 
development order by the city, and additional fees, costs, expenses or such other 
obligations attributable to the application are thereafter posted to the project account for 
work that is associated with said approval or issuance, the applicant or his successor in 
interest shall pay said costs, fees and expenses incurred by the city for such application. 
The city shall send an invoice to the applicant or successor for such fees or expenses, and 
the applicant or successor shall reimburse the city for such fees or expenses within ten 
days. 
(2) ?Deficiency and liens. 
a. ?Failure to pay an invoiced amount within the requested time shall constitute a violation of 
this section. Any deficiency owed to the city, whether incurred before or after project 
approval, shall bear interest from the date of the aforementioned notice of non-payment at 
the rate of 18 percent simple interest per annum, or otherwise at the highest rate permitted 
by law, until paid. The amount of any such deficiency owed to the city shall, together with 
interest and the costs of collection as hereinafter provided, shall be the personal obligation 
of the applicant, and shall be a continuing lien on the real property related to the 
application or project under review. Any subsequent or new owner of the real property 
related to the application or project shall take title subject to the obligations of the applicant 
under the terms of this section and shall be jointly and severally liable for such obligations. 
An applicant may not escape liability for the deficiency by abandonment of the application 
or project, withdrawal of such application, or sale of the real property with respect to which 
such application has been submitted. If the initial or subsequent invoices are not paid in a 
timely fashion, and the invoiced amount exceeds the amount of the review deposit, the city 
may take whatever legal means it deems appropriate to collect the deficiency, including, 
but not limited to, retaining the services of a collection agency or attorney, initiating legal 
proceedings for the collection thereof, recording a notice of lien as hereinafter provided, 
and foreclosing same in the same manner as mortgage liens are foreclosed. 
b. ?If the project is subject to the provisions of a development agreement, and the applicant is 
found to be in default of such development agreement, then it would be considered a 
default of that agreement and whatever remuneration such development agreement calls 
for would be applied, as opposed to the provisions called for in this section. 
(f) ?Required payments. Payment for costs, expenses and fees incurred by the city under this section is 
a requirement for the city's final approval of the application and project. 
(g) ?Assessable costs, expenses, and fees. 
(1) ?All direct costs, expenses and fees incurred by the city that relate directly to the review, 
processing, inspection, regulation or defense of an application, including, but not limited to, 
expenses incurred by city consultants who review or defend the application at the direction of 
the city, as well as other expenses related directly to advertising, surveying, legal review and/or 
engineering review for an application or project shall be assessed to the applicant and 
reimbursed to the city. Assessable expenses shall not include the cost of city employee time in 
reviewing such application, as such time shall be deemed to have been reimbursed by the 
application fee. 
(2) ?City consultants shall submit records of their time, fees, costs, and expenses to the city 
administrator or his designee, and such fees, costs and expenses shall be invoiced to the 
applicant on a dollar-for-dollar basis for services provided under the direction of the city to 
review. The rates charged to the applicant for said services shall not exceed those charged to 
the city. 
(h) ?Objections/appeal. Any objection to any invoice or to any matter set forth in this section must be set 
forth in writing and addressed and delivered to the city administrator on or before the tenth day after 
the date of the relevant invoice. In the event the city administrator denies the objection, the applicant 
shall have ten days after the date of the city administrator's written decision to file an appeal of such 
decision with the city clerk or his designee, which appeal shall be heard by the city council. All 
objections and appeals shall set forth in detail the reasons and evidence upon which the objection 
and appeal are based. Failure of the applicant to establish beyond a preponderance of the evidence 
that an invoice is not appropriate and is not based upon competent substantial evidence, shall result 
in a denial of the objection and appeal. 
(i) ?Attorney fees in the event of failure to pay review costs. In the event the city is required to enforce 
this section, then the city shall be entitled to recover from the applicant all costs and expenses 
incurred, including, but not limited to, its reasonable attorney fees, paralegal fees and other costs 
and expenses, whether incurred prior to, during or subsequent to court proceedings or on appeal, 
and/or in any bankruptcy proceedings involving the applicant, the real property and/or the project 
being reviewed. 
(j) ?Change of ownership. An applicant shall provide prompt written notice to the city administrator in the 
event of a change in ownership of all or a portion of a lot, tract, or parcel of real property with respect 
to which an application or project is pending before the city. Such notice shall be on a form approved 
by the city and shall include the name, address and telephone number of the new owner and a legal 
description of the lot, tract or parcel of real property now owned by the new owner. Any such new 
owner: (i) shall not be entitled to utilize or draw upon any review deposit previously paid to the city by 
the original applicant, (ii) shall be liable to the city for all fees, costs and expenses related to the lot, 
tract or parcel of real property which arise subsequent to the date the new owner acquires title to 
such real property, and (iii) may be required by the city to pay a separate review deposit in the same 
manner as a new application, in which case, a separate project account will be opened in the name 
of the new owner or the new owner's authorized agent. If a separate review deposit is required, no 
work shall be undertaken by the city or its consultants with respect to the lot, tract or parcel of real 
property under control of the new owner until a separate review deposit is paid to the city. Until such 
time as the city receives such written notice of a change in ownership, the original applicant shall be 
jointly and severally liable to the city for all fees, costs and expenses associated with the application 
or project; provided, however, that upon receipt by the city of a notification of change of ownership, 
the original applicant shall no longer be liable to the city for fees, costs and expenses incurred by the 
city which arise after receipt of the notification of change of ownership, and the new owner shall be 
solely liable to the city for all such fees, costs and expenses associated with the application or 
project activities subsequent to the date of receipt by the city of such notification. Additionally, the 
applicant shall be entitled to a refund of any review deposit balance as of the date said change of 
ownership notice is received by the city. 
(k) ?Agreement to be bound by this section. Submission of an application shall constitute the consent 
and agreement for the applicant and the owner, if the application is being executed by the owner's 
authorized agent, to be bound by the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1993, § 2-123; Ord. No. 2415, § 1, 4-15-2015) 


Secs. 2-108—2-127. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE V. - PETITIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference— Initiative, § 5.05. 
State Law reference— Placement of petition on ballot, F.S. § 100.371; ballot summary, F.S. § 101.161; 
registration of political committee, F.S. § 106.03; signatures on an initiative petition, F.S. § 106.191; recall 
of municipal elected official, F.S. § 100.361. 


Sec. 2-128. - Registration of sponsor with city clerk; submission of text for approval. 
    The sponsor of any petition proposing an issue to be placed upon the ballot other than recall of an 
elected official, prior to obtaining any signatures, shall register with the city clerk as a political committee 
pursuant to F.S. § 106.03, if applicable, and shall submit, in the petition format prescribed in section 2-
131, the text of the proposed question to the city clerk, with the form on which the signatures shall be 
affixed, and shall obtain the approval of the city clerk of such form as provided in section 2-130. 
(Code 1983, § 2-50; Code 1993, § 2-141) 


Sec. 2-129. - Petitions not proposing ballot issues. 
    A sponsor of a petition submitted pursuant to this article which has signatures of electors to be 
verified but does not propose a ballot issue shall not be required to submit the text to the city clerk for 
approval prior to circulating the petition. Such petition shall adhere to the requirements of section 2-131 
concerning petition format. If the sponsor should voluntarily submit the petition form to the city clerk for 
approval, the clerk shall proceed to approve or object to the form as a courtesy to the sponsor. 
(Code 1983, § 2-51; Code 1993, § 2-142) 


Sec. 2-130. - Review criteria; action by city clerk. 
    The city clerk shall not review the accuracy, content or legal sufficiency of the text of the material 
submitted pursuant to this article, but shall examine the document to determine that the required format 
has been followed, and shall approve or object strictly on form requirements. The city clerk shall deliver 
his action in writing to the sponsor before the end of the next working day. 
(Code 1983, § 2-52; Code 1993, § 2-143) 


Sec. 2-131. - Format. 
(a) ?The form of a petition submitted pursuant to this article shall include the following requirements: 
(1) ?The petition shall conspicuously contain the full text of the proposal, unless otherwise provided 
by state or federal law. Should the text require printing on both sides of the form, it shall be 
clearly indicated that the text continues or begins on the other side; 
(2) ?The petition form shall, at the top, be clearly and conspicuously entitled; 
(3) ?The petition form shall be printed on separate cards or individual sheets of paper. The 
minimum size of such forms shall be three inches by five inches, and the maximum size shall be 
8½ inches by 11 inches. Each form shall contain space for only one elector's signature. Forms 
providing for multiple signatures will not be approved. Adequate space for the printed name and 
street address of the signee shall be included; and 
(4) ?The petition form shall also contain an affidavit, to be executed by the circulator thereof, 
verifying the fact that the circulator saw each elector sign the petition form, that each signature 
appearing thereon is the genuine signature of the person it purports to be, and that the petition 
was signed in the presence of the circulator on the date indicated. Such verification, pursuant to 
F.S. § 92.51, may be taken or administered within or without the United States by or before any 
commissioned officer in active service of the armed forces of the United States with rank of 
second lieutenant or higher in the Army, Air Force or Marine Corps, or of ensign or higher in the 
Navy or Coast Guard, when the elector is a member of the armed forces of the United States, 
the spouse or dependent of such member, or a person whose duties require his presence with 
the armed forces of the United States. 
(b) ?Petition forms may be reproduced in newspapers, magazines and other forms of printed mass 
media, provided such forms are reproduced in the same format required in this section. 
(c) ?Any change in a previously approved form, or additional types of petition forms to be circulated by a 
previously approved circulator, shall be submitted in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 2-53; Code 1993, § 2-144) 
State Law reference— Form and requirements of a recall petition, F.S. § 100.361. 


Sec. 2-132. - Verification of signatures; retention of petition forms. 
(a) ?Verification method. Registration books and files used in the checking of electors' signatures on 
petitions submitted pursuant to this article are in the custody of the supervisor of elections, with 
whom the city clerk shall determine the administrative procedures used in the signature verification 
process. Either of two methods for checking may be used: 
(1) ?A name-by-name, signature-by-signature check; or 
(2) ?A check of a random sample, following the rules and guidelines as set forth in F.S. § 99.097. 
(b) ?Payment of costs of verification. The sponsor of the petition shall pay such sums as are allowed by 
state statute to the city clerk for each signature submitted for verification. Actual costs shall be 
determined at the conclusion of the process, and the sum per signature checked, or the cost of 
checking, whichever is less, shall be charged, and necessary adjustments made at the time of 
certification by the city clerk of the results of the signature verification. Any portion of these monies 
which shall be payable to the supervisor of elections by the city clerk for process shall be a 
transaction between the supervisor and the city clerk. 
(c) ?Retention. Petition forms shall be retained by the city clerk for a period of time as required by the 
director of archives, history and records management, department of state. 
(Code 1983, § 2-54; Code 1993, § 2-145) 


Secs. 2-133—2-162. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE VI. - LAW ENFORCEMENT 


Sec. 2-163. - Court costs for use in law enforcement training. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of F.S. § 938.15, there are hereby assessed the following court costs to 
be used for criminal justice education degree programs and training courses, including basic recruit 
training expenditures for police officers, part-time police officers, auxiliary police officers, corrections and 
employing agency support personnel: 
(1) ?The sum of $2.00 against every person convicted for a violation of a state penal or criminal 
statute or convicted for violation of a city ordinance. Such sum shall not be assessed against 
any person convicted for violation of any state statute or city ordinance relating to the parking of 
vehicles. 
(2) ?The sum of $2.00 for every bond estreature or forfeited bail bond related to the statutes and 
ordinances mentioned in subsection (1) of this section. 
(Code 1983, § 2-2; Code 1993, § 50-1) 
State Law reference— Authority to levy court costs for criminal justice education, F.S. § 
938.15. 


Sec. 2-164. - Law enforcement services. 
    The city council does hereby establish, approve, and authorize the city police chief and the city 
police department as the exclusive agency for providing law enforcement services to the residents of the 
city, except as provided by agreement or contract or by law. 
(Code 1993, § 50-2; Ord. No. 958, § 1, 9-18-1996) 
State Law reference— Law enforcement officers, qualification, training, etc., F.S. ch. 943. 


Secs. 2-165—2-179. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE VII. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Fire prevention and control, F.S. ch. 633. 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 2-180. - Fire department rates and charges. 
(a) ?Base rate, residents of the city. 
(1) ?BLS transport. The rate for any city resident receiving medical transportation service requiring 
base life support (BLS) from the city fire department shall be $500.00. 
(2) ?ALS I transport. The rate for any city resident receiving medical transportation service requiring 
advanced life support level one (ALS I) from the city fire department shall be $600.00. 
(3) ?ALS II transport. The rate for any city resident receiving medical transportation service 
requiring advanced life support level two (ALS II) from the city fire department shall be $700.00. 
(b) ?Base rate, nonresidents of the city. 
(1) ?BLS transport. The rate for any nonresident receiving medical transportation service requiring 
base life support (BLS) from the city fire department shall be $575.00. 
(2) ?ALS I transport. The rate for any nonresident receiving medical transportation service requiring 
advanced life support level one (ALS I) from the city fire department shall be $675.00. 
(3) ?ALS II transport. The rate for any nonresident receiving medical transportation service requiring 
advanced life support level two (ALS II) from the city fire department shall be $775.00. 
(c) ?Mileage rate. Mileage is $10.00 a mile, per patient, per transport. Billable transport mileage is the 
total number of transported mileage for which the patient travels in the ambulance vehicle. Any travel 
in an increment of a mile shall be considered a full mile. 
(d) ?Standby time. Standby time shall be charged at a rate of $50.00 per 30 minutes, per ambulance and 
crew, with a minimum of 30 minutes. Any wait in an increment past each 30 minutes shall be 
considered a full 30 minutes for rate calculation purposes. The term "standby time" is defined as the 
time spent committed to a scene or call by the ambulance crew beyond the time involved in normal 
patient care. 
In addition, standby time may be utilized in any situation where a previously announced event or activity 
creates a need to have one or more ambulances and/or fire engines present because of risks of physical 
harm to themselves and/or others in attendance there. Examples of these events or activities include, but 
are not limited to, sporting events, fireworks displays, carnivals, etc. This ordinance authorizes the fire 
chief to determine whether standby crews will be needed. In the event the standby ambulance is used to 
transport a person to a hospital from the standby site, each person transported shall be charged for an 
emergency call and any additional services rendered as provided within this section. 
(e) ?Patients of skilled nursing facilities and hospitals. This section allows the fire chief to enter into a 
contract to establish a rate for services between the city, Emergency Medical Services and the 
skilled nursing facilities or hospitals located within the city limits, given the rate does not exceed that 
which would normally be charged to residents and nonresidents under this section. If no contractual 
agreement is established, the aforementioned rate included in this section shall apply. 
(f) ?Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the 
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different 
meaning: 
    Advanced life support I (ALS I) means transportation by ground ambulance vehicle and the provision 
of medically necessary supplies and, including the provision of an ALS assessment or at least one ALS 
intervention. 
    Advanced life support II (ALS II) means transportation by ground ambulance vehicle and the 
provision of medically necessary supplies and services, including: 
(1) ?At least three separate administrations of one or more medications by intravenous push/bolus 
or by continuous infusion (excluding crystalloid fluids); or 
(2) ?Ground ambulance transport and the provision of at least one of the ALS II procedures listed 
below: 
a. ?Defibrillation/cardioversion. 
b. ?Endotracheal intubation*. 
c. ?Central venous line. 
d. ?Cardiac pacing. 
e. ?Chest decompression. 
f. ?Surgical airway. 
g. ?Intra-osseous line. 
*The monitoring and maintenance of an endotracheal tube that was previously inserted prior to 
the transport also qualifies as an ALS II procedure. 
    Base life support (BLS) means transport by ground ambulance vehicle and the provision of medically 
necessary BLS supplies and services, as defined by the state. 
(Code 1983, § 10-6; Code 1993, § 46-1; Ord. No. 1371, § 1, 8-2-2000; Ord. No. 2091, § I, 8-6-
2008; Ord. No. 2238, § I, 10-19-2011) 


Sec. 2-181. - Fire safety zones. 
(a) ?The chief of the fire department may designate a safety zone around any building that may be on 
fire, or any building that might be in danger from such fire, and no person, when informed of the 
existence of such safety zone, shall enter or remain within such zone without the permission of the 
chief of the fire department. 
(b) ?The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to duly accredited members of the fire 
department or operators of vehicles being used to transport such members. 
(Code 1983, § 10-4; Code 1993, § 46-2) 


Sec. 2-182. - Tampering with fire hose. 
    No person shall tamper with or molest any fire hose that may be placed on the streets by the fire 
department. 
(Code 1983, § 10-5; Code 1993, § 46-3) 
State Law reference— Crossing fire hose, F.S. § 316.2034. 


Sec. 2-183. - EMS and fire services. 
    The city council does hereby establish, approve, and authorize the city fire chief and the city EMS 
and fire department as the exclusive agency for providing fire and EMS services to the residents of the 
city except as provided by agreement or contract or by law. 
(Code 1993, § 46-4; Ord. No. 959, § 1(46-91), 9-18-1996) 


Secs. 2-184—2-199. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - DIVISION OF FIRE PREVENTION 


Sec. 2-200. - Creation. 
    A division of fire prevention is hereby created. 
(Code 1983, § 10-21; Code 1993, § 46-36) 


Sec. 2-201. - Chief officer. 
    The fire chief shall be the chief of the division of fire prevention. 
(Code 1983, § 10-22; Code 1993, § 46-37) 


Sec. 2-202. - Inspectors. 
(a) ?The fire chief may detail such members of the fire department to the division of fire prevention as he 
shall from time to time deem necessary. 
(b) ?The fire chief may recommend to the city council the employment of one or more technical 
inspectors. When such positions are authorized by the city council, the inspectors shall be chosen on 
the basis of fitness for the position after a competitive examination open to both members and non-
members of the fire department. Technical inspectors shall hold office at the pleasure of the city 
council. 
(Code 1983, § 10-23; Code 1993, § 46-38) 


Sec. 2-203. - General duties. 
(a) ?The officers of the division of fire prevention shall enforce all laws and ordinances covering the 
following: 
(1) ?The prevention of fires. 
(2) ?The storage and use of explosives and flammables. 
(3) ?The installation and maintenance of automatic and other private fire alarm systems, and fire 
extinguishing equipment. 
(4) ?The maintenance and regulation of fire escapes. 
(5) ?The means and adequacy of exit in case of fire from factories, schools, hotels, lodginghouses, 
asylums, hospitals, churches, halls, theaters, amphitheaters and all other places in which 
numbers of persons work, live or congregate from time to time for any purpose. 
(6) ?The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires. 
(b) ?They shall have such other powers and perform such other duties as are set forth by this Code and 
as may be conferred and imposed from time to time by law. 
(Code 1983, § 10-24; Code 1993, § 46-39) 


Sec. 2-204. - Entry powers. 
    Subject to constitutional limitations, the chief of the division of fire prevention or any inspector may, 
at all reasonable hours, enter any building or premises within his jurisdiction for the purpose of making 
any inspection or investigation which, under the provisions of this article, he may deem necessary to be 
made. 
(Code 1983, § 10-25; Code 1993, § 46-40) 


Sec. 2-205. - Inspections. 
(a) ?The chief of the division of fire prevention or any designated inspector shall inspect, as often as may 
be necessary, all specially hazardous manufacturing processes, storage or installations of gases, 
chemicals, oils, explosives and flammable materials, all interior fire alarm and automatic sprinkler 
systems, and such other hazards or appliances as the chief shall designate. Such person shall make 
such orders as may be necessary for the enforcement of the laws and ordinances governing such 
hazards and appliances and for safeguarding of life and property from fire. 
(b) ?The chief of the division of fire prevention or any designated inspector shall inspect, as often as may 
be necessary, all buildings and premises, except the interiors of private dwellings, for the purpose of 
ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire, or any violations of the 
provisions or intent of this Code affecting fire hazards. 
(c) ?The chief of the division of fire prevention or an inspector designated by him, upon the complaint of 
any person or when he shall deem necessary, shall inspect any buildings and premises within his 
jurisdiction. 
(Code 1983, § 10-26; Code 1993, § 46-41) 


Sec. 2-206. - Investigation of fires. 
(a) ?The division of fire prevention shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire 
occurring in the city by which property has been destroyed or damaged, and, so far as possible, shall 
determine whether the fire is the result of carelessness or design. 
(b) ?Such investigations shall be begun immediately upon the occurrence of such a fire by the inspector 
in whose district the fire occurs, and, if it appears to the officer making such an investigation that 
such fire is of suspicious origin, the chief of the fire department shall be immediately notified of the 
facts. He shall take charge immediately of the physical evidence, shall notify the proper authorities 
designated by law to pursue the investigation of such matters, and shall further cooperate with the 
authorities in the collection of evidence and in the prosecution of the case. 
(c) ?Every fire shall be reported in writing to the bureau of fire prevention within two days after it has 
occurred, by the officer in whose jurisdiction such fire has occurred. Such report shall be in such 
form as shall be prescribed by the chief of the fire department, and shall contain a statement of all 
facts relating to the cause, origin and circumstances of such fire, and extent of the damage thereof, 
and the insurance upon such property, and such other information as may be required. 
(d) ?The city attorney, upon request of the division of fire prevention, shall assist the inspectors in the 
investigation of any fire which, in its opinion, is of suspicious origin. 
(Code 1983, § 10-27; Code 1993, § 46-42) 


Sec. 2-207. - Correction of dangerous conditions. 
(a) ?Whenever any inspector of the division of fire prevention shall find in any building or upon any 
premises combustible or explosive matter or a dangerous accumulation of rubbish or unnecessary 
accumulation of wastepaper, boxes, shavings or any highly flammable materials which is so situated 
as to endanger property, or shall find obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors 
or windows liable to interfere with the operations of the fire department or egress of occupants in 
case of fire, he shall order such accumulations or obstructions to be removed or remedied. 
(b) ?Whenever any such officer shall find any building or other structure which, for want of repairs or lack 
of sufficient fire escapes, automatic or other fire alarm apparatus or fire extinguishing equipment, or 
by reason of age or dilapidated conditions, or from any other cause, is especially liable to fire, and 
which is so situated as to endanger other property or the occupants thereof, and whenever such 
officer shall find in any building combustible or explosive matter or flammable conditions dangerous 
to the safety of such building or the occupants thereof, he shall order such dangerous conditions or 
materials to be removed or remedied. 
(c) ?The service of such orders as are required in this section or section 2-205 may be made upon the 
occupant of the premises to whom it is directed, either by delivering a copy of the order to such 
occupant personally or by delivering the order to and leaving the order with any person in charge of 
the premises, or, in case no such person is found upon the premises, by affixing a copy thereof in a 
conspicuous place on the door to the entrance of the premises. Whenever it may be necessary to 
serve such order upon the owner, it may be served either by delivering to and leaving with such 
person a copy of the order, or, if such owner is absent from the jurisdiction of the officer making the 
order, by mailing such copy to the owner's last-known post office address. Any such order shall 
forthwith be complied with by the owner or occupant of such premises or building. 
(d) ?If such order is made by the chief of the division of fire prevention or one of the inspectors, such 
owner or occupant may, within 24 hours, appeal to the chief of the fire department, who shall, within 
five days, review such order and file his decision thereon, and unless by his authority the order is 
revoked or modified, it shall remain in full force and be complied with within the time fixed in the 
order or decision of the chief of the fire department. 
(e) ?Any such owner or occupant may, within five days after the making or affirming of any such order by 
the chief of the fire department, file his petition with the city council, requesting a review of such 
order, and it shall be the duty of the council to hear the petition within not less than five days and not 
more than ten days from the time the petition is filed, and to make such order within the premises as 
right and justice may require, and such decision shall be final. The parties so appealing to the council 
shall file, within two days, a bond approved by the council, in an amount fixed by the council, 
conditioned to pay all the costs of such appeal in case such appellant fails to sustain his appeal or 
the appeal is dismissed for any cause. 
(Code 1983, § 10-28; Code 1993, § 46-43) 


Sec. 2-208. - Record of fires. 
(a) ?The chief of the division of fire prevention shall keep a record of all fires and of the facts concerning 
all fires, including statistics as to the extent of such fires and the damage caused thereby, and 
whether such losses were covered by insurance, and, if so, in what amount. Such records shall be 
made daily from the reports made by the inspectors under the provisions of this article. 
(b) ?All such records shall be public. 
(Code 1983, § 10-29; Code 1993, § 46-44) 


Sec. 2-209. - Annual report. 
    An annual report of the division of fire prevention shall be made on or before October 31, unless the 
city council authorizes another date, and transmitted to the city council. The report shall contain all 
proceedings under this article, with such statistics as the chief may wish to include therein. The chief shall 
also recommend any amendments to this article which, in his judgment, shall be desirable. 
(Code 1983, § 10-30; Code 1993, § 46-45) 


Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 


Sec. 6-1. - Jurisdiction and scope; rules of evidence; penalty. 
(a) ?Pursuant to the city Charter, section 1.03, this chapter shall apply and be effective within the 
corporate municipal limits of the city. 
(b) ?Violations of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(c) ?In accordance with F.S. § 562.47, Rules of evidence; beverage law, as may be amended from time 
to time by the state legislature: 
(1) ?Proof that the liquor in question was and is known as whiskey, moonshine whiskey, shine, rum, 
gin or brandy or by another similar name shall be prima facie evidence that such liquor is 
intoxicating and contains more than 4.007 percent of alcohol by volume, and that same is 
intoxicating. 
(2) ?Proof that the beverage in question was contained in a container labeled as beer, ale, malt 
liquor, malt beverage, wine, or distilled spirits or with other similar names, and which bears the 
manufacturer's insignia, name or trademark, is prima facie evidence that such beverage is an 
alcoholic beverage as defined in F.S. § 561.01. 
(3) ?Any person who, by experience in the past in the handling or use of intoxicating liquors, or who, 
by taste, smell, or the drinking of such liquors, has knowledge as to the intoxicating nature 
thereof, may testify as to his opinion whether such beverage or liquor is or is not intoxicating, 
and a verdict based upon such testimony shall be valid. 
(Code 1993, § 6-1; Ord. No. 2376, § 1, 9-3-2014; Ord. No. 2454, § 1, 10-21-2015) 


Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings 
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. As used 
in this chapter, the terms "beverages," "beer" and "wine" shall have the meanings assigned to them by 
the state alcoholic beverage law. If a classification or definition is not clearly contained within this chapter, 
then the classification and definitions as contained in F.S. chs. 561 through 565, as may be amended 
from time to time, are hereby adopted as classifications and definitions for this article. 
    Alcoholic beverages means distilled spirits and all beverages containing one-half of one percent or 
more alcohol by volume. The percentage of alcohol by volume shall be determined by measuring the 
volume of the standard ethyl alcohol in the beverage and comparing it with the volume of the remainder of 
the ingredients as though the remainder of the ingredients were distilled water. 
    Bar and lounge mean any place of business where wine, beer or alcoholic beverages are sold or 
offered for sale for consumption on the premises, and where the sale of food is incidental to the sale of 
such beverages, or where no food is sold, and includes any establishment in receipt of a valid alcoholic 
beverage license from the state which permits the sale for consumption on the premises of intoxicating 
liquors as a principal use. Establishments where beer or wine, or both, are permitted for consumption on 
the premises as an incidental or accessory use are not considered a bar. Bottle club means a commercial 
establishment, operated for a profit, whether or not a profit is actually made, wherein patrons consume 
alcoholic beverages which are brought onto the premises and not sold or supplied to the patrons by the 
establishment, whether the patrons bring in and maintain custody of their own alcoholic beverages or 
surrender custody to the establishment for dispensing on the premises, and which is located in a building 
or other enclosed permanent structure. The term "bottle club" does not apply to sporting facilities where 
events sanctioned by nationally-recognized regulatory athletic or sports associations are held, bona fide 
restaurants licensed by the division of hotels and restaurants of the department of business and 
professional regulation whose primary business is the service of full-course meals, or hotels and motels 
licensed by the division of hotels and restaurants of the department of business and professional 
regulation. 
    Church means an edifice designed or arranged for religious services, on land held in fee or on lease 
by an organized group, which group utilizes such edifice for regularly scheduled ongoing religious 
services, including, but not limited to, associated accessory uses. 
    Commercial amusement means an establishment within an enclosed building or structure whose 
primary function is to provide profit-oriented entertainment and amusement by being engaged in the 
commercial operation of sports and recreational services. The term "commercial amusement" includes, 
but is not limited to, bona fide bowling alleys, skating rinks, indoor theaters and that portion of golf club 
facilities wherein patrons are served food and beverages. 
    Consumption off the premises means the selling of beer, wine or alcoholic beverages in the original 
unbroken containers, to be taken by the purchaser off the premises where sold before being consumed. 
    Consumption on the premises means consumption of all beers, wines or alcoholic beverages of any 
kind, or the right to sell by the drink, bottle or can, such beverages for consumption only on the licensed 
premises where purchased. 
    Full-course meal. A bona fide full-course meal must consist of a salad or vegetable, entree, 
beverage and bread, all prepared on the premises. Fast food, sandwiches, frozen foods or any other 
services are not considered full-course meals. 
    Government property means a site for the housing of any department, commission, independent 
agency or instrumentality of the federal, state, county or city government or any other governmental unit. 
    Liquor, distilled spirits, spirituous liquors, spirituous beverages and distilled spirituous liquors mean 
that substance known as ethyl alcohol, ethanol or spirits of wine in any form, including all dilutions and 
mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
    Nonprofit private club means a fraternal benefit society, whether incorporated or not, conducted 
solely for the benefit of its members and their beneficiaries and not for profit, operated on a lodge system 
with ritualistic forms of work, having a representative form of government, and which makes provision for 
the payment of benefits in accordance with state law. 
    Package store means vendors licensed to sell all alcoholic beverages, but in sealed containers only, 
and for consumption off the premises. The sealed package must not be broken and the contents must not 
be consumed in or on the premises under a package store license. 
    Public parks means facilities maintained for the use of the public, including, but not limited to, 
playgrounds, athletic fields or other facilities for outdoor recreation use. 
    Restaurant means a business advertised and held out to the public to be a place where full-course 
meals are prepared, in a full service kitchen with a commercial stove, refrigerator and oven, and served 
on a regular basis from a prepared menu, which facility provides seating for at least 25 patrons with 
standard height dining room tables or booths of adequate size to accommodate the service of full-course 
meals in accordance with the number of chairs found at the table, with such seating exclusive of seating 
at bars, counters or cocktail tables. The primary operation of the restaurant shall be for the serving of full-
course meals. A restaurant must derive at least 51 percent of its gross revenue from the sale of food and 
non-alcoholic beverages. Records shall be provided to the city, upon written request, for determination of 
percentage requirements. No person shall attempt to circumvent the intent of this subsection by an 
artifice or scheme, such as the serving of stock meals. The term "stock meals," as used in this definition, 
includes, but is not limited to, the serving of cold plates, snacks, hors d'oeuvres, microwave oven heated 
foods or previously prepared sandwiches. 
    Sale and sell mean any transfer of an alcoholic beverage for a consideration, any gift of an alcoholic 
beverage in connection with or as a part of a transfer of property other than an alcoholic beverage for a 
consideration, or the serving of an alcoholic beverage by a club licensed under the beverage law. 
    School means a public or private elementary, middle or high school. 
    Vendor includes all persons selling, keeping with the intention of selling, or dealing in the beverages 
defined in this section. 
(Code 1993, § 6-2; Ord. No. 754, § I(3-2), 3-17-1993; Ord. No. 2376, § 1, 9-3-2014; Ord. No. 
2454, § 1, 10-21-2015; Ord. No. 2612 , § 6-2, 12-20-2017) 
State Law reference— Definitions, F.S. § 561.01 et seq. 


Sec. 6-3. - Possession or consumption in public place. 
(a) ?Prohibition and exceptions. 
(1) ?It is unlawful for any person to use, possess, consume, or carry in any cup, glass, can, or other 
open or unsealed container, any alcoholic beverage or any mixture containing an alcoholic 
beverage in any public park or governmental property or on the public right-of-way, inclusive of 
streets, sidewalks or alleys, within the municipal corporate limits of the city, except as otherwise 
permitted under subsections (a)(4) through (6) of this section. 
(2) ?It is unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic beverages or carry in any cup, glass, can or 
other open or unsealed container any alcoholic beverage or any mixture containing an alcoholic 
beverage in or upon any parking area open to public use or in or upon any private property 
without the consent of the owner, tenant or other person lawfully in possession of said property, 
except as otherwise permitted under subsections (a)(4) through (6) of this section. 
(3) ?It is unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic beverages or carry in any cup, glass, can, or 
other open or unsealed container any alcoholic beverage or any mixture containing an alcoholic 
beverage while such person is in or on any vehicle which is located in or upon any parking area 
open to public use, or in or upon any private property without consent of the owner or in any 
public park or governmental property or on the public right-of-way, inclusive of streets, 
sidewalks or alleys. This subsection (a)(3) shall not apply to: 
a. ?A passenger of a vehicle in which the driver is operating the vehicle pursuant to a contract 
to provide transportation for passengers and such driver holds a valid commercial driver's 
license with a passenger endorsement issued in accordance with the requirements of F.S. 
ch. 322, as long as such consumption is not visible from the exterior of the vehicle; 
b. ?A passenger of a bus in which the driver holds a valid commercial driver's license with a 
passenger endorsement issued in accordance with the requirements of F.S. ch. 322, as 
long as such consumption is not visible from the exterior of the vehicle; or 
c. ?A passenger of a self-contained motor home which is in excess of 21 feet in length, as long 
as such consumption is not visible from the exterior of the vehicle. 
(4) ?The city council may permit consumption and carrying of alcoholic beverages on streets, 
sidewalks, alleys and rights-of-way within the municipal corporate limits of the city and/or on 
city-owned property subject to such terms and conditions as the city council may impose for the 
protection of the public health, safety and welfare through approval of a special event permit, 
use agreement, or other official action. 
(5) ?The city administrator may permit alcohol consumption by official action for events on city-
owned property where a lease or rental agreement has been authorized by city council for such 
property, and alcoholic beverage sales and/or service takes place subject to such terms and 
conditions as the city administrator or his designee may impose for the protection of the public 
health, safety, and welfare and all other requirements of law. 
(6) ?Any individual, corporation, association or organization which has received permission from the 
city to engage in a public or private event is further authorized to provide alcoholic beverages 
for consumption at the particular event or program, given such authorization is expressly 
approved by the city pursuant to the requirements of this section and all other requirements of 
law through the approval of a special event permit, use agreement, or other official action. 
(b) ?Consumption in parking areas, lots, etc., outside licensed premises prohibited; vendor's 
responsibilities. 
(1) ?It is unlawful for any vendor or for any agent, servant or employee of such vendor, to permit the 
consumption of any alcoholic beverages in or upon other areas outside of the building or room 
mentioned in the vendor's license certificate as the address thereof, when any part of such 
parking or area is adjacent to the building or premises in which the business is operated and 
when such parking or other area is owned, rented, leased, regulated, controlled or provided, 
directly or indirectly, by such licensed vendor or by any agent, servant or employee of such 
licensed vendor. 
(2) ?A licensed vendor shall post and maintain a legible painted or printed sign in at least two 
separate prominent places on such parking or other area with sufficient light directed thereon to 
be visible during the hours of darkness while such place of business is open, in letters not less 
than three inches in height, stating: 
"WARNING: Drinking Alcoholic Beverages on this Lot Prohibited—$500.00 Fine and/or 60 
days in Jail—City Ordinance." 
Posting of such signs shall constitute prima facie evidence that such vendor is not operating in 
violation of subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(3) ?If any licensed vendor mentioned in this section is a corporation, then the officers of such 
corporation shall be regarded as the owners thereof for the purposes of enforcement of this 
section. 
(Code 1983, § 3-1(a), (b), (d); Code 1993, § 6-3; Ord. No. 754, § I(3-1(a), (b), (d)), 3-17-1993; 
Ord. No. 2272, § 2, 10-17-2012; Ord. No. 2376, § 1, 9-3-2014; Ord. No. 2454, § 1, 10-21-2015; 
Ord. No. 2612 , § 6-3, 12-20-2017) 


Sec. 6-4. - Possession or consumption on golf course or in golf cart. 
    Section 6-3 shall not be applicable to any person while on a golf course or in a golf cart while going 
to and from a clubhouse or villa or from hole to hole on the golf course, unless the golf cart is being 
operated on a public right-of-way. 
(Code 1983, § 3-1(e); Code 1993, § 6-5; Ord. No. 754, § I(3-1(e)), 3-17-1993; Ord. No. 2376, § 
1, 9-3-2014; Ord. No. 2454, § 1, 10-21-2015) 


Sec. 6-5. - Permitting consumption in areas adjacent to vendor's premises; permitting open containers 
to be taken from premises. 
(a) ?It is unlawful for any vendor, or for any agent, servant or employee of such vendor, to permit the 
consumption of any alcoholic beverages in or upon any parking or other area outside of the vendor's 
building or room if such parking or other area is adjacent to the building or premises in which the 
business licensed is operated, when such parking or other area is owned, rented, leased, regulated, 
controlled or provided, directly or indirectly, by such licensed vendor or any agent, servant or 
employee of such licensed vendor. 
(b) ?A licensed vendor may post and maintain a legible painted or printed sign in at least two separate 
prominent places on such parking or other area, with sufficient light directed thereon to be visible 
during the hours of darkness while such place of business is open, in letters not less than three 
inches in height, stating the following: 
"WARNING: Drinking Alcoholic Beverages on this Lot Prohibited—$500.00 Fine and/or 60 days in 
Jail—City Ordinance." 
Posting of such signs shall constitute prima facie evidence that such vendor is not operating in violation of 
subsection (a) of this section. 
(c) ?If any licensed vendor mentioned in this section is a corporation, then the officers of such 
corporation shall be regarded as the owners thereof for the purposes of enforcement of this section. 
(d) ?It is unlawful for any vendor, or his agents or employees, licensed to sell beer, wine, liquor or other 
alcoholic beverages within the city, to knowingly allow any person to take from the licensed premises 
any opened beer, wine, liquor or other alcoholic beverage container, or to knowingly allow any 
person to take from the licensed premises any glass or other opened or unsealed container 
containing an alcoholic beverage or any mixture containing an alcoholic beverage. 
(e) ?Violation of this section shall be prosecuted and punished in the manner provided by general law. 
(Code 1983, § 3-1(f)—(j); Code 1993, § 6-6; Ord. No. 754, § I(3-1(f)—(j)), 3-17-1993; Ord. No. 
2376, § 1, 9-3-2014; Ord. No. 2454, § 1, 10-21-2015) 


Sec. 6-6. - Location of sales. 
(a) ?No person shall sell any alcoholic beverage within 500 feet of any established school, which 
distance shall be measured by following the shortest route of ordinary pedestrian travel along the 
public thoroughfare from the main entrance of such place of business to the nearest point of the 
school grounds in use as part of the school facilities. 
(b) ?Where an establishment for the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages is located in conformity 
with subsection (a) of this section, the subsequent location of a school in the proximity of such 
existing establishment shall not be construed to cause such establishment to be in violation of this 
chapter, provided the establishment maintains a current occupational license. 
(c) ?The restrictions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to: 
(1) ?Supermarkets, convenience stores, drugstores or similar establishments which sell alcoholic 
beverages in-house or as an accessory use, in sealed containers, for consumption off the 
premises. 
(2) ?Bars and lounges which: 
a. ?Limit the sale of alcoholic beverages to wine and/or beer only, in accordance with a license 
issued by the state division of alcoholic beverages and tobacco, where wine and/or beer is 
served only on the premises and/or sold only in sealed containers for consumption off the 
premises; and 
b. ?Are located within both (i) the community redevelopment area of the city community 
redevelopment agency as designated by the community redevelopment plan, and (ii) the 
downtown development overlay district. The community redevelopment area and 
downtown development overlay district share the common area herein described as those 
lands within the following boundaries: Highland Avenue to Sheeler Avenue and 10th Street 
to 1st Street. 
(3) ?Restaurants which: 
a. ?Limit the sale of alcoholic beverages to wine and/or beer only in accordance with a license 
issued by the state division of alcoholic beverages and tobacco where wine and/or beer is 
served only on the premises and/or sold only in sealed containers for consumption off the 
premises; and 
b. ?Are located within both (i) the community redevelopment area of the city community 
redevelopment agency as designated by the community redevelopment plan, and (ii) the 
downtown development overlay district. The community redevelopment area and 
downtown development overlay district share the common area herein described as those 
lands within the following boundaries: Highland Avenue to Sheeler Avenue and 10th Street 
to 1st Street. 
(4) ?Nonprofit private clubs that are located within both (i) the community redevelopment area of the 
city community redevelopment agency as designated by the community redevelopment plan, 
and (ii) the downtown development overlay district. The community redevelopment area and 
downtown development overlay district share the common area herein described as those lands 
within the following boundaries: Highland Avenue to Sheeler Avenue and 10th Street to 1st 
Street. 
(5) ?City-owned property for which a lease or rental agreement has been authorized by city council, 
and alcoholic beverage sales and/or service takes place subject to such terms and conditions 
as the city administrator or his designee may impose for the protection of the public health and 
safety, and subject to all other requirements of law. 
(6) ?A special event permit, use agreement, or other similar official action approved by the city for 
an event on streets, sidewalks, alleys and rights-of-way, and/or city property within the 
municipal corporate limits of the city subject to such terms and conditions as the city council 
may impose for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Code 1983, § 3-3; Code 1993, § 6-7; Ord. No. 754, § I(3-4, 3-7, 3-8), 3-17-1993; Ord. No. 
2376, § 1, 9-3-2014; Ord. No. 2454, § 1, 10-21-2015; Ord. No. 2612 , § 6-7, 12-20-2017) 
State Law reference— Intoxicating beverages defined, F.S. § 561.01(5); beer defined, F.S. § 
563.01; wine defined, F.S. § 564.01; authority to regulate location of certain establishments, F.S. 
§ 562.45. 


Sec. 6-7. - Existing establishments. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to be retroactive, and any existing 
establishment for the sale of alcoholic beverages which conforms to the regulations in effect when such 
establishment was established shall not be rendered illegal or in violation through the adoption of these 
regulations. If any nonconforming or grandfathered use ceases operation, for any reason, for a period of 
more than 180 days, the nonconforming or grandfathered use shall be deemed abandoned and shall not 
thereafter be permitted to continue. 
(Code 1993, § 6-8; Ord. No. 754, § I(3-9), 3-17-1993; Ord. No. 2376, § 1, 9-3-2014; Ord. No. 
2454, § 1, 10-21-2015; Ord. No. 2612 , § 6-8, 12-20-2017) 


Sec. 6-8. - Hours of sale; closing hours. 
(a) ?On-premises; catered events; hours of operation. 
(1) ?Except as provided by subsections (a)(1)a. through d. of this section, alcoholic beverages may 
be sold, consumed, served or permitted to be served or consumed, in any place holding a 
license issued by the division of alcoholic beverages and tobacco of the department of business 
and professional regulation, which license permits the consumption of alcoholic beverages on 
the premises of the licensee, only between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. of the 
following day, each day of the week, except that alcoholic beverages may be sold, consumed, 
served or permitted to be served or consumed, in any place holding such a license, between the 
hours of 11:00 a.m. on December 31 and 3:00 a.m. of the following day. 
a. ?At any golf course holding a license, the hours of sale, consumption or service may begin 
at 7:00 a.m. and end at sundown of the same day. 
b. ?At any private function at a banquet hall or convention facility holding a license, the hours 
of sale, consumption or service may begin at 7:00 a.m. and end at 3:00 a.m. of the 
following day, provided the hall or facility has a minimum square footage of 10,000 square 
feet available for the private function. 
c. ?At any hotel or motel (as the terms are defined by state statute) holding a license, the hours 
of sale, consumption or service may begin at 7:00 a.m. and end at 2:00 a.m. of the 
following day, except that at any private guest room the hours of sale or service may end at 
3:00 a.m. of the following day. 
d. ?At any restaurant, the hours of sale, consumption or service may begin at 7:00 a.m. and 
end at 2:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(2) ?Alcoholic beverages may be sold or served at a catered event by a caterer licensed by the 
division of alcoholic beverages and tobacco and the division of hotels and restaurants, only 
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(3) ?For those licensed under the beverage law to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the 
vendor's licensed premises and whose principal business is the sale of alcoholic beverages, 
and for those licensed under the beverage law as caterers, the hours of operation or hours of 
business at a premises shall be restricted to the hours of sale, consumption or service set forth 
in subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this section. 
(b) ?Package sale, off-premises. Alcoholic beverages may be sold in any place holding a license under 
the division of alcoholic beverages and tobacco, state department of business and professional 
regulation, which license permits package sale of alcoholic beverages by the licensee for 
consumption off the premises of the licensee, only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. of 
the following day, each day of the week, except that alcoholic beverages may be sold in any place 
holding a license under the division of alcoholic beverages and tobacco, state department of 
business and professional regulation, which license permits package sale of alcoholic beverages by 
the licensee for consumption off the premises of the licensee between the hours of 7:00 a.m. on 
December 31 and 3:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(Code 1983, § 3-4; Code 1993, § 6-9; Ord. No. 754, § I(3-5), 3-17-1993; Ord. No. 2376, § 1, 9-
3-2014; Ord. No. 2454, § 1, 10-21-2015; Ord. No. 2612 , § 6-9, 12-20-2017) 
State Law reference— Intoxicating beverage defined, F.S. § 561.01(5); beer defined, F.S. § 
563.01; wine defined, F.S. § 564.01; ordinances regulating hours of sale, F.S. § 562.14. 


Sec. 6-9. - Forfeiture of vehicles used for illegal transportation. 
    Any vehicle, vessel, aircraft or animal used in the transportation or removal of, or for the deposit or 
concealment of, any illicit liquor still or stilling apparatus or any mash, wort, wash or other fermented 
liquids capable of being distilled or manufactured into an alcoholic beverage containing more than one 
percent of alcohol by weight, or any alcoholic beverage commonly known and referred to as moonshine 
whiskey, where seized by a municipal police officer within the corporate limits of the city, shall be forfeited 
as provided for by state law. 
(Code 1983, § 3-5; Code 1993, § 6-11; Ord. No. 754, § I(3-6), 3-17-1993; Ord. No. 2376, § 1, 9-
3-2014; Ord. No. 2454, § 1, 10-21-2015) 
State Law reference— Forfeiture, F.S. § 562.27; alcoholic beverages, F.S. chs. 561—565; 
effect of state beverage statutes upon powers of municipalities, F.S. § 562.45(2). 


Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 10-1—10-18. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - MOTION PHOTOGRAPHY PRODUCTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Film and entertainment industry, F.S. § 288.1251; entertainment industry 
incentive programs, F.S. § 288.1254; obscenity, F.S. § 847.001 et seq.; obscene programming, F.S. § 
847.201; obscene official rating of motion pictures, F.S. § 847.202. 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 10-19. - Portrayal of certain acts prohibited. 
    It shall be a violation of this article to film, tape or act out on or upon any city-owned facility any act 
that would portray the act of rape, sodomy, bestiality or sexual intercourse, or acts of violence that portray 
exploding body parts or the dismemberment of bodies or body parts of humans or animals. Violation of 
this section shall be punishable according to section 1-14. 
(Code 1983, § 13-89; Code 1993, § 10-36) 


Sec. 10-20. - Authorization required for use of words "Apopka" or "City of Apopka." 
    Usage of the words "Apopka" or "City of Apopka" either visually or verbally in a film, including in the 
credit line, shall be prohibited without the express written consent of the mayor of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 13-90; Code 1993, § 10-37) 


Secs. 10-21—10-43. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 


Sec. 10-44. - Purpose of division. 
    The purposes of this division are to establish a one-stop permitting process for motion photography 
production endeavors on public property owned or controlled by or under the jurisdiction of the city, to 
provide a means whereby acts otherwise prohibited by this Code may be allowed during such 
productions, and to provide for an exemption from other permit requirements of this Code in recognition of 
the economic impact of the motion picture and television industries. 
(Code 1983, § 13-82; Code 1993, § 10-61) 


Sec. 10-45. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City equipment means any tangible property, other than real property, purchased by public funds and 
utilized in the normal course and scope of providing governmental service by the city. 
    City facility means any public street, sidewalk, place or building owned or controlled by or under the 
jurisdiction of the city, including, but not limited to, city parks and recreation facilities and city hall. 
    Film commission means the Orlando Film Commission. 
    Motion photography means the commercial taking or making of a motion picture, television, 
videotape or film production utilizing city equipment or utilizing city facilities. The term "motion 
photography" shall include, and a production permit shall be required for, such productions on private 
property not at a studio involving the erection of tents or other temporary structures or involving the use of 
pyrotechnics, explosives or other incendiary devices. This term shall not include the shooting of such film 
at studios constructed for such purpose where no city equipment or city facilities are involved, and shall 
not include any news, news feature or documentary production. 
    Production permit and permit mean the permit required by this article. 
(Code 1983, § 13-83; Code 1993, § 10-62) 


Sec. 10-46. - Authority of film commission. 
    The film commission is hereby authorized to act as the agent for the city in the receipt and 
processing of applications for production permits. After review and approval by the city, the film 
commission shall issue the permit. With regard to motion photography production, no other city permits 
shall be required. 
(Code 1983, § 13-84; Code 1993, § 10-63) 


Sec. 10-47. - Permit required. 
    No person shall advertise, engage in, participate in or start any motion photography production 
unless a production permit shall first have been obtained from the film commission. Violation of this 
section shall be punishable as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1983, § 13-85(a); Code 1993, § 10-64) 


Sec. 10-48. - Application; prohibited activities. 
(a) ?Any person seeking the issuance of a production permit shall file an application with the film 
commission, on forms provided by the film commission. The application shall be filed not more than 
180 days before and not less than five working days before the commencement of production. The 
application shall be signed, under oath, by an authorized representative of the applicant. 
(b) ?The application shall contain the following information: 
(1) ?The locations of the production. 
(2) ?The duration and type of the production. 
(3) ?Proof of general liability insurance coverage in the amount of at least $1,000,000.00, with the 
city named as an additional insured. 
(4) ?Special effects to be utilized, especially incendiary or explosive devices, with proof of 
$5,000,000.00 liability insurance therefor. In addition, the application shall list the person in 
charge (pyrotechnician) of such special effects, together with his qualifications and licensure by 
the applicable federal and state agencies. 
(5) ?Proposed utilization of city equipment. 
(6) ?Necessity for closures of public streets or sidewalks, and for what duration, approval of which is 
subject to the public safety and welfare needs of the city. 
(7) ?A written summary or explanation of the portion of the production to be shot within the city. 
(8) ?The number and types of vehicles and equipment and number of personnel to be on location 
with the production. 
(9) ?An agreement to pay for extraordinary services required or provided by the city. 
(10) ?Prior to final issuance of the permit, a certificate signed under oath that the mayor and all 
adjacent private property owners and tenants, and other persons as may be directed by the city, 
have been notified of the filming and arrangements made to cause the least disruption for the 
property owners and tenants as possible, and that the local chamber of commerce has been 
consulted and notified. 
(c) ?The city strictly prohibits the use of any profane language, profane acts, profane conduct or profane 
materials that are deemed to be a danger, threat or offense to the public health, safety and welfare 
by any federal or state regulation, statute or court decision. 
(d) ?The application shall contain a certificate, under oath, that the film will not be a pornographic film. 
The term "pornographic," for the purposes of this article, means a film or tape of activities of one or 
the more of the following: 
(1) ?Depiction of human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
(2) ?Acts of human masturbation, actual sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality, and, in a graphically 
sexual context, the following: masochism, sadism or sadomasochism. 
(Code 1983, § 13-86; Code 1993, § 10-65) 


Sec. 10-49. - Suspension or revocation. 
    Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the production permit, once issued, shall be 
grounds for immediate suspension of the production until such time as the noncompliance is remedied. 
The suspension shall be initially communicated orally, followed by a written suspension order. Continued 
failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the production permit may result in revocation of the 
permit. Continuation of the production in violation of the suspension or revocation shall be punishable as 
provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1983, § 13-85(b); Code 1993, § 10-66) 


Sec. 10-50. - Exemption from other permit requirements. 
    Once a production permit has been issued, and notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code to 
the contrary, no other city permits shall be required for any of the activities forming a part of the 
production. 
(Code 1983, § 13-87(a); Code 1993, § 10-67) 


Sec. 10-51. - Exemption from regulations pertaining to outdoor public assemblies. 
    The provisions of section 62-92 et seq., insofar as certain acts are required or prohibited, may be 
suspended in connection with the conduct of a production pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1983, § 13-87(b); Code 1993, § 10-68) 


Sec. 10-52. - Restoration of production site. 
    If some or all of a motion photography production is to take place on public or private property not at 
a studio and the production involves the erection of temporary structures or temporary modification of an 
existing structure or the introduction of an object or substance onto the property, the applicant for the 
production permit shall be required to restore the property to the condition existing prior to the production. 
In addition, the city may require that the applicant provide a performance bond, in an amount to be 
determined by the city, to ensure such restoration. 
(Code 1983, § 13-87(c); Code 1993, § 10-69) 


Sec. 10-53. - Payment of costs for extraordinary services. 
    The city shall recover direct costs for extraordinary services rendered in connection with a production 
regulated by this article. Such costs shall include, but not be limited to, charges for personnel and 
equipment committed in support of the production which are outside the normal scope of government 
services. Based on the information contained in the permit application, an estimate of these costs will be 
provided to the applicant prior to issuance of the permit. The city may require prepayment of all or a 
portion of these estimated costs prior to issuance of the permit. At the conclusion of the production, the 
difference between the actual costs and the amount prepaid will be refunded by the city or paid by the 
applicant, as appropriate. The city is under no obligation to provide city personnel or equipment, and 
these shall be provided only if the mayor of the city approves. 
(Code 1983, § 13-88; Code 1993, § 10-70) 


Secs. 10-54—10-79. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CODE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Obscenity, F.S. § 847.001 et seq.; obscene programming, F.S. § 847.201; 
obscene official rating of motion pictures, F.S. § 847.202; display of adult publications, F.S. § 847.0134; 
human trafficking, F.S. § 787.06. 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 10-80. - Purpose, findings and intent; incorporation of "whereas" clauses. 
(a) ?Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to regulate adult entertainment establishments and sexually 
oriented businesses in order to promote and protect the public health, safety, good order, morals and 
general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations of 
adult entertainment establishments and sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions 
of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing an unreasonable limitation or 
unreasonable restriction on the content of any lawful communicative materials including sexually 
oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this article to unreasonably restrict or 
deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment or to deny 
access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment protected by the First 
Amendment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to condone or 
legitimize the distribution of obscene or otherwise illegal material. 
(b) ?Findings. Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult uses on the 
community presented in hearings and in reports made available to the commission, and on findings 
incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. 
American Mini Theaters, 426 U.S. 50 (1976); Barnes v. Glen Theater, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), on 
materials made of record relating to the St. Johns County Public Nudity Ordinance, and on the 
substance of and findings made or incorporated in studies accomplished in other communities and 
ordinances enacted in other communities, including, but not limited to, New York, New York; City of 
Houston Ordinance Number 97-15; Senate Bill Number 232, as passed by the Kansas State 
Legislature; Phoenix, Arizona; Tucson, Arizona; St. Paul, Minnesota; Minneapolis, Minnesota; 
Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, 
California; Austin, Texas; Macon-Bibb County, Georgia; Palm Beach County, Florida; Manatee 
County, Florida; the findings of the Attorney General of the State of Minnesota; the report of the 
United States Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986); Jacksonville, Florida; Detroit, 
Michigan; "A Summary of a National Survey of Real Estate Appraisers Regarding the Effect of Adult 
Bookstores on Property Values," conducted by the Division of Planning, Department of Metropolitan 
Development, Indianapolis, January 1984; the publication entitled "Protecting Communities From 
Sexually Oriented Businesses" (Southwest Legal Press, Inc.); the publication entitled "Local 
Regulation of Adult Businesses" (Clark, Boardman and Callaghan); publications prepared by the 
Florida Family Association, Inc. (Tampa, Florida) relating to the regulation of sexually oriented 
businesses and adverse secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses; the "Report to the 
American Center for Law and Justice on the Secondary Impacts of Sex Oriented Businesses," Peter 
R. Hecht, Ph.D. (1996); and the findings of fact relating to the Adult Entertainment Code of Orange 
County, Florida, the county in which the City of Apopka is located, matters and materials submitted 
at the public hearings relating to this article, and other matters and documents relating to all of the 
above; the city council finds: 
(1) ?Sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments lend themselves to 
ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled or not adequately 
controlled by the operators of the establishments or businesses. Further, there are presently no 
mechanisms or inadequate mechanisms to make the owners of these businesses or 
establishments responsible for the activities that occur on their premises. 
(2) ?Certain workers of certain sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment 
establishments defined in this article engage in a higher incidence of certain types of illicit 
sexual behavior than workers of other business establishments. 
(3) ?Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at sexually oriented 
businesses and adult entertainment establishments, especially those which provide private or 
semi-private areas, booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, live sex shows and those 
having physical interaction between workers and customers. 
(4) ?Offering and providing such private spaces encourages such previously-mentioned activities, 
which create unhealthy conditions. 
(5) ?Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades, and other sexually oriented businesses 
and adult entertainment establishments for the purpose of engaging in sex within the premises 
of such businesses and establishments. 
(6) ?At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented 
businesses and adult entertainment establishments, including, but not limited to: syphilis; 
gonorrhea; human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV/AIDS); genital herpes; hepatitis B; 
non-A, non-B hepatitis; amebiasis; salmonella infections; and shigella infections. 
(7) ?Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an increasing cumulative number of reported 
cases of AIDS caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in the United States: 600 in 
1982; 2,200 in 1983; 4,600 in 1984; 8,555 in 1985; and 253,448 through December 31, 1992. 
(8) ?As of December 31, 1995, there have been 51,838 reported cases of AIDS in the state. 
(9) ?From 1981 to June 1996, the number of living persons testing positive for the HIV antibody with 
AIDS symptoms has risen to 73,217 in the 28 states having confidential reporting requirements. 
(10) ?The number of cases of early (less than one year) syphilis in the United States reported 
annually has risen, with 33,613 cases reported in 1982 and 45,200 through November of 1990. 
(11) ?The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States reported annually remains at a high 
level, with over one-half million cases being reported in 1990. 
(12) ?The Surgeon General of the United States, in his report of October 22, 1986, has advised the 
American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, 
intravenous drug abuse, exposure to infected blood and blood components, and from an 
infected mother to her newborn. 
(13) ?According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and 
gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts. 
(14) ?Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment 
establishments are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, 
and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of owners and 
operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities. 
(15) ?Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in the areas of sexually 
oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments where persons view adult-oriented 
films. 
(16) ?The findings noted in subsections (b)(1) through (15) of this section and as set forth 
hereinafter raise substantial governmental concerns. 
(17) ?Sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments have operational 
characteristics which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial 
governmental concerns. 
(18) ?A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of that 
reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators of the sexually oriented businesses and 
adult entertainment establishments. Further, such a licensing procedure will place a heretofore 
non-existent incentive on the operators to see that the business or establishment is run in a 
manner consistent with the good order, health, safety and welfare of its patrons and workers, as 
well as the citizens of the city. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the 
licensee is the actual operator of the business or establishment, fully in possession and control 
of the premises and activities occurring therein. 
(19) ?Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on premises with adult 
booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual 
activity occurring in adult theaters. 
(20) ?Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments 
to keep information regarding current workers and certain past workers will help reduce the 
incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential 
witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from working at such businesses and 
establishments. 
(21) ?The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day-to-
day operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment 
establishments, where such information is substantially related to the significant governmental 
interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted 
diseases. 
(22) ?It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases to obtain a limited 
amount of information regarding certain workers who may engage in the conduct which this 
article is designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to such activity. 
(23) ?The fact that an applicant for an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented 
business license has been convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational 
assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of this article. 
(24) ?Commercial establishments exist or may exist within the city and other nearby cities and 
counties in central Florida where adult entertainment material is possessed, displayed, 
exhibited, distributed and/or sold for commercial purposes in the form of books, magazines, 
periodicals or other printer material, or photographs, films, motion pictures, prints, videotapes, 
slides, computer digital graphic recordings or other visual representations or recordings, or 
recordings or other audio matter, or instruments, novelties, devices, or paraphernalia which 
depict, illustrate, describe or relate to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(25) ?Commercial establishments exist or may exist within the city and other nearby cities or 
counties in central Florida where adult entertainment and sexually oriented commercial activities 
in the form of nude, semi-nude or topless dancers, entertainers, performers, or other individuals, 
who, for commercial gain, perform or are presented while displaying or exposing specified 
anatomical areas; or engage in straddle dancing or touching with customers. 
(26) ?Commercial sexually oriented businesses exist or operate or may exist or operate within the 
city or other nearby cities or counties in central Florida where sexually oriented services are 
offered for commercial or pecuniary gain in the form of commercial physical contact, escort 
services and other services providing sexual encounters. The workers of such sexually oriented 
businesses operating in central Florida engage in physical contact or touching with customers 
including, but not limited to, acts of prostitution, or encourage or entice the customers to engage 
in lewdness. 
(27) ?The activities occurring at sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment 
establishments occur at establishments and businesses which operate primarily for the purpose 
of making a profit and, as such, are subject to regulation by the city in the interest of the good 
order, health, safety, economy, property values, morals and general welfare of the people, 
businesses and industries of the city. A major industry which is important to the community's 
economic welfare is tourism by persons seeking to bring children to visit central Florida 
attractions who wish to stay in a community with a family atmosphere not dominated by 
commercialized sexual themes. 
(28) ?When the activities occurring at sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment 
establishments are present in establishments and businesses, other activities which are illegal, 
unsafe, or unhealthful tend to accompany them, concentrate around them, and be aggravated 
by them. Such other activities include, but are not limited to, prostitution, pandering, solicitation 
for prostitution, lewd and lascivious behavior, exposing minors to harmful materials, possession, 
distribution and transportation of obscene materials, sale or possession of controlled 
substances, and violent crimes against persons and property. 
(29) ?When the activities occurring at sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment 
establishments are competitively exploited in establishments and businesses, they tend to 
attract an undesirable number of transients, blight neighborhoods, adversely affect neighboring 
businesses, lower real property values, promote the particular crimes described above and, 
ultimately, lead residents and businesses to move to other locations. 
(30) ?Sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments often have exterior 
signs or exterior appearances that lower the surrounding property values and contribute to 
urban decline. 
(31) ?In order to reverse urban blight, the city has established a community redevelopment area 
pursuant to F.S. ch. 163. Sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments 
that contribute to urban blight operate at cross-purposes with the community redevelopment 
area. 
(32) ?The activities occurring at sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment 
establishments sometimes occur in establishments and businesses concurrent with the sale 
and consumption of alcoholic beverages, which concurrence leads to a further increase in 
criminal activity, unsafe activity, and disturbances of the peace and order of the surrounding 
community, and creates additional hazards to the health and safety of customers and workers, 
and further depreciates the value of adjoining real property, harming the economic welfare of 
the surrounding community and adversely affecting the quality of life, commerce, and 
community environment. 
(33) ?Physical contact or touching within sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment 
establishments between workers exhibiting specified anatomical areas and customers poses a 
threat to the health of both and promotes the spread of communicable and social diseases. 
(34) ?In order to preserve and safeguard the good order, health, morals, safety, and general welfare 
of the people of the city, it is necessary and advisable for the city to regulate the conduct of 
owners, managers, operators, agents, workers, entertainers, performers, and customers at 
sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments. 
(35) ?The potential dangers to the good order, morals, health, safety, and general welfare of the 
people of the city posed by permitting a sexually oriented business or adult entertainment 
establishment to operate without first meeting the requirements for obtaining a license under 
this article are so great as to require the licensure of such establishments prior to their being 
permitted to operate. 
(36) ?Requiring operators of sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments 
to keep records of information concerning workers and certain recent past workers as well as 
customer contracts and other matters and materials will help reduce the incidence of certain 
types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects and 
by making it difficult for minors to work at or be customers in such establishments. 
(37) ?Prohibiting sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments from 
operating within set distances of schools, religious institutions, residences, areas zoned or 
designated for residential use, and parks at which minors are customarily found will serve to 
protect minors from the adverse effects of the activities that accompany such establishments 
and businesses. 
(38) ?Straddle dancing, unregulated private performances, and enclosed adult booths in sexually 
oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments have resulted in indiscriminate 
commercial sex between strangers and poses a threat to the health of the participants and 
promotes the spread of communicable sexually transmitted diseases. Straddle dancing is 
primarily conduct, rather than communication or expression. 
(39) ?Workers at sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments engage in a 
higher incidence of certain types of unhealthy or criminal behavior than workers of other 
establishments and businesses including, but not limited to, a very high incidence of illegal 
prostitution or engaging in lewdness in violation of F.S. ch. 796, operation without occupational 
licenses, and illegal and unlicensed massage. 
(40) ?Physical contact or touching between workers of sexually oriented businesses and adult 
entertainment establishments and customers poses a threat to the health of both and promotes 
the spread of communicable and sexually transmissible diseases. 
(41) ?The practice of not paying workers at sexually oriented businesses and requiring them to earn 
their entire income from tips or gratuities from their customers who are predisposed to want 
sexual activity has resulted in a high incidence of prostitution and crimes related to lewdness by 
workers. 
(42) ?Sexually oriented businesses involve activities that are pure conduct engaged in for the 
purpose of making a profit, rather than speech or expressive activity, and, therefore, are subject 
to and require increased regulation to protect the health, good order, morals, welfare and safety 
of the community. 
(43) ?Requiring sexually oriented businesses to post a listing of services provided and restrict 
services to those listed as well as maintaining a customer contract and transaction record in a 
daily register will discourage incidents of criminal behavior such as lewdness and prostitution, 
thereby further safeguarding the health of both workers and customers, and will assist 
facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects if criminal acts do occur. 
(44) ?The general welfare, health, good order, morals and safety of the citizens of the city will be 
promoted by the enactment of this article. 
(c) ?Intent. It is the intent of this article to protect and preserve the good order, health, peace, morals, 
safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city. This article regulates conduct and is not an ordinance 
that affects the use of land as contemplated by F.S. § 166.041 (1997). 
(d) ?Authority. This article is enacted under the constitutionally derived home rule power of the city in the 
interest of the good order, health, morals, peace, safety, and general welfare of the people of the 
city. 
(e) ?"Whereas" clauses. It is the city council's further intention to accomplish those intents and purposes 
expressed by the city council in the recital ("whereas" clauses) of this article, each of which are 
incorporated by reference into this section. 
(f) ?Speech protection. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit constitutionally protected 
expression or speech. This article is intended to reasonably regulate the adult entertainment industry 
and sexually oriented businesses which engage in commercial activities involving acts or services of 
a sexually explicit nature or which involve acts or services involving matters which are sexual in 
nature. 
(Code 1993, § 10-95; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-81. - Construction. 
(a) ?This article shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purpose of reasonably regulating sexually 
oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments in order to reduce or eliminate adverse 
secondary effects of such businesses and establishments. (Barnes v. Glen Theater, Inc., 510 U.S. 
560, 111 S. Ct. 2456, 115 L.Ed. 2d. 504 (1991), and the recent litigation in St. Johns County (see 
Cafe 207, Inc. v. St. Johns County, 856 F. Supp. 641 (M.D. Fla. 1994)); affirmed, Cafe 207, Inc. v. 
St. Johns County, 66 F.3d. 272 (11th Cir. 1995); cert. denied, 134 L.Ed. 2d. 647 (U.S. April 22, 
1996).) This article shall not be construed to authorize any illegal act under federal law, state law or 
city ordinance. This article is intended to reasonably regulate such matters in order to reduce or 
eliminate the adverse secondary effects of commercial establishments and businesses. The 
regulation of alcoholic beverage establishments is also addressed in this Code and other provisions 
of law. 
(b) ?Unless otherwise indicated, all provisions of this article shall apply equally to all persons, regardless 
of sex. Masculine pronouns, such as "he," "his," and "him," as employed in this article, shall also be 
construed to apply to feminine pronouns and neutral pronouns, unless the context suggests 
otherwise. Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, unless the context 
suggests otherwise. 
(Code 1993, § 10-96; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-82. - Obscenity/indecent exposure unlawful. 
    As a matter of state and federal law, obscenity is unlawful in the city. Likewise, state law prohibits 
indecent exposure. Nothing in this article shall be construed to allow or permit the possession, distribution 
and transportation of obscene materials; to authorize the exposing of persons under 18 years of age to 
motion pictures, exhibitions, shows, representations and presentations of specified sexual activities or 
persons displaying or exhibiting specified anatomical areas; or the indecent exposure of a person as 
prohibited by state law. 
(Code 1993, § 10-97; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-83. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult bookstore/adult video store means: 
(1) ?An establishment which, as one of its principal business purposes, sells or rents adult material 
or which offers adult materials for sale or rent as a significant portion of its stock and trade. 
(2) ?Any establishment in which any one or more of the following five elements occur shall be 
presumed to be an adult bookstore/adult video store: 
a. ?That the adult material is accessible to customers; the term "accessible to customers" 
means that the item can be physically touched, picked up, handled by a customer before 
being transferred from the control of a worker, or is visually displayed so that an adult or 
child present in the store can view substantially more than its name alone; 
b. ?That the individual items of adult material offered for sale and/or rental comprise more than 
25 percent of the unused individual items publicly displayed at the establishment as stock 
in trade in the following categories: books, magazines, periodicals, other printed matter, 
slides, photographs, films, motion pictures, videotapes, compact discs, computer digital 
graphic recordings, other visual representations, audio recordings and other audio matter, 
and more than 25 percent of the total used items publicly displayed at the establishments 
as stock in trade in each of the same categories set out above; 
c. ?The gross income each month from the sale and rental of adult material comprises more 
than ten percent of that month's gross income from the sale and rental of the goods and 
material at the establishment; 
d. ?The floor area used to display adult material comprises more than ten percent of the floor 
area used for display of all goods and material at the establishment; or 
e. ?The establishment uses any of the following terms in advertisements or any other 
promotional activities relating to the adult material: "XXX," "XX," "X," or any series of the 
letter "X," whether or not interspersed with other letters, figures or characters; "erotic" or 
deviations of that word; "adult entertainment," "adult books," "adult videos" or similar 
phases; "sexual acts" or similar phrases; "nude" or "nudies" or similar phrases; which 
letters, words or phrases a reasonable person would believe to be promotional of the 
purchase or rental of adult material. 
(3) ?In recognition of the provisions of F.S. §§ 847.013 and 847.0133, which protects minors from 
exposure to obscene material, any business which is an adult bookstore/adult video store shall 
have in place at each entrance to such business a sign, no greater than one square foot in size, 
stating: "Persons under 18 years of age not permitted." 
    Adult booth means a separate booth inside an adult entertainment establishment accessible to any 
person, regardless of whether a fee is charged for access. The term "adult booth" includes, but is not 
limited to, a peep show booth or arcade, or other booth used to view adult material. The term "adult 
booth" does not include a foyer through which any person can enter or exit the establishment, or a 
restroom. 
    Adult entertainment means: 
(1) ?The display or exposure of any specified anatomical area by a worker to a customer, 
regardless of whether the worker actually engages in performing or dancing, or where workers 
wear or display to a customer any covering, tape, pastie, or other device which simulates or 
otherwise gives the appearance of the display or exposure of any specified anatomical areas, 
regardless of whether the worker actually engages in performing or dancing. 
(2) ?Providing adult material for commercial or pecuniary gain. 
(3) ?The offering, soliciting or contracting to dance or perform by a worker with or for a customer 
with the acceptance of any consideration, tip, remuneration or compensation from or on behalf 
of that customer. 
(4) ?The dancing or performing by a worker with or within three feet of a customer with the 
acceptance of any consideration, tip, remuneration, or compensation from or on behalf of that 
customer. 
    Adult entertainment establishment means an adult performance establishment, adult bookstore/adult 
video store, adult motel, or adult theater, as those terms are defined herein, which is operated for 
commercial or pecuniary gain. An establishment with an adult entertainment license shall be presumed to 
be an adult entertainment establishment. 
    Adult material means one or more of the following, regardless of whether it is new or used: 
(1) ?Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, photographs, films, motion pictures, 
videotapes, video cassettes, slides, computer digital graphic recordings, or other visual 
representations, tape recordings, discs or other audio matter, which have as their primary or 
dominant theme matters depicting, illustrating, describing or relating to specified sexual 
activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2) ?Instruments, novelties, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with 
specified sexual activities, excluding bona fide birth control devices. 
    Adult model means any person who, for commercial or pecuniary gain, offers, suggests, or agrees to 
engage in a private performance, modeling or display of male or female lingerie, bathing suits, under 
garments, or specified anatomical areas to the view of a customer. 
    Adult motel means any motel, hotel, boardinghouse, roominghouse or similar commercial 
establishment which offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration, whose 
advertisements or business name includes the word "adult," or which advertises to the public outside of 
the premises of the establishment and visible from a public right-of-way the presentation of closed-circuit 
television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video tapes, video cassettes, slides or other photographic 
reproductions which have as their primary or dominant theme matters depicting, illustrating or relating to 
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. The term "adult motel" is included within the 
definition of "adult theater." 
    Adult performance establishment means: 
(1) ?Any establishment where any worker: 
a. ?Engages in a private performance, acts as an adult model, or displays or exposes any 
specified anatomical areas to a customer, regardless of whether the worker engages in 
dancing or any particular activity; 
b. ?Wears and displays to a customer any covering, tape, pastie, or other device which 
simulates or otherwise gives the appearance of the display or exposure of any specified 
anatomical areas, regardless of whether the worker actually engages in performing or 
dancing; 
c. ?Offers, solicits, or contracts to dance or perform with or for a customer and accepts any 
consideration, tip, remuneration or compensation from or on behalf of that customer; or 
d. ?Dances or performs with or within three feet of a customer and accepts any consideration, 
tip, remuneration, or compensation from or on behalf of that customer. 
(2) ?It is an affirmative defense to an alleged violation of this Code regarding operating an adult 
performance establishment without a license if the alleged violator demonstrates that the 
predominant business or attraction of the establishment is not offering to customers 
entertainment which is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such 
customers and the establishment and its advertising is not distinguished by an emphasis on or 
the promotion of matters or persons depicting, describing, displaying, exposing, simulating or 
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult theater means an establishment which consists of an enclosed building, or a portion or part of 
an enclosed building, or an open-air area used for viewing by persons of films, motion pictures, video 
cassettes, video tapes, slides, computer digital graphic recordings, or other photographic reproductions, 
which have as their primary or dominant theme matters depicting, illustrating or relating to specified 
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. The terms "adult motels" and "adult booths" are included 
within the definition of "adult theater." 
    Adult video store. See Adult bookstore. 
    Alcoholic beverage means all distilled spirits and all beverages containing one-half of one percent 
(0.005) or more alcohol by volume. It shall be prima facie evidence that a beverage is an alcoholic 
beverage if there is proof that the beverage in question was or is known as beer, wine, whiskey, 
moonshine whiskey, moonshine, shine, rum, gin, tequila, bourbon, vodka, scotch, scotch whiskey, 
brandy, malt liquor, or by any other similar name or names, or was contained in a bottle or can labeled as 
any of the above names, or a name similar thereto, and the bottle or can bears the manufacturer's 
insignia, name, or trademark. Any person who, by experience in the handling of alcoholic beverages, or 
who, by taste, smell, or drinking of such alcoholic beverages, has knowledge of the alcoholic nature 
thereof, may testify as to his opinion about whether such beverage is an alcoholic beverage. 
    Anal means a ring, pertaining to the rectal opening; near the anus. 
    Anilingus means oral stimulation of the anus by use of the tongue or lips. 
    Anus means the outlet of the rectum leading from the bowel. 
    Areola mans the colored circle surrounding the nipple of the female breast. 
    Bestiality means the use of animals for sexual enjoyment or any sexual act between a person and an 
animal involving the sex organ of the one and the mouth, anus, penis or vagina of the other. 
    Buggery means sodomy. 
    City commissioner means the city commissioner of the City of Apopka, Florida. 
    Commercial bodily contact means: 
(1) ?The manipulation, washing, scrubbing, stroking, or touching, for commercial or pecuniary gain, 
of the body of another person directly or indirectly through a medium or using any object, 
instrument, substance, or device between a worker and a customer. 
(2) ?The following persons engaged in the bona fide performance of the following activities shall not 
be deemed to be engaging in commercial bodily contact for the purposes of this article when 
they are engaged in the bona fide practice of their occupation or profession: 
a. ?Persons licensed as massage therapists or apprentice massage therapists pursuant to F.S. 
ch. 480, when providing massage services in an establishment licensed under F.S. ch. 
480. 
b. ?Persons licensed under the laws of the state to practice medicine, surgery, osteopathy, 
chiropody, naturopathy, or podiatry. 
c. ?Persons licensed under the laws of the state as physicians' assistants or nurses. 
d. ?Persons holding drugless practitioners' certificates under the laws of the state. 
e. ?Persons licensed as barbers or cosmetologists under the laws of the state. 
f. ?Persons performing authorized services in a hospital, nursing home, sanitarium, adult 
congregate living facility, group home, day care center, or similar place of business when 
owned and operated in accordance with the laws of the state. 
g. ?Persons who are instructors, coaches, or athletic trainers employed by, or on behalf of, any 
professional, amateur, Olympic, or similar athletic team engaging in bona fide athletic 
events, or when employed by a governmental entity or a bona fide school. 
h. ?Persons licensed as physical therapists under the laws of the state. 
    Commercial bodily contact establishment means any establishment, business, or place operated for 
commercial or pecuniary gain or where, for any form of consideration, workers or customers engage in 
commercial bodily contact, or any establishment, business or place, any portion of which is set aside, 
advertised, promoted or used as a place where commercial bodily contact occurs, or which is described 
or depicted as a body scrub salon, body wash salon, or body relaxation salon. 
    Commercial establishment means any business, location, or place which conducts or allows to be 
conducted on its premises any activity for commercial or pecuniary gain. 
    Commercial or pecuniary gain means operated for commercial or pecuniary gain, and shall be 
presumed for any establishment which has received an occupational license. For the purposes of this 
article, operation for commercial or pecuniary gain shall not depend on actual profit or loss. An 
establishment which has an occupational license or an establishment which advertises itself as a type of 
adult entertainment establishment shall be presumed to be operated for commercial or pecuniary gain. 
    Conviction means a determination of guilt resulting from a plea or trial, regardless of whether 
adjudication was withheld or whether imposition of a sentence was suspended. 
    Coprophagy means the eating of excrement. Coprophilia means an abnormal interest in feces. 
    Cunnilingus means sexual activity in which the mouth and tongue are used to stimulate the female 
genitalia. 
    Customer means: 
(1) ?Any person present at an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business, 
other than operators or workers, regardless of whether the person has given or paid any 
consideration to be present at the adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented 
business, and regardless of whether the person has paid any money for goods or services at or 
to the adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business. 
(2) ?Any person, excluding a worker or operator, who has paid, or has offered, agreed, been 
solicited, or had someone else offer or agree on that person's behalf to pay any consideration, 
fee, or tip to an operator or worker of an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented 
business. 
    Entity means any proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, business trust, joint venture, 
joint stock company or other for-profit or not-for-profit organization by whatever name, title or description. 
    Escort means any person who, for commercial or pecuniary gain, compensation or tips, agrees to, 
offers to go, or goes to any place, including, but not limited to, a business, hotel, motel, residence, boat, 
vessel, motor vehicle, or other mode of transportation, to do any of the following acts: 
(1) ?Act as a companion or date for, or converse with, a customer; 
(2) ?Engage in commercial bodily contact with another person; 
(3) ?Engage in a private performance; 
(4) ?Engage in adult modeling or act as an adult model; 
(5) ?Display specified anatomical areas, strip naked, or go topless; or 
(6) ?Engage in any specified sexual activity. 
Nothing in this definition shall be construed to legalize prostitution or other conduct prohibited by this 
Code or other laws. Workers of a licensed adult performance establishment for whom worker records are 
maintained pursuant to this article are excluded from the definition of the term "escort" when engaged in 
the expressive display of specified anatomical areas at a licensed adult performance establishment. An 
escort who is a paid employee type worker of an escort service for whom taxes and Social Security 
payments are withheld and paid by the escort service, and who is not an independent contractor, is not 
required to obtain his own sexually oriented business license for activities conducted pursuant to 
employment with the escort service. 
    Escort service means a person, business, establishment, or place operated for commercial or 
pecuniary gain, which advertises as an "escort," "escort service" or "escort agency" or otherwise offers or 
advertises that it can furnish escorts, a private performance, or adult models; or offers or actually 
provides, arranges, dispatches, or refers workers or themselves to act as an escort or engage in a private 
performance for a customer. 
Defense. A bona fide dating or matching service which arranges social matches or dates for two 
persons who each wish to meet a compatible companion when neither of said persons solicits, 
accepts, or receives any financial gain or any monetary tip, consideration, or compensation for the 
meeting or date is not an escort service. 
    Establishment means any place, site, or premises, or portion thereof, upon which any person, 
corporation, or business conducts activities or operations for commercial or pecuniary gain including, but 
not limited to, any place, site or premises from where an escort service dispatches or refers workers to 
other locations or at which an escort service receives business calls from customers. 
    Fellatio means oral stimulation of the penis. 
    Flagellation means whipping or a massage by strokes which is a form of sexual aberration in which 
the libido is stimulated by whipping oneself, being whipped, or whipping someone else. 
    Genitals or genitalia means organs of the reproductive system, especially the external organs. 
    Law enforcement officer means an officer who is on official duty for any law enforcement agency. 
    Licensee means any person, corporation, partnership, or other entity whose application for an adult 
entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business license has been granted, and any person, 
corporation, partnership or other entity who owns or operates or controls the establishment or business. 
    Masochism means sexual excitement by being humiliated or hurt by another or a sexual perversion 
in which one takes delight in being dominated, even to the extent of violence or cruelty, by another 
person. Masturbation means stimulation of genitals or other erogenous areas by some means other than 
sexual intercourse, such as a hand or object. 
    Necrophilia means sexual intercourse with a dead body. 
    Nipple means the mammilla papilla, a protuberance from the mammary gland from which the 
lactiferous duets discharge milk in the female. 
    Nude means any person insufficiently clothed in any manner so that any of the specified anatomical 
areas, as defined by this article, are not entirely covered with a fully opaque covering. For the purposes of 
this section, body paint, body dyes, tattoos, liquid latex, whether wet or dried, G-strings, thongs, dental 
floss and similar substances shall not be considered opaque covering. This definition shall also apply to 
the term "nudity." 
    Operator means any person who engages in or performs any activity which is necessary to or which 
facilities the operation of a sexually oriented business or an adult entertainment establishment including, 
but not limited to, the licensee, manager, owner, doorman, bouncer, bartender, disc jockey, sales clerk, 
ticket taker, movie projectionist, dispatcher, receptionist, attendant or supervisor. 
    Park means a tract of land within any jurisdiction which is kept for ornament or recreation and which 
is maintained as public property including, but not limited to, playgrounds, nature trails, swimming pools, 
reservoirs, athletic fields, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness areas or other 
similar public land. 
    Pederasty means anal intercourse between a man and a young boy. 
    Pedophilia means fondling of children or any other sexual relations with a child. 
    Penis means the male organ for urination and copulation, a pendulous structure that is suspended 
from the front and the sides of the pubic arch. 
    Person includes, but is not limited to, an individual, associations, joint ventures, partnerships, 
estates, trusts, business trusts, syndicates, fiduciaries, corporations, and any and all other similar entities 
and all officers, directors and principal stockholders of such associations, joint ventures, partnerships, 
estates, trusts, business trusts, syndicates, fiduciaries, corporations or other similar entities. 
    Police chief means the chief of police of the City of Apopka, Florida. 
    Private performance means modeling, posing, or the display or exposure of any specified anatomical 
area by a worker to a customer while the customer is in an area not accessible during such display to all 
other persons in the establishment or, while the customer or worker is in an area which is not on the 
premises of the establishment, or in which the customer or worker is totally or partially screened or 
partitioned during such display from the view of persons outside of the area. 
    Pubic area means: 
(1) ?Pubes, the pubic region; the anterior region of the innominate bone covered with pubic hair; os 
pubis. 
(2) ?Pubic, pertaining to the pubes. 
(3) ?Pubis, pubic bone, or the innominate bone. 
    Religious institution means a building which is used primarily for religious worship and/or related 
religious activities, including religious education. 
    Residential district includes any area inside or outside of the city currently used for residential 
dwelling purposes or legally zoned as designated in a comprehensive plan in a manner primarily intended 
for dwellings. 
    Sadism means sexual pleasure derived from inflicting mental or physical pain on others. 
    Sadomasochism means sexual pleasure related to sadism and masochism. 
    Sapphism means lesbianism, i.e., the unnatural sexual relationship between women such as 
cunnilingus, anilingus, masturbation, etc. 
    School or educational institution means a premises or site upon which there is an institution of 
learning for minors, whether public or private, which conducts regular classes and/or courses of study 
required for eligibility to certification by, accreditation to, or membership in the state department of 
education, Southern Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, or the Florida Council of 
Dependent Schools. The term "school" or "educational institution" includes a premises or site upon which 
there is a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, junior high school, senior high school, or any 
special institution of learning, a vocational institution, professional institution, an institution of higher 
education, a community college, junior college, four-year college or university. 
    Scrotum means the external double pouch that contains the testicles. Sexual encounter business 
means : 
(1) ?Any person or entity which, for any form of consideration or remuneration or which charges an 
admission fee, provides a place for the purpose of providing, encouraging or allowing three or 
more persons to engage in any specified sexual activity among themselves or with other 
persons. 
(2) ?The following shall be presumed not to be a sexual encounter business: 
a. ?A state-licensed sexual therapist; and 
b. ?A bona fide hotel or motel licensed by the state. 
    Sexual intercourse means sexual union between a man and a woman by insertion of the penis into 
the vagina. 
    Sexually oriented business means a commercial bodily contact establishment, escort service, or 
sexual encounter business. A business shall be a sexually oriented business, whether services are 
provided on the premises of an establishment or on an out-call basis at any other place, and regardless of 
whether such business is licensed under this article. A business with a sexually oriented business license 
shall be presumed to be a sexually oriented business. An individual operating a sexually oriented 
business is subject to the provisions of this article notwithstanding the fact that services are being 
provided at or from a residence, motor vehicle, vessel or any other location, and a license pursuant to this 
article is required unless the individual is a paid employee for whom taxes and Social Security payments 
are withdrawn and paid by the licensed establishment, worker records are maintained, and the individual 
is not an independent contractor. 
    Sodomy means anal intercourse. 
    Specified anatomical areas. 
(1) ?The term "specified anatomical areas" means any of the following in a state that is less than 
completely and opaquely covered: 
a. ?The male or female genitals; 
b. ?The male or female pubic area; 
c. ?The vulva; 
d. ?The anus; 
e. ?The penis; 
f. ?The scrotum; 
g. ?The cleavage of the buttocks; 
h. ?The buttocks; 
i. ?The anal cleft; 
j. ?The anal cleavage; 
k. ?The areola; 
l. ?Breasts - The upper anterior aspects of the chest of a woman; mammary glands; 
m. ?The nipple on the breast of a female; 
n. ?The female breast below a line immediately above the top of the areola, said line running 
horizontal across the top of the entire breast, but shall not include any portion of the 
cleavage between the human female breasts typically exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, 
leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided that the areola is not exposed; 
o. ?Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely 
covered. 
(2) ?Body paint, body dyes, tattoos, liquid latex, whether wet or dried, dental floss, G-strings, 
thongs, and similar coverings shall not be considered an opaque covering. 
    Specified criminal act means : 
(1) ?A violation of this article; 
(2) ?Any felony not otherwise specified in this definition; 
(3) ?An offense under F.S. ch. 794 (Sexual battery); 
(4) ?An offense under F.S. ch. 796 (Prostitution); 
(5) ?An offense under F.S. ch. 800 (Lewdness; indecent exposure); 
(6) ?An offense under F.S. ch. 826 (Bigamy; incest); 
(7) ?An offense under F.S. ch. 847 (Obscene literature; profanity); or 
(8) ?An offense against an analogous federal statute or the statutes of a state other than Florida, or 
an analogous ordinance of another county or city. 
    Specified sexual activities. The term "specified sexual activities" means: 
(1) ?Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(2) ?Acts of human anilingus, bestiality, buggery, cunnilingus, coprophagy, coprophilia, fellatio, 
flagellation, masochism, masturbation, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sadism, 
sadomasochism, sapphism, sexual intercourse, sodomy, Urolagnia, or zooerasty; 
(3) ?Fondling or other touching of human genitals, pubic regions, any part of the buttocks, anus or 
female breast; 
(4) ?Oral, anal, or vaginal penetration by, or union with, the sexual organ or any other part of the 
body of another; 
(5) ?Anal or vaginal penetration of another or oneself with any object; 
(6) ?The handling or fondling of the sexual organ of another for the purpose of masturbation directly 
or through a medium; or 
(7) ?Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections 
(1) through (6) of this definition. 
    Straddle dance means: 
(1) ?The use by a worker of any part of his body to touch the genitals or pubic areas of another 
person, or the touching of the genitals or pubic areas of any worker by another person; or the 
straddling of the legs of a worker over any part of the body of a customer at the establishment, 
regardless of whether there is a touch or touching; or the use by a worker, of any part of his 
body to touch the genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anus or female breasts of another person 
while at the establishment, or the touching of the genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anus or 
female breasts of any worker by a customer while at the establishment. 
(2) ?Conduct shall be a straddle dance regardless of whether the touch or touching occurs while the 
worker is displaying or exposing any specified anatomical area. 
(3) ?Conduct shall also be a straddle dance regardless of whether the touch or touching is direct or 
through a medium. 
(4) ?The terms "lap dance," "table dance," and "face dance" are included within the term "straddle 
dance." 
    Urolagnia means sexual excitation associated with urination (e.g., watching another person urinate 
or having another person urinate on one's own body). Vulva means external female genitalia, including 
the mons pubis, labia majora and minora, clitoris and vestibule of the vagina. 
    Worker means a person who works, performs, or provides services at an adult entertainment 
establishment or at or for a sexually oriented business, irrespective of whether said person is paid a 
salary or wage, and shall include, but is not limited to, employees, independent contractors, 
subcontractors, lessees, or sub-lessees who work or perform at an adult entertainment establishment or 
at or for a sexually oriented business. An operator is a type of worker. 
    Zooerasty means bestiality. 
(Code 1993, § 10-98; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-84. - Notice. 
    Any notice required under this article shall, unless otherwise provided in this article, be accomplished 
by posting upon the subject premises and sending a written notification by certified mail to the mailing 
address set forth on the application for the license or a permit. This mailing address shall be considered 
the correct mailing address unless the assistant city administrator or his designee has been otherwise 
notified in writing. 
(Code 1993, § 10-99; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-85. - Penalties/remedies/relief. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be prosecuted in the same manner as 
misdemeanors are prosecuted. Such violations shall be prosecuted in the name of the state in a court 
having jurisdiction of misdemeanors by the prosecuting attorney thereof and, upon conviction, shall be 
punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed 60 days, or 
by both fine and imprisonment, as provided in F.S. § 162.22 (1997). Each incident or separate occurrence 
of any act that violates this article shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition to the penalties 
provided under this section, violators of this article shall be subject to any other appropriate civil or 
criminal action provided by law in a court of competent jurisdiction, including, but not limited to, injunctive 
relief. 
(Code 1993, § 10-100; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Secs. 10-86—10-113. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 


Sec. 10-114. - Required. 
(a) ?Requirement. It is unlawful for any person to operate or to be an operator of or worker at a sexually 
oriented business or an adult entertainment establishment which has not first obtained a license 
which is applicable for said establishment or business pursuant to this article, or to continue to 
operate or be an operator of or worker at a sexually oriented business or an adult entertainment 
establishment where that person knows or has reason to know that the license of the establishment 
or business is under suspension, has been revoked or has lapsed. The operation of a sexually 
oriented business or an adult entertainment establishment without a valid license, where applicable, 
is unlawful and shall be grounds for the closing of the establishment or business upon a finding of 
fact by a court or other body with proper jurisdiction that the establishment does not have a valid 
license. 
(b) ?Licensing office. Unless the assistant city administrator designates in writing an office to administer 
the provisions of this article, he shall serve as the licensing office. The assistant city administrator 
may modify his designation from time to time in writing. When the phrase "assistant city administrator 
or his designee" is used in this article, the designee referred to shall be the office designated in 
writing pursuant to this subsection. 
(c) ?Classifications. Adult entertainment establishment and sexually oriented business licenses referred 
to in this article shall be classified as follows: 
(1) ?Adult bookstore/adult video store; 
(2) ?Adult performance establishment; 
(3) ?Adult motel; 
(4) ?Adult theater; 
(5) ?Commercial bodily contact establishment; 
(6) ?Escort service. 
(d) ?Single license/single classification of license. Only one license may be issued for a location and only 
under a single classification. 
(Code 1993, § 10-101; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-115. - Responsibilities of other offices and departments. 
    The city council is the legislative branch of the city government. Ultimate responsibility for the 
administration of this article is vested in the assistant city administrator or his designee as set forth in this 
article. Other departments having responsibility under this article are as follows: 
(1) ?The city clerk's office is responsible for granting, denying, revoking, renewing, suspending and 
canceling business licenses in accordance with state law. 
(2) ?The police chief is responsible for verifying information contained on applications, for inspecting 
proposed or existing adult entertainment establishments and sexually oriented businesses in 
order to ascertain compliance with applicable criminal statutes and ordinances including, but not 
limited to, those set forth in this article, for determining whether license applicants have been 
convicted of a felony or a specified criminal act within the previous five years, and for enforcing 
applicable criminal statutes and ordinances including, but not limited to, those set forth in this 
article. 
(3) ?The building official is responsible for inspecting establishments in order to ascertain 
compliance with all applicable building codes, statutes, ordinances and regulations. 
(4) ?The fire chief is responsible for inspecting establishments and businesses in order to ascertain 
compliance with all applicable fire codes, statutes, ordinances and regulations. 
(5) ?The community development department is responsible for ascertaining whether the location of 
proposed sexually oriented businesses or adult entertainment establishments comply with all 
separation, distance, zoning and location requirements of the land development regulations of 
the city and whether compliance with all applicable zoning regulations and land use laws is 
maintained. 
(Code 1993, § 10-102; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-116. - Application and fee. 
    Any person desiring to engage in the business of operating an adult entertainment establishment or 
a sexually oriented business shall file with the assistant city administrator or his designee a sworn 
application on forms supplied by the city. The application shall contain the information and documents as 
provided in this article and shall be accompanied by an application fee as established in this article. The 
application shall be signed by the applicant and verified by the applicant before an officer authorized to 
take oaths and acknowledgments. 
(Code 1993, § 10-103; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-117. - Contents of application. 
(a) ?The completed application shall be accompanied by the following documents and shall be 
accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee of $200.00, which shall be used to defray the costs 
of the application review process by various offices and departments; provided, however, that the fee 
shall be applied as a credit toward the annual license fee for licensing under this article. 
(b) ?If the applicant is: 
(1) ?An individual, the individual shall state his legal name to include any and all aliases, residential 
street address, residential telephone number, an address where all correspondence from the 
city should be mailed, and shall submit proof that he is at least 18 years of age by providing a 
copy of a valid driver's license, voter's registration card or another state-issued identification 
card, or a certified copy of a birth certificate; 
(2) ?A partnership or trust, the partnership or trust shall state its complete name, and the names, 
residential street addresses, and telephone numbers of all partners, whether the partnership is 
general or limited or trustees, the name and residential street address of at least one person 
authorized to accept service of process and, if in existence, a copy of the partnership 
agreement; 
(3) ?A corporation, the corporation shall provide a copy of its articles of incorporation stating its 
complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing, 
the names, residential street addresses, telephone numbers and capacities of all officers, 
directors and principal stockholders, and, if applicable, the name of the registered corporate 
agent and the legal street address of the registered office for service of process; or 
(4) ?Any other entity, the entity shall state its complete name, the date of formation, the names, 
residential addresses, telephone numbers and capacities of all principal owners, and the name 
and residential street address of one person authorized to accept service of process. 
(c) ?If the applicant intends to conduct activities in the establishment or business under a name other 
than that of the applicant, the applicant shall state the establishment's or business's fictitious name 
and the county of registration under F.S. § 865.09, or its successor, and all business names and 
telephone numbers to be used by the establishment or business. 
(d) ?The applicant shall state whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed on the 
application has, within the five-year period immediately preceding the date of the application, been 
convicted of a specified criminal act, and, if so, the specified criminal act involved, the date of 
conviction and the place of conviction. 
(e) ?The applicant shall state whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to 
subsection (b) of this section has had a previous license under this article suspended or revoked, 
including the name and location of the establishment for which the license was suspended or 
revoked, the date of the suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant or any other individuals 
listed pursuant to subsection (b) of this section has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, 
director or principal stockholder of a corporation whose license under this article has previously been 
suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the establishment for which the license 
was suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the suspension or revocation. 
(f) ?The applicant shall state whether the applicant or any other individuals listed pursuant to subsection 
(b) of this section holds any other licenses under this article and, if so, the names and locations of 
such other licensed establishments. 
(g) ?The applicant shall state the single classification of license for which the applicant is filing. 
(h) ?The applicant shall state the location of the proposed establishment or business including a street 
address, the name and address of the real property owner of the site, a notarized statement of 
consent from the real property owner authorizing a sexually oriented business or adult entertainment 
establishment on the site, and a legal description of the property on which the establishment is to be 
located. 
(i) ?The applicant shall provide the names of the workers for the proposed establishment or business, if 
known, or, if presently unknown, a statement to that effect. 
(j) ?The applicant shall submit a plan drawn to appropriate scale of the proposed licensed premises 
indicating the areas to be covered by the license, all windows, doors, entrances and exits and the 
fixed structural features, walls, stages, partitions, projection booths, admission booths, adult booths, 
concession booths, stands, counters and similar structures of the establishment or business to which 
the proposed license pertains. The term "fixed structural features" shall include immovable partitions 
and counters and similar structures that are intended to be permanent. 
(k) ?The applicant shall provide a mailing address, and, if different, a designated return address where 
all future correspondence from the city may be sent, and the applicant's telephone number where 
communications and inquiries can be made. 
(l) ?The applicant shall provide a recent color photograph of the applicant in passport size, if an 
individual, and of each officer, director and principal stockholder, if a partnership, corporation or other 
similar entity. 
(m) ?The applicant shall provide the weight, height, color of eyes, date of birth and gender of the 
applicant, if an individual, and of each officer, director and principal stockholder or owner, if a 
partnership, corporation or other similar entity. 
(n) ?The applicant shall provide the applicant's Social Security account number or employer's tax 
identification number and either the applicant's driver's license number or the number of a federal- or 
state-issued identification card, if an individual, and of each officer, director and principal stockholder 
or owner, if a partnership, corporation or other similar entity. 
(o) ?The applicant shall provide a complete set of the applicant's fingerprints, if an individual, and of 
each officer, director and principal stockholder or owner, if a partnership, corporation or other similar 
entity. 
(p) ?The applicant shall provide a copy of the most recent lease or deed of conveyance, whichever is 
applicable, indicating the applicant's interest in the proposed establishment. 
(q) ?The applicant shall provide a statement of the hours of operation of the establishment or business. 
(r) ?The applicant shall provide a notarized statement that the applicant has complied with the applicable 
laws of the state relating to corporations, partnerships and fictitious names. 
(s) ?It is unlawful for any person applying for an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented 
business license to make a false statement which is intended to facilitate the issuance of a license or 
to provide false information which is intended to facilitate the issuance of a license. 
(Code 1993, § 10-104; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-118. - Continuing duty; false or misleading information. 
(a) ?Each applicant shall be under a continuing duty and obligation to disclose to the assistant city 
administrator or his designee any and all changes or alterations in the information or disclosures 
required by this article. It is the duty of each applicant to correct changed, false or erroneous 
information provided in an application. It is unlawful for an applicant to fail to disclose changes in 
information provided or to fail to correct false or erroneous information given in an application 
immediately upon the applicant knowing or being in such a position that he should have known that 
the information provided has changed or was false or erroneous when provided. 
(b) ?It is unlawful for any person applying for an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented 
business license to make a false or misleading statement or provide false or misleading information 
which is intended to facilitate the issuance of a license. 
(Code 1993, § 10-105; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-119. - Consent. 
    By applying for a license under this article, the applicant shall be deemed to have consented to the 
provisions of this article. 
(Code 1993, § 10-106; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-120. - Investigation of applicant. 
    Upon receipt of an application properly filed with the assistant city administrator or his designee and 
upon payment of the nonrefundable application fee, the application shall be time and date stamped and a 
copy of the application shall be forwarded to the police chief, the fire chief, the building official, and the 
community development department. Each recipient entity shall promptly conduct an investigation of the 
applicant, application and the proposed establishment within 15 days from the date that the application 
was filed. At the conclusion of its investigation, each recipient entity shall indicate to the assistant city 
administrator or his designee its investigative findings relating to the application, and the reasons therefor. 
(Code 1993, § 10-107; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-121. - Issuance or denial of license. 
(a) ?Upon the completion of the investigation and a review of the application as required, upon 
determination that the applicant meets the requirements of this article, and upon payment of the 
appropriate license fee by the applicant, the assistant city administrator or his designee shall, within 
30 days of the application being filed, issue the license. 
(b) ?If, after review and investigation as provided herein, the assistant city administrator or his designee 
determines that one or more of the reasons for denial set forth in section 10-122 exist, the 
application shall be denied within 30 days of the date that the application is filed, and the assistant 
city administrator or his designee shall issue a written and dated notice of the denial and the reasons 
therefor. A copy of the notice shall be sent to the applicant by certified mail to the designated return 
address on the application within five days of the date of denial. 
(c) ?If an application has neither been affirmatively issued nor denied within 30 days after the application 
was filed, the establishment or business shall be allowed to open and operate unless and until the 
application is denied by the assistant city administrator or his designee. 
(d) ?The denial of an application shall be final. No further exhaustion of administrative remedies shall be 
necessary for judicial review of the administrative action. 
(e) ?An applicant whose application is denied may immediately appeal as a matter of right to a court of 
competent jurisdiction, which court shall promptly review said application. 
(Code 1993, § 10-120; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-122. - Reasons for denial of application of license. 
    The application for a license shall be denied if one or more of the following reasons is found: 
(1) ?The application does not comply with the requirements of this article. 
(2) ?The application contains materially false information. 
(3) ?The applicant or any of the individuals stated in section 10-117 has a license under this article 
which is under suspension. 
(4) ?The applicant or any of the individuals stated in section 10-117 is or was at the time of 
suspension an officer, director or principal stockholder in an entity who has a license under this 
article which is under suspension. 
(5) ?The applicant or any of the individuals stated in section 10-117 had a license under this article 
which had been revoked within the preceding two years. 
(6) ?The applicant or any of the individuals stated in section 10-117 is or was at the time of 
suspension an officer, director or principal stockholder in an entity who had a license under this 
article which had been revoked within the preceding two years. 
(7) ?The granting of the application would violate a statute or ordinance or an order from a court of 
law which effectively prohibits the applicant from obtaining an adult entertainment establishment 
or sexually oriented business license. 
(8) ?The applicant has failed to comply with F.S. ch. 607, relating to corporations, F.S. ch. 620, 
relating to partnerships, or F.S. § 865.09, relating to fictitious names. 
(Code 1993, § 10-121; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-123. - Re-application after denial. 
    The applicant may not re-apply for a license for a period of nine months from the date of denial 
unless there has been an intervening change in the circumstances which may lead to a different decision 
regarding the former reason for denial. 
(Code 1993, § 10-122; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-124. - Annual license fee. 
(a) ?There shall be collected under this article annual license fees for the following classifications of 
adult entertainment establishments and sexually oriented businesses: 
(1) ?Adult bookstore/adult video store: $750.00; 
(2) ?Adult theater: $750.00; 
(3) ?Adult performance establishment: $750.00; 
(4) ?Adult motel: $750.00; 
(5) ?Commercial bodily contact establishment: $750.00; and 
(6) ?Escort service: $750.00. 
(b) ?The annual license fees are declared regulatory in nature, collected for the purpose of examination 
and inspection of adult entertainment establishments and sexually oriented businesses under this 
article and the administration thereof. These regulatory fees are in addition to, and not in lieu of, the 
occupational license taxes imposed by this Code or state law and other land development or 
regulatory fees associated with general commercial activities and locations. 
(Code 1993, § 10-123; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-125. - License contents; term; renewals; expiration; lapse. 
(a) ?Contents. An adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business license shall state on 
its face the name of the licensee, the name of the establishment, the street address of the 
establishment, the classification of the license, the date of issuance, and the date of expiration. 
(b) ?Term. All licenses issued under this article shall be annual licenses which shall commence running 
on October 1, on which date they shall have been paid for, and shall expire on September 30 of the 
following year. If a license is issued after October 1, but by March 31 of the following year, the 
applicant shall pay the appropriate license fee in full. If a license is issued after March 31, but by 
October 1 of the same year, the applicant shall pay one-half the appropriate license fee. 
(c) ?Expiration; renewal; lapse. Each license shall expire on September 30 of each year and may be 
renewed only by making an application for a license in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
An application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date of the license. 
Failure to make application at least 30 days before the expiration date will not suspend the expiration 
of the license. If the application for a renewal is denied, the applicant may immediately appeal to a 
court of competent jurisdiction, which court shall provide prompt judicial review of said appeal. 
(d) ?Currently licensed establishments. An adult entertainment establishment licensed by the city on the 
effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived may continue to operate under its 
current license until September 30, 1999, but shall apply for a new license on or before August 31, 
1999, and shall be immediately subject to all requirements and provisions of this article upon the 
effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Code 1993, § 10-124; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-126. - Records and reports. 
    Each licensee shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by this article. 
(Code 1993, § 10-125; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-127. - Transfer. 
    It is unlawful for a licensee to transfer his license to another person or entity or surrender 
possession, control, and operation of the licensed establishment to such other person or entity. 
(Code 1993, § 10-126; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-128. - Establishment name change. 
    It is unlawful for a licensee to change the name of an adult entertainment establishment or sexually 
oriented business unless and until the following requirements are satisfied: 
(1) ?The assistant city administrator or his designee is given 30 days' notice in writing of the 
proposed name change; and 
(2) ?The change of name fee in the amount of $500.00 is paid; 
(3) ?The licensee has complied with F.S. § 865.09; 
(4) ?The licensee has complied with the provisions of F.S. ch. 607; and 
(5) ?The licensee has complied with the provisions of F.S. ch. 620. 
(Code 1993, § 10-127; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-129. - Suspension and revocation. 
    The assistant city administrator or his designee shall suspend a license when he or his designee 
determines that any one of the following has occurred: 
(1) ?Violation defined. For purposes of this section, the term "violation" means an incident having 
occurred at, or by, an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business which is 
prohibited by the provisions of this article or made unlawful by F.S. chs. 561, 562, 563, 564, 
565, 794, 796, 800, 826, 827, 847, 893 or 895, or an analogous federal statute. 
(2) ?Inspection of records and premises. In the event that the assistant city administrator or his 
designee determines that the licensee or an operator at or of the licensee has refused to allow 
any inspection of records or premises as required by this article, the assistant city administrator 
or his designee may suspend the license for a period not to exceed 30 days. 
(3) ?Illegal activity; suspension. 
a. ?In the event three or more violations occur within a two-year period, and convictions result 
from at least three of the violations, the assistant city administrator or his designee shall, 
upon the date of the third conviction, notify the licensee that the license shall be suspended 
for a period of 30 days unless good cause is shown, in accordance with this article, that the 
violations have not occurred. For purposes of calculating this two-year period, the two-year 
period shall be deemed to be those 24 months occurring immediately prior to the violation 
occurrence date for which the 30-day suspension is sought. 
b. ?In the event one or more violations occur within a two-year period from the date of the last 
violation occurrence date from which the conviction resulted in a 30-day suspension 
pursuant to subsection (3)a. of this section, but not including any time during which the 
license was effectively suspended, and a conviction results from one or more of the 
violations, the assistant city administrator or his designee shall, upon the date of the latest 
conviction, provide notice to the licensee that the license shall be suspended for a period of 
90 days unless good cause is shown, in accordance with this article, that the violation has 
not occurred. 
c. ?In the event one or more violations occur within a two-year period from the date of the last 
violation occurrence date from which the conviction resulted in a 90-day suspension 
pursuant to subsection (3)b. of this section, but not including any time during which the 
license was effectively suspended, and a conviction results from one or more of the 
violations, the assistant city administrator or his designee shall, upon the date of the latest 
conviction, provide notice to the licensee that the license shall be suspended for a period of 
180 days unless good cause is shown, in accordance with this article, that the violation has 
not occurred. 
(4) ?Revocation. The assistant city administrator or his designee shall revoke a license when he or 
his designee determines that any one of the following has occurred: 
a. ?There has been one or more violations that have occurred within a two-year period from 
the last violation occurrence date from which the conviction resulted in a 180-day 
suspension pursuant to subsection (3)c. of this section, but not including any time during 
which the license was effectively suspended, and a conviction results from one or more of 
the violations, the assistant city administrator or his designee shall, upon the date of the 
latest conviction, provide notice to the licensee that the license shall be revoked unless 
good cause is shown, in accordance with this article, that the violation has not occurred. 
b. ?The licensee or any person on his behalf or any person listed on the application pursuant 
to section 10-117(b) gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during 
the application process. 
c. ?The licensee or any person on his behalf or any person listed on the application pursuant to 
section 10-117(b) has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances 
on the premises of the establishment or business or when with a customer. 
d. ?The licensee or any person on his behalf or any person listed on the application pursuant 
to section 10-117(b) has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises of the 
establishment or business or when with a customer. 
e. ?The licensee or any person on his behalf or any person listed on the application pursuant 
to section 14-117(b) knowingly operated the adult entertainment establishment or sexually 
oriented business during a period when the licensee's license was suspended. 
f. ?Except in the case of an adult motel, the licensee or any person on his behalf or any person 
listed on the application pursuant to section 10-117 has knowingly allowed any specified 
sexual activities to occur on the premises of the establishment or business. 
(5) ?Effective dates of suspensions and revocations. Except as otherwise provided in this article, all 
periods of suspension and revocation shall become effective 15 days after the assistant city 
administrator or his designee posts the notice of suspension or revocation at the licensee's 
establishment, or on the date that the licensee turns in his license, whichever happens first. The 
suspension or revocation shall be abated in the event that the licensee files a timely challenge 
to the suspension or revocation in accordance with the procedures set forth in this article or 
upon order of a court of competent jurisdiction. If an adult entertainment establishment or 
sexually oriented business license is revoked, the licensee shall not be issued another adult 
entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business license for a period of two years 
running from the date the revocation actually takes effect after all abatement periods have 
lapsed. 
(6) ?Other remedies. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the city may pursue any and all 
other available remedies through any and all other available processes and procedures 
available to correct violations of city codes. Included within such remedies are the enforcement 
actions set forth in this article, actions in a court of competent jurisdiction for injunctive or other 
appropriate relief, criminal prosecution, code enforcement proceedings, the issuance of 
citations, the suspension or revocation of permits relating to health or safety matters, and any 
and all other remedies available under the laws of the state and the United States. 
(Code 1993, § 10-128; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-130. - Suspension and revocation proceedings. 
(a) ?Challenge to suspension or revocation. If the assistant city administrator or his designee notifies a 
licensee in writing of the pending suspension or revocation of a license as provided in section 10-
129, then the suspension or revocation shall become final and effective 15 days after mailing to the 
licensee's record address, posting at the licensed establishment, or actual delivery of the notice to 
the licensee, unless the licensee first files with the assistant city administrator or his designee a 
written response stating the reasons why the suspension or revocation is alleged to be in error or 
inappropriate, and a written notice of intent to challenge the suspension or revocation, requesting a 
hearing to determine whether the suspension or revocation will become effective. The suspension or 
revocation shall be abated in the event that a licensee files a timely challenge to the suspension or 
revocation in accordance with the procedures of this article, or upon an order of a court of competent 
jurisdiction. A suspension or revocation already in effect, but not previously challenged in a 
suspension or revocation hearing, may be challenged in the same manner, but is not abated during 
the proceedings. 
(b) ?Hearing on suspension or revocation. When a licensee files a written response and notice of intent 
to challenge a pending or existing suspension or revocation, a public hearing to determine if the 
pending suspension or revocation will become effective and final shall be held by the city council. 
The assistant city administrator or his designee shall notify the city attorney and any appropriate city 
offices, who shall schedule and provide notice of the hearing date and time. 
(1) ?The suspension or revocation hearing shall be held within 30 days of the assistant city 
administrator's receipt of a written challenge and request for a hearing by the aggrieved 
licensee. 
(2) ?The participants before the city council shall be the licensee, any witnesses of the licensee, the 
assistant city administrator or his designee and any witnesses of the assistant city administrator 
or his designee. All witnesses shall provide their legal names, mailing addresses and telephone 
numbers. 
(3) ?The procedures used shall be those typically used in a civil case with the assistant city 
administrator or his designee having the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(4) ?Testimony and evidence may be submitted by any witness, but shall be limited to matters 
directly relating to the grounds for suspension or revocation. Irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly 
repetitious testimony or evidence shall be excluded. 
(5) ?All testimony shall be under oath. The city council shall decide all questions of procedure and 
standing. Unless otherwise mutually agreed to between the licensee and the assistant city 
administrator or his designee, the order of presentation of testimony and evidence shall be as 
follows: 
a. ?The assistant city administrator or his designee and any witnesses of the assistant city 
administrator or his designee. 
b. ?The licensee and any witnesses of the licensee. 
c. ?Rebuttal witnesses from the assistant city administrator or his designee. 
d. ?Rebuttal witnesses from the licensee. 
e. ?Summation by the assistant city administrator or his designee. 
f. ?Summation by the licensee. 
(6) ?The city council may also call and question witnesses or request additional evidence as the city 
council deems necessary and appropriate. 
(7) ?To the maximum extent practicable, the hearing shall be informal. Reasonable cross-
examination of witnesses shall be permitted, but questioning shall be confined as closely as 
possible to the scope of direct testimony. 
(8) ?If the city council comes to believe that any facts, claims, or allegations necessitate additional 
review or response by either the licensee or the assistant city administrator or his designee, 
then the city council may order the hearing continued until an announced date certain, not to 
exceed 30 days from the date of continuance. The city council shall render a final decision on 
the appeal within 60 days of the assistant city administrator's receipt of licensee's written notice 
of challenge. 
(9) ?The city council shall render a written decision determining whether the suspension or 
revocation will become or remain effective at the conclusion of the hearing at which the appeal 
is decided or as soon as practicable thereafter. 
(c) ?Filing of decision. The original of the written decision of the city council shall be filed with the city 
clerk and copies shall be delivered or mailed to the licensee, the community development director 
and the city police department. 
(d) ?Judicial review. Any person who participated in a suspension or revocation hearing before the city 
council and who is aggrieved by the decision of the city council may immediately challenge the 
decision in any court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to the rules of procedure of that court. The 
record of the hearing shall consist of the complete record of the proceedings before the city council. 
The city council's decision shall be promptly reviewed by the court. 
(e) ?Requirement of exhaustion procedures. Judicial review of a suspension or revocation, or related 
hearing or appeal proceedings, shall be available only after the administrative procedures and 
remedies set forth in this section have been exhausted. 
(f) ?Notice of final suspension or revocation. If no response or request for a suspension or revocation 
hearing is filed within 15 days of the notice of a pending suspension or revocation, or if the licensee 
who requested the hearing does not appear at the suspension or revocation hearing after notice, or if 
the city council decides after a hearing that a pending suspension or revocation will become final, 
then the assistant city administrator or his designee shall issue to the licensee notice of final 
suspension or revocation of the adult entertainment license and mail or arrange delivery of the notice 
to the licensee's record address. 
(g) ?Effective date of suspension or revocation. The suspension or revocation of a license shall take 
effect the day after delivery of a notice of final suspension or revocation to the licensee in person, by 
posting on the licensed establishment, or by mail to the licensee's record address, or on the date the 
licensee surrenders the license, whichever happens first. The licensee shall immediately return and 
surrender a revoked license to the assistant city administrator or his designee or surrender the 
revoked license, upon demand, to a member of the police department. 
(Code 1993, § 10-129; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-131. - Worker records. 
(a) ?Each adult entertainment establishment and sexually oriented business, regardless of whether it is 
licensed under this article, shall create, establish and maintain a record of all workers of the 
establishment or business. The record shall contain the worker's full legal name and any aliases and 
all past or current aliases of the worker; his date of birth; his residential address; his residential 
telephone number (if any) and all pager numbers and other similar numbers used; his driver's license 
number and a photocopy of the license; his state- or federally-issued identification card number, 
including the worker's Social Security account number; the employment status of the worker 
including, but not limited to, whether the worker is a salaried employee, an independent contractor, a 
lessee, a sub-lessee, a subcontractor allowed to work at the establishment, or such other 
arrangement as may be in place; whether income taxes are withheld for the worker; and a recent 
passport type photograph of the worker as of the date of association with the establishment which 
accurately reflects the date on which the photograph was taken. Said records shall be maintained for 
a period of no less than two years from the date the worker is separated from employment. 
(b) ?The original records required by subsection (a) of this section, or true and exact photocopies 
thereof, shall be kept at the adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business at all 
times, including clear photographs. 
(c) ?All operators of an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business shall be 
responsible for knowing the location of the original records, or the true and exact photocopies 
thereof. 
(d) ?All operators of an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business shall, upon 
request by a law enforcement officer or the assistant city administrator or his designee, make 
available for immediate inspection the original records, or the true and exact photocopies thereof, at 
any time when the establishment or business is open for business. 
(Code 1993, § 10-130; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Secs. 10-132—10-142. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 3. - REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSED PREMISES 


Sec. 10-143. - General requirements for all adult entertainment establishments and sexually oriented 
businesses. 
    Each adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business, regardless of whether it is 
licensed under this article, shall observe the following general requirements: 
(1) ?Conform to, comply with and abide by all applicable safety, employer-related, building, fire, 
health, zoning or land use statutes, codes, ordinances, rules and regulations, whether federal, 
state or local. 
(2) ?Keep the adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business license posted and 
prominently displayed in a conspicuous place at the establishment or business at all times, 
which license shall be available for inspection upon request at all times by the public, any law 
enforcement officer and the assistant city administrator or his designee, when the establishment 
or business is open for business. 
(3) ?Opaquely cover each non-opaque area where a person outside the adult entertainment 
establishment or sexually oriented business may otherwise see inside the establishment or 
business. 
(4) ?Provide to any law enforcement officer and the assistant city administrator or his designee, 
during all hours of operation or when an operator is present at the establishment, access 
through the main entrance and into all areas of the establishment where customers are 
permitted without the necessity of using a key, computer entry, password or seeking clearance 
from a worker or customer to obtain entry through an electronically operated door or entryway. 
(5) ?Install, construct, keep, maintain or allow only those signs at the establishment or building 
exterior which comply with the provisions relating to signage in the land development 
regulations of the city. 
(6) ?Not allow any person under 18 years of age to be present when services are provided to or 
performed for a customer or when the establishment or business is open for business. 
(7) ?Not employ or provide goods or services to any person under 18 years of age. 
(8) ?Not provide, offer or engage in any services to any person when not licensed to do so under 
this article. 
(9) ?Not operate when a license issued pursuant to this article has been suspended, revoked or 
canceled or when the license is expired. 
(10) ?Not permit any animal except Seeing Eye dogs to accompany a worker or customer when 
services are provided or performed. 
(11) ?Not place, operate or contain video cameras, transmitting or taping equipment anywhere on 
the premises except where customers are advised in advance by posted notice. 
(12) ?Not advertise the presentation of any activity prohibited by any law, rule or regulation, whether 
federal, state or local. 
(13) ?Ensure that the view areas specified in this article remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, 
merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any customer is present in the 
premises so as to ensure that no customer is permitted access to any area of the premises 
which has been designated as an area in which non-workers will not be permitted. 
(14) ?Ensure that at least one operator is on duty and present at the establishment or business 
when the establishment or business is open for business who is responsible and knows the 
whereabouts of all records required by this article. Said operator's name shall be conspicuously 
posted on the premises at all times that the business or establishment is open for business. 
(15) ?Ensure that at least one operator is situated in each manager's station, when required by this 
article, at all times that any customer is present inside the premises. 
(16) ?Ensure that the premises is equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to 
illuminate every place to which customers are permitted access at an illumination of not less 
than 15 to 20 average maintained foot-candles, as measured 35 inches above the floor level. 
The light shall be maintained at all times any customer is present in the premises. 
(17) ?Not alter or otherwise change the contents of an adult entertainment establishment or 
sexually oriented business license. 
(18) ?Ensure that each exterior entrance and exit door for use by customers and interior doors 
which permit entrance to the interior and exit to the interior from any interior foyer area shall 
remain unlocked when any person who is not a worker is inside the establishment. 
(19) ?Establish, create and maintain worker records as required by this article. 
(Code 1993, § 10-132; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-144. - Sexually oriented businesses. 
    In addition to the general requirements for adult entertainment establishments and sexually oriented 
businesses contained in this article, a sexually oriented business shall, regardless of whether it is 
licensed thereunder, comply with the following general requirements: 
(1) ?Post in an open and conspicuous place a list of services provided by the sexually oriented 
business, which services shall be described clearly in the English language along with a 
specification as to the cost of each service. 
(2) ?Provide each customer, in advance of any service being provided, with a written customer 
contract, written clearly in the English language, setting forth the service to be rendered, the 
cost of such service, the actual full name of the worker providing the service, and actual full 
name, address and date of birth of the customer as reflected on a state- or federally-issued 
identification card or driver's license, and the customer's telephone number. 
(3) ?Create, establish and maintain a daily register in a format provided by the assistant city 
administrator or his designee, containing the actual full names and addresses of all customers 
as reflected on a state- or federally-issued identification card or driver's license, the services 
performed, the time expended, the mode of payment and the full name of the worker providing 
the service. 
(4) ?Not allow any worker of the sexually oriented business to accept any tip or gratuity, directly or 
indirectly, from a customer in addition to the service fee specified in the customer contract. 
(5) ?Maintain all customer contracts and daily registers for a period of two years following the 
customer's date of service. 
(Code 1993, § 10-133; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-145. - Adult theater provisions. 
    In addition to the general requirements relating to adult entertainment establishments contained in 
section 10-143 of this article, an adult theater, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, shall: 
(1) ?If the adult theater contains an auditorium or hall, comply with each of the following provisions: 
a. ?Have individual and separate seats (not couches, benches, or other seating configurations 
allowing or providing for the seating of multiple persons on the same item of furniture) to 
accommodate the maximum number of persons who may occupy the area; 
b. ?Have a continuous main aisle alongside of the seating areas in order that each person 
seated in the areas shall be visible from the aisle at all times; 
c. ?Have a sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near each entrance to the auditorium or 
hall which lists the maximum number of persons who may occupy the auditorium or hall 
area, which number shall not exceed the number of seats within the hall or auditorium 
area; and 
d. ?Be illuminated at an illumination of not less than 15 to 20 foot-candles average, maintained 
as measured at 35 inches above the floor level, and shall maintain the light at all times so 
that any customer present in the hall or auditorium may be seen. 
(2) ?If the adult theater contains adult booths, each adult booth shall comply with each of the 
following provisions: 
a. ?Have a sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance which states the 
maximum number of persons who may occupy the booth, which number shall correlate 
with the number of seats in the booth; 
b. ?Have a permanently open entrance not less than three feet wide and not less than six feet 
high, not capable of being closed or partially closed by any curtain, door, or other partition 
which would be capable of wholly or partially obscuring any person situated in the booth; 
provided, however, that the requirements of all building and related codes shall also be 
complied with; 
c. ?Have individual, separate seats (which are not couches, benches, or other seating 
configurations allowing or providing for the seating of multiple persons on the same item of 
furniture) which correlate with the maximum number of persons who may occupy the 
booth; 
d. ?Have a continuous main aisle alongside the booth in order that each person situated in the 
booth shall be visible from the aisle at all times; 
e. ?Have an illuminated and continuous main aisle in which workers and customers can be 
seen from one end to the other; and 
f. ?Have, except for the entrance, walls or partitions of solid construction without any holes or 
openings in such walls or partitions. 
(3) ?Have one or more manager's stations. 
(4) ?Configure the interior of the premises in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from 
a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any customer is permitted access for 
any purpose, excluding restrooms. 
(5) ?If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, configure the interior of the 
premises in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to 
which any customer is permitted access for any purposes from at least one of the manager's 
stations. The view required in this subsection shall be by direct line of sight from the manager's 
station. 
(6) ?If the adult theater is designed to permit outdoor viewing by persons seated in automobiles, 
cause the motion picture screen to be so situated, or the perimeter of the establishment to be so 
fenced, such that the material to be seen by those persons may not be seen from any public 
right-of-way, property assigned a residential zoning classification or assigned a residential land 
use designation, any religious institution, any school or educational institution, or from a park. 
(7) ?Cover the floors of areas accessible to customers with smooth and non-permeable flooring 
material which can withstand frequent effective cleaning with industrial strength cleaning 
agents. Carpeting of any type is prohibited. 
(8) ?Use smooth and non-permeable upholstery material, which can withstand frequent cleaning 
with industrial strength cleaning agents, to cover furniture permitted by this article for the use of 
customers. 
(9) ?Have, in areas accessible to customers, interior wall surfaces which can withstand frequent 
cleaning with industrial strength cleaning agents. 
(10) ?Use only those shades and blinds which can withstand frequent cleaning with industrial 
strength cleaning agents. (Draperies are prohibited.) 
(11) ?Maintain areas accessible to customers in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(12) ?Keep all furniture upholstery material free from holes and rips. 
(13) ?Utilize an appropriate and effective adaptation of the U.S. Center for Disease Control's 
universal precautions for the storage and transmission of the HIV virus and other diseases 
when cleaning or sanitizing the establishment. 
(Code 1993, § 10-134; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-146. - Adult performance establishment provisions. 
(a) ?In addition to the general requirements for adult entertainment establishments and sexually oriented 
businesses contained in section 10-143, an adult performance establishment shall, regardless of 
whether it is licensed under this article, have a stage provided for the expressive display or exposure 
of any worker's specified anatomical areas to a customer consisting of a permanent platform (or 
other similar permanent structure) raised a minimum of 18 inches above the surrounding floor and 
encompassing an area of at least 100 square feet. The stage shall be located at least three feet from 
the nearest table, chair, area or other accommodation where customers are seated or otherwise 
located; provided, however, that a table at which any customer is seated or served shall not be used 
as a stage. 
(b) ?In addition to the general requirements for adult entertainment establishments and sexually oriented 
businesses contained in this article, an adult performance establishment shall, regardless of whether 
it is licensed under this article: 
(1) ?In any area in which a private performance occurs, have a permanently open entrance not less 
than three feet wide and not less than six feet high, which entrance shall not have any curtain 
rods, hinges, rails or the like which would allow the entrance to be closed or partially closed by 
any curtain, door, or other partition; provided, however, that the requirements of all building and 
related codes shall also be complied with; 
(2) ?In any area in which a private performance occurs, have a wall-to-wall, floor-to-ceiling partition 
of solid construction without any holes or openings, which partition may be completely or 
partially transparent, and which partition separates the worker from the person viewing the 
displays; 
(3) ?Post a sign which is clearly legible and located in a conspicuous place setting forth that 
straddle dancing is strictly prohibited; 
(4) ?Not place or permit the placement of a bed or mattress in the establishment. 
(Code 1993, § 10-135; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-147. - Commercial bodily contact establishment's provisions. 
    In addition to all general requirements of this article pertaining to adult entertainment establishments 
and sexually oriented businesses as set forth in sections 10-143 and 10-144, a commercial bodily contact 
establishment, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, shall: 
(1) ?Operate only from a fixed physical location which is set forth on its sexually oriented business 
license and all required occupational licenses. 
(2) ?Not advertise, offer or provide any other service other than services which are posted. 
(3) ?Provide clean linen and towels for each customer when towels and linens are used during the 
course of providing services to a customer; provided, however, that heavy white paper may be 
substituted for sheets if such paper is used for only one customer and then discarded into a 
sanitary receptacle. 
(4) ?Store clean linen, towels and other materials used in connection with providing commercial 
bodily contact in closed cabinets. 
(5) ?Disinfect and sterilize non-disposable instruments after each use on a customer. 
(6) ?Cause all workers to conceal their specified anatomical areas with an opaque covering at all 
times when on the premises of the business by wearing an opaque surgical type gown. 
(7) ?Not encourage, allow or permit any customer to consume food or beverages in the business. 
(8) ?Provide commercial bodily contact in an area wherein such area is visible at all times from 
common areas in the establishment. No contact may occur in a separate or individual cubicle, 
room, booth or area which is not visible from common areas of the establishment and a 
receptionist area; provided, however, that if male and female customers are provided services 
at the same time, separate work areas shall be established for each gender. 
(9) ?Not advertise, display, publish, exhibit, place, distribute or promote on any advertising matter or 
signage services that are not posted or a suggestion that services not posted will be provided. 
(10) ?Not advertise, display, publish, exhibit, place, distribute or promote on any advertising matter 
or signage any suggestion that workers will be dressed in any manner other than as required in 
this article. 
(11) ?Not begin a meeting or service with a customer between 10:00 p.m. of any day of the week 
and 9:00 a.m. the following day. 
(12) ?Not provide services at any place other than a physical location licensed to provide 
commercial bodily contact under the provisions of this article. 
(13) ?Not place or permit the placement of any bed, mattress or sofa at the business; provided, 
however, that a sofa may be placed in the reception area open to the public at the main 
entrance of the business and cots or padded mats may be used when providing commercial 
bodily contact. 
(Code 1993, § 10-136; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-148. - Escort service. 
    In addition to all general provisions of sections 10-143 and 10-144 pertaining to adult entertainment 
establishments and sexually oriented businesses, an escort service, regardless of whether licensed under 
this article, shall: 
(1) ?Not advertise, offer or perform any other service than services which are posted. 
(2) ?Cause all workers and escorts to conceal their specified anatomical areas with an opaque 
covering at all times when on the premises of the escort service. 
(3) ?Not advertise, display, publish, exhibit, place, distribute or promote on any advertising matter or 
signage services that are not posted, or a suggestion that services not posted will be provided. 
(4) ?Not begin a meeting or service with a customer between 10:00 p.m. of any day of the week and 
9:00 a.m. the following day. 
(5) ?If offering or providing escorts or escort service within the city, each escort service shall notify 
the community development department of an authorized physical location, which may or may 
not be within the city, from where the escort service operates and dispatches escorts. 
(6) ?Include in all advertising or promotional literature posted, placed, published, or distributed 
within the city the number of a valid sexually oriented business license issued by the city, unless 
the escort service does not refer, send, or dispatch escorts to any location within the 
jurisdictional limits of the city. 
(7) ?Each escort service shall ensure that every escort and worker of the escort service is provided 
with a copy of the escort service's license and carries it while working as an escort for the 
service, and displays said license upon the request of any law enforcement officer or the 
assistant city administrator or his designee. In addition to a copy of the escort service's license, 
each escort service shall ensure that each escort has an occupational license to engage in the 
occupation of escort within the city and that he carries said license while working, and displays 
said license upon the request of any law enforcement officer or the assistant city administrator 
or his designee. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an escort or worker of an escort service who is 
a paid employee for whom taxes and Social Security payments are withheld, who is paid by the 
licensed escort service, and who is not an independent contractor, may substitute and carry a 
copy of the sexually oriented business/escort service license of the employing escort service 
only, provided that worker records as required by this article are created and maintained by the 
licensed escort service. 
(8) ?If a meeting with or the service of a customer occurs at a location not open to the public, then 
the escort shall check in with the on-duty manager of the premises in person where the meeting 
or service occurs or begins prior to meeting or servicing a customer, and advise the manager of 
the following: the name of the escort, the escort service and customer; the escort's time of 
arrival and estimated time of departure; and a copy of the escort service's sexually oriented 
business license and the escort's own occupational license, if applicable; and the location of the 
meeting within the structure. 
(Code 1993, § 10-137; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-149. - Customers engaging in prohibited activity. 
(a) ?It is unlawful for any customer in or for an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented 
business, regardless of whether licensed pursuant to this article, to do any of the following acts: 
(1) ?To engage or participate in a straddle dance at the establishment or business. 
(2) ?To offer, contract or otherwise agree to engage or participate in a straddle dance with a person 
at the establishment or business. 
(3) ?To engage or participate in any specified sexual activity at the establishment or business or 
while in the presence of a worker. 
(4) ?To display or expose while in the presence of a worker or when at the establishment or 
business any specified anatomical area. 
(5) ?To offer or deliver a tip or gratuity to any worker of an establishment or business before, during 
or after the provision of services. 
(6) ?If a worker is a female, to intentionally touch, fondle or manipulate her on her clothed or 
unclothed breasts, either directly or through a medium. 
(7) ?To intentionally touch, fondle, massage, or manipulate any specified anatomical area of a 
worker, a customer, or himself, whether clothed or unclothed, on the premises of the 
establishment or business. 
(8) ?To intentionally touch, fondle, massage or manipulate a worker on any specified anatomical 
area when at or receiving services from the adult entertainment establishment or sexually 
oriented business. 
(9) ?To intentionally touch, fondle, massage or manipulate the clothed or unclothed breasts of a 
female worker, or to touch the clothed or unclothed body of a worker at any point below the 
waist and above the knee of the worker when at an adult entertainment establishment or 
sexually oriented business. 
(10) ?To occupy an adult booth, in which booth there are more people than that specified on the 
posted sign required by this article. 
(11) ?To otherwise violate or aid or abet a violation of this article. 
(12) ?To encourage or solicit any worker to engage in any specified sexual activity. 
(b) ?It is unlawful for any customer at or of a sexually oriented business to do any of the following acts, 
regardless of whether the establishment is licensed pursuant to this article: 
(1) ?To intentionally touch, massage or manipulate, directly or indirectly or through a medium while 
on the premises of the establishment or when with a worker, the customer's specified 
anatomical areas. 
(2) ?To solicit any worker to provide a service not posted. 
(3) ?To solicit or receive any service not indicated and contracted for in the written customer 
contract. 
(4) ?To provide to the worker providing the service either directly, indirectly or through a medium, 
any tip, gratuity or other consideration beyond the fee specified in the customer contract. 
(5) ?To expose any specified anatomical area to the view of a worker. 
(Code 1993, § 10-145; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-150. - Workers/operators engaging in prohibited activity. 
(a) ?It is unlawful for any worker of an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business, 
regardless of whether licensed under this article, to do any of the following acts, or for an operator of 
an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business, regardless of whether licensed 
hereunder, to knowingly permit, suffer, aid, allow or encourage any worker to do any of the following 
acts: 
(1) ?To engage or participate in a straddle dance with a customer at the establishment or business. 
(2) ?To offer, contract or otherwise agree with a customer to engage or participate in a straddle 
dance with a person at the establishment or business. 
(3) ?To engage or participate in any specified sexual activity or activities at the establishment or 
business with a customer, himself or a worker. 
(4) ?To display or expose at the establishment or business specified anatomical areas except in 
accordance with the provisions of this article and other applicable law. 
(5) ?To request or accept a tip or gratuity from a customer. For purposes of this subsection, a tip or 
gratuity shall include, but not be limited to, anything of value such as cash, or any chip, ticket, 
card, token, or other items purchased or paid for or made available by a customer or patron for 
or on behalf of any performer at the adult entertainment establishment. 
(6) ?To work in an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business that he knows or 
should know is not licensed under this article, or which has a license which is under suspension, 
has been revoked or canceled, or has expired, regardless of whether he has applied for and 
obtained a license under this article. 
(7) ?To engage in personal advertising, pandering, or solicitation, whether passive or otherwise, on 
behalf of the worker, any other worker, or the establishment or business, while situated outside 
any structure at the establishment or business, or at a place at the establishment or business 
where the worker is visible from any public right-of-way or sidewalk. The term "personal 
advertising" means encouraging or enticing, by whatever direct or indirect means, potential 
customers outside the doors of the establishment or business to enter the establishment or 
business. 
(8) ?To suffer, permit, or allow any door of the business or establishment that is visible from a public 
right-of-way or sidewalk to be opened or remain opened except when a person is entering or 
exiting the establishment or business. 
(9) ?To allow or encourage a customer to intentionally touch or fondle, either directly or through a 
medium, any specified anatomical area of the customer, a worker or another customer. 
(10) ?If the worker is a female, to allow herself to be intentionally touched on her clothed or 
unclothed breasts by a customer. 
(11) ?If a worker is a female, to allow herself to be intentionally touched by a customer on any 
portion of her body below the waist and above the knee. 
(12) ?To display or expose any specified anatomical area, unless such worker is in an area 
described in section 10-146(a) or (b), and the stage on which the worker is located is not 
located between the legs of a customer. 
(13) ?To provide or engage in any private performance, unless such worker is in an area described 
in subsection 10-146. 
(14) ?To remain in the presence of a customer who is exposing specified anatomical areas at the 
establishment or in the presence of a worker or another customer. 
(15) ?To violate or aid or abet in a violation of the provisions of this article. 
(16) ?To encourage or knowingly permit any customer to intentionally touch, fondle, massage or 
manipulate, either directly or indirectly through a medium, any of the customer's specified 
anatomical areas on the premises of the establishment or when in the presence of another 
customer or worker. 
(17) ?To encourage or solicit any customer to engage in any specified sexual activity. 
(18) ?To intentionally touch, fondle, massage or manipulate any customer on the customer's 
clothed or unclothed body below the waist and above the knee. 
(b) ?It is unlawful for any worker of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether it is licensed 
under this article, to do any of the following acts, or for an operator of a sexually oriented business, 
regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, to knowingly or with reason to know permit, 
suffer, or allow any worker to commit any of the following acts: 
(1) ?To accept a tip or gratuity from or on behalf of a customer in addition to the service fee stated 
in the written customer contract. 
(2) ?To begin a meeting or service, continue a meeting or service, solicit a meeting or service or 
make or solicit a sale between the hours of 10:00 p.m. of any particular day and 9:00 a.m. the 
following day. 
(3) ?To provide commercial bodily contact except at the physical structure of the establishment 
which has a commercial bodily contact establishment license. 
(4) ?To provide any service not posted as required by this article. 
(5) ?To provide any service without first executing a customer contract. 
(c) ?It is unlawful for any worker of an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business, 
regardless of whether licensed pursuant to this article, to knowingly permit, suffer, aid, allow or 
encourage any customer to do any of the following acts: 
(1) ?To intentionally touch, fondle, massage or manipulate, either directly or indirectly through a 
medium, any of the customer's specified anatomical areas when at the establishment or 
business or while in the presence of a worker or another customer. 
(2) ?To intentionally touch, fondle, massage or manipulate, either directly or indirectly through a 
medium, any specified anatomical area of another customer or a worker when at the 
establishment or business or while in the presence of a worker or customer. 
(3) ?To engage in any specified sexual activities at the establishment or business with a worker, 
customer, himself or with another customer. 
(4) ?To expose the customer's specified anatomical areas at the establishment or business or when 
receiving services or when in the presence of a worker or another customer. 
(5) ?To engage or participate in a straddle dance. 
(6) ?To intentionally touch, fondle, massage or manipulate a worker at any point below the waist 
and above the knee. 
(7) ?To intentionally touch a female worker on the clothed or unclothed breast. 
(Code 1993, § 10-146; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-151. - Operation without license. 
    It is unlawful for any person to be an operator of or at or to be a worker for an adult entertainment 
establishment or sexually oriented business where the person knows or should know: 
(1) ?That the establishment or business does not have an adult entertainment establishment or 
sexually oriented business license for the applicable classification. 
(2) ?That the establishment or business has a license which is under suspension. 
(3) ?That the establishment or business has a license which has been revoked, canceled or has 
expired. 
(Code 1993, § 10-147; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-152. - Operation contrary to operational requirements. 
(a) ?It is unlawful for any person to be an operator of an adult entertainment establishment or sexually 
oriented business which does not satisfy all of the general requirements of section 10-143, 
regardless of whether the establishment is licensed thereunder. 
(b) ?It is unlawful for any person to be an operator of a sexually oriented business which does not satisfy 
all of the general requirements of section 10-144, regardless of whether the establishment is 
licensed thereunder. 
(c) ?It is unlawful for any person to be an operator of an adult performance establishment which does not 
satisfy all of the special requirements of section 10-146, regardless of whether the establishment is 
licensed thereunder. 
(d) ?It is unlawful for any person to be an operator of an adult theater which does not satisfy all of the 
special requirements of section 10-145, regardless of whether the establishment is licensed 
thereunder. 
(e) ?It is unlawful for any person to be an operator of an escort service which does not satisfy all of the 
special requirements of section 10-148, regardless of whether the service is licensed thereunder. 
(f) ?It is unlawful for any person to be an operator of a commercial bodily contact establishment which 
does not satisfy all of the special requirements of section 10-147, regardless of whether the 
establishment is licensed thereunder. 
(Code 1993, § 10-148; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-153. - Use of restrooms or dressing rooms. 
(a) ?Notwithstanding any provision in this article indicating to the contrary, it is not unlawful for any 
worker of an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business, regardless of whether 
it is licensed under this article, to expose any specified anatomical area during the worker's bona fide 
use of a dressing room or bathroom which is occupied at the time only by workers of the same sex. 
(b) ?Notwithstanding any provision in this article indicating to the contrary, it shall not be unlawful for any 
customer of an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business, regardless of 
whether it is licensed under this article, to expose any specified anatomical area during the 
customer's bona fide use of a bathroom which is occupied at the time only by customers of the same 
sex. 
(c) ?It is unlawful to be an operator of an adult performance establishment which has a dressing room for 
use by its workers that is accessible to customers. 
(d) ?It is unlawful to be an operator of a sexually oriented business which has a dressing room for use by 
its customers that is accessible to workers. 
(e) ?Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, a worker engaged in the work of a 
restroom attendant or valet may occupy a restroom which is also occupied by customers, provided 
that the valet or attendant does not expose any specified anatomical area to the view of a customer 
and is of the same sex of the customer occupying the restroom. 
(f) ?Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, it is not unlawful for a worker or 
customer to touch his own specified anatomical areas during his bona fide use of a restroom, 
dressing room or bathroom when such touching is necessary and inherent to the activity of changing 
clothes or excretory functions. 
(Code 1993, § 10-149; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-154. - Minors; unlawful provisions. 
    It is unlawful for an operator or worker of an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented 
business, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, to knowingly or with reason to know, 
permit, suffer or allow: 
(1) ?Admittance to the establishment or business of a person under 18 years of age when the 
establishment or business is open for business. 
(2) ?A person under 18 years of age to remain at the establishment or business when the 
establishment or business is open for business. 
(3) ?A person under 18 years of age to purchase goods or services from the establishment or a 
worker at the establishment or business. 
(4) ?A person under 18 years of age to be a worker at or for the establishment or business. 
(Code 1993, § 10-150; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-155. - Records; unlawful provisions. 
(a) ?It is unlawful to be an operator or worker of an adult entertainment establishment or sexually 
oriented business, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, if the current and valid adult 
entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business license is not conspicuously displayed on 
the premises of the establishment or business. 
(b) ?It is unlawful to be an operator of an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented 
business, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, which does not create, establish and 
compile worker records, maintain worker records or where such records are not produced for 
inspection by a law enforcement officer upon request when the establishment or business is open for 
business. 
(c) ?It is unlawful to be an operator of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether it is licensed 
under this article, at which customer contracts, daily registers and a list of services have not been 
compiled, maintained or are not produced for inspection by a law enforcement officer upon request 
when the establishment or business is open for business. 
(d) ?It is unlawful for a worker at or of an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented 
business, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, to fail to obtain, carry or produce for 
inspection by a law enforcement officer upon request, an occupational license for the occupation in 
which the worker is engaged; provided, however, that a worker of an adult entertainment 
establishment or sexually oriented business who is a paid employee for whom income taxes and 
Social Security payments are withheld and paid by the establishment and who is not an independent 
contractor shall not be required to obtain an occupational license or his own adult entertainment 
establishment/sexually oriented business license. 
(e) ?It is unlawful for an escort, regardless of whether they are a paid employee for whom income taxes 
and Social Security payments are withheld and paid by the escort service, to fail to carry and 
produce for inspection by a law enforcement officer a copy of the sexually oriented business license 
of the employing escort service when working as an escort or providing the services of an escort. 
(f) ?It is unlawful for any person or any person on his behalf applying for a license under this article to 
make a false or misleading statement or provide false or misleading information which is intended to 
facilitate the issuance of a license. 
(g) ?It is unlawful for any worker, customer or operator to provide false or misleading information in any 
worker record, customer contract or daily register required by this article. 
(h) ?It is unlawful to be an operator or worker at an adult entertainment establishment or sexually 
oriented business which does not have conspicuously posted the name of the operator on duty while 
the establishment is open for business. 
(i) ?It is unlawful for an operator of an adult entertainment establishment to fail to produce for inspection 
any worker record required by this article, when requested by a law enforcement officer or the 
assistant city administrator or his designee, when the establishment or business is open for 
business. 
(j) ?It is unlawful for an operator of a sexually oriented business to fail to produce for inspection any 
worker record, customer contract or daily register required by this article when requested by a law 
enforcement officer or the mayor or his designee when the establishment or business is open for 
business. 
(Code 1993, § 10-151; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-156. - Hours of operation; unlawful provisions. 
(a) ?It is unlawful for any operator or worker of an adult entertainment establishment, regardless of 
whether it is licensed pursuant to this article, to allow such establishment to remain open for 
business or to knowingly allow any worker to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make 
a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service or solicit a service during the following hours and days: 
(1) ?Between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 9:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday; and 
(2) ?Between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 11:59 p.m. on Sunday. 
(b) ?It is unlawful for any operator of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether it is licensed 
pursuant to this article, to allow such business to remain open for business or to permit any worker to 
engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, begin, continue or provide a service, or 
solicit a service during the following hours and days: 
(1) ?Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. of the following morning, Monday through 
Friday; and 
(2) ?The entire period between 10:00 p.m. Saturday night and 9:00 a.m. the following Monday. 
(Code 1993, § 10-152; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-157. - Special prohibitions relating to escorts and escort services; unlawful provisions. 
    It is unlawful for any escort, escort service or worker of an escort service, regardless of whether the 
service is licensed under this article, to commit any of the following acts, or for an operator of an escort 
service, regardless of whether the service is licensed hereunder, to knowingly permit, suffer, aid, assist or 
allow any escort or escort service worker to commit any of the following acts: 
(1) ?To enter a hotel, motel or other place of temporary lodging for the purpose of meeting or 
providing services to a customer without immediately upon entering such hotel, motel or other 
place and prior to meeting the customer making personal face-to-face contact with the on-duty 
manager at the front desk or reception area and providing that person with the following 
information: 
a. ?The time of arrival and estimated time of departure; 
b. ?A copy of the escort service's sexually oriented business license and, if applicable, the 
escort's occupational license; 
c. ?The name of the escort, the escort service and the customer being met/served; and 
d. ?The location of the meeting or service within the structure, including the room number. 
(2) ?To require, entice or solicit any customer to remove any article of clothing. 
(3) ?To display or expose any specified anatomical area to a customer. 
(4) ?To begin a meeting or service without first meeting the customer in a public place such as a bar 
or restaurant before accompanying the customer to any place not open to the public such as a 
hotel room or residence. 
(5) ?To meet with or provide services to a customer in any place not open to the public such as a 
hotel room, motel room or residence without first executing the customer contract as required by 
this article. 
(6) ?To provide services to a customer, even in a public place, without first executing the customer 
contract as required by this article, immediately following the meeting of the customer. 
(7) ?To solicit a tip or gratuity from a customer in exchange for a promise or suggestion that any act 
or service not contracted for in the customer contract will be performed. 
(8) ?To accept any compensation or payment except that which is provided in the customer 
contract. 
(Code 1993, § 10-153; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-158. - Special prohibited acts; commercial bodily contact; unlawful provisions. 
    It is unlawful for a worker of a commercial bodily contact establishment, regardless of whether it is 
licensed pursuant to this article, to commit any of the following acts or for the operator of a commercial 
bodily contact establishment, regardless of whether it is licensed thereunder, to knowingly or with reason 
to know, permit, suffer, aid, assist or allow any worker to commit any of the following acts: 
(1) ?To provide commercial bodily contact or to be present at the premises of the business when 
open for business unless covering his specified anatomical areas by wearing an opaque 
surgical type gown. 
(2) ?To display or expose any specified anatomical area to a customer. 
(3) ?To allow a customer to expose or display the customer's specified anatomical areas in the 
presence of a worker. 
(4) ?To allow a customer to engage in any specified sexual activity with himself, another customer 
or with a worker. 
(5) ?To perform or provide commercial bodily contact except at the premises of a commercial bodily 
contact establishment licensed under this article. 
(6) ?To engage in or offer to engage in private modeling or the activities of an escort with any 
customer. 
(7) ?To provide commercial bodily contact or service to a customer without first executing a 
customer contract as required by this article. 
(8) ?To intentionally touch, fondle, manipulate or massage the specified anatomical area of any 
customer. 
(9) ?To allow any customer to intentionally touch, fondle, manipulate or massage any specified 
anatomical area of any worker or the body of any worker below the waist and above the knee, 
directly, indirectly or through a medium. 
(10) ?To remain in the presence of any customer who is displaying, exposing, intentionally touching, 
fondling or manipulating any specified anatomical area. 
(11) ?To allow any customer to intentionally touch, massage or manipulate any specified anatomical 
area while on the premises of the business or when in the presence of a worker. 
(12) ?To solicit or require a customer to remove any item of clothing as a prerequisite to providing 
commercial bodily contact. 
(13) ?To accept or solicit any tip, remuneration, consideration or gratuity in excess of the fee 
provided in the executed customer contract. 
(14) ?To accept or solicit any tip, remuneration, consideration or gratuity in exchange for any 
enhanced service. 
(15) ?To fail to require a customer to cover such customer's specified anatomical areas with a 
towel, robe, undergarment, bathing suit or other similar fully opaque material while on the 
premises of the business. 
(16) ?To engage in or offer to engage in any private performance or act as an adult model. 
(Code 1993, § 10-154; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-159. - Commercial bodily contact establishments prohibited; savings provision. 
(a) ?Notwithstanding any provision of this article, it is unlawful to operate or be a worker for or at a 
commercial bodily contact establishment which engages in commercial bodily contact. 
(b) ?Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, in the event that subsection (a) of 
this section, prohibiting commercial bodily contact establishments, is found to be unconstitutional or 
otherwise invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, or should an injunction be issued relative to the 
enforcement of subsection (a) of this section, then all provisions set forth in this article applicable to 
commercial bodily contact establishments and sexually oriented businesses shall apply to 
businesses and establishments engaged in commercial bodily contact. 
(Code 1993, § 10-155; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-160. - Licenses/home occupations. 
(a) ?The city clerk's office may take such steps as may be necessary to ensure that the local business 
tax is paid by only such individuals and entities that are lawfully permitted in accordance with the 
provisions of this article. 
(b) ?Adult entertainment establishments and sexually oriented businesses shall not be approved as 
home occupations. 
(Code 1993, § 10-157; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-161. - Sexual encounter businesses prohibited; prohibited acts; unlawful provisions. 
(a) ?It is unlawful to be an operator of or be a worker at a sexual encounter business. 
(b) ?It is unlawful to cause, encourage, or allow a person under 18 years of age to be present at a sexual 
encounter business. 
(c) ?It is unlawful to aid or abet a person causing, encouraging or allowing a person under 18 years of 
age to be present at a sexual encounter business. 
(Code 1993, § 10-158; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-162. - Immunity from prosecution. 
    The city and any and all of its officers, departments or agents and any law enforcement officer shall 
be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for the reasonable, good faith trespass upon an adult 
entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business while acting within the scope of the authority 
set forth in this article. 
(Code 1993, § 10-159; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Secs. 10-163—10-177. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 4. - LOCATIONAL REQUIREMENTS 


Sec. 10-178. - Applicable zoning district. 
    All adult entertainment establishments or sexually oriented businesses within the city shall be limited 
to the I-1 (restricted industrial) zoning district, and subject to all restrictions enumerated for such district. 
(Code 1993, § 10-174; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-179. - Prohibited locations. 
(a) ?Notwithstanding any other provision of this article or any other provision of this Code, no person 
shall cause or permit the establishment, or substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or 
control of, an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business which, while in 
operation or after enlargement, would or will be located within 750 feet of a pre-existing adult 
entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business; within 1,500 feet of any pre-existing 
religious institution; within 1,500 feet of an area zoned or designated by the comprehensive plan for 
residential use; within 1,500 feet of an existing residential use; within 1,500 feet from any pre-existing 
park or school; or within 500 feet of an existing commercial establishment that in any manner sells or 
dispenses alcohol (on-premises or off-premises sales). 
(b) ?For the purposes of this section, the term "substantial enlargement" means increasing the floor size 
of the establishment by more than ten percent of the originally licensed premises. 
(c) ?For the purposes of this section, distances shall be measured by drawing a straight line, without 
regard to intervening structures or objects, between the closest property lines of the proposed or 
existing adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business to the nearest point on the 
property line of another adult entertainment establishment and/or sexually oriented business; 
religious institution; school or educational institution; park; residential use zoning district; or 
commercial establishment which sells alcohol. Measurement shall be made in a straight line, without 
regard to municipal boundaries. 
(Code 1993, § 10-175; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-180. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a) ?Generally. A person owning or controlling an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented 
business which, on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, does not 
comply with the distance requirement of the prohibited locations listed in section 10-179, shall be 
subject to the nonconforming use provisions contained in article X of the city's Land Development 
Code. 
(b) ?Residential rezoning. If an area is zoned residential or designated by a comprehensive plan in a 
manner for dwellings for the first time or an area is rezoned for residential use and lies within 1,500 
feet of an existing adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business, the adult 
entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business shall be considered an existing 
nonconforming use, as in subsection (a) of this section, from the effective date of the rezoning 
ordinance. 
(Code 1993, § 10-176; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Secs. 10-181—10-203. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 5. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 


Sec. 10-204. - Proof of alcoholic content of beverages. 
(a) ?In all actions, civil or criminal, for violation of this article, testimonial evidence that a beverage was 
an alcoholic beverage, beer or wine may be offered by any person who, by experience in the past in 
handling or using alcoholic beverages, beer or wine, or who, by taste, smell or drinking of such 
liquids, has knowledge of the presence of the alcoholic content thereof or the intoxicating effect 
thereof. 
(b) ?The presence of alcoholic content of any beverage, beer or wine may be shown by hydrometer or 
gravity test made in or away from the presence of the fact finder by any person who has knowledge 
of the use of such instrument, but the production of such evidence is optional. 
(Code 1993, § 10-177; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-205. - Responsibility of employer for acts of employees. 
(a) ?Employers of commercial establishments within the city are responsible for the acts of their 
employees. 
(b) ?It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining or operating a commercial establishment, regardless 
of whether it is licensed under this article, where the person knows or has reason to know that 
alcoholic beverages are on the premises of the commercial establishment, to knowingly, or with 
reason to know, permit, suffer or allow any employee on the premises to perform or participate in a 
straddle dance, as broadly defined by this article, or to exhibit or display the human genitals or pubic 
region, the cleavage of the human buttocks or the areola of the human female breast. 
(c) ?Any establishment which has received or is required to obtain an occupational license to operate 
commercially is presumed to be a commercial establishment. 
(Code 1993, § 10-178; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Sec. 10-206. - Prohibition against co-mingling of alcohol and nudity. 
(a) ?It is unlawful within the city for any person, including, but not limited to, any manager, officer, agent, 
servant, employee, contractor, customer, member or invitee of any commercial establishment 
licensed under the laws of the state, to possess, sell, or allow the consumption of alcoholic 
beverages, or to knowingly, intentionally or recklessly exhibit, suffer, allow, permit, engage in, 
participate in or be connected with nudity at or upon the licensed premises of the commercial 
establishment. 
(b) ?It is unlawful in the city for any person to possess, sell, serve or allow the consumption of alcohol or 
alcoholic beverages at any commercial establishment where any person shall be nude or knowingly, 
intentionally or recklessly exhibits, suffers, allows, permits, engages in, participates in, or is 
connected with nudity on the premises. 
(c) ?It is unlawful within the city for any person to be nude or to knowingly, intentionally, or recklessly 
exhibit, suffer, allow, permit, engage in, participate in, or be connected with nudity upon the premises 
of any commercial establishment at which the consumption of alcoholic beverages occurs. 
(d) ?Any establishment which has received or is required to obtain an occupational license to operate 
commercially is presumed to be a commercial establishment. 
(e) ?The combination of nudity and the possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages at any 
commercial establishment as set forth in subsections (a), (b), and (c) of this section and the act of 
permitting, condoning, or allowing the possession, sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages within 
the city is hereby strictly prohibited and made unlawful. No establishment regulated by this article, at 
which nudity occurs as described in subsections (a), (b), (c), and (d) of this section, shall offer for 
sale, possession, service or consumption of alcoholic beverages at any time during any business 
day. 
(f) ?It is not a violation of this article for any person to engage in the ordinary and customary bona fide 
use of an enclosed single-sex public restroom, enclosed single-sex functional shower or enclosed 
single-sex locker and/or dressing room facility. It is also not a violation of this article for a mother to 
breastfeed her baby. 
(Code 1993, § 10-179; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Secs. 10-207—10-235. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 6. - ADVERTISEMENTS 


Sec. 10-236. - Advertising. 
(a) ?Advertisements, displays or other promotional materials for any adult entertainment establishments, 
except as authorized and described within this section, shall not be shown or exhibited so as to be 
visible to the public from any street, sidewalk or other public place. 
(b) ?This section shall not prohibit the use of a sign displaying the name of the business. Such signs 
shall be in accordance with the city's Land Development Code. 
(c) ?A sign shall not contain any flashing lights, photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial 
representations of any type or manner, and as follows: 
(1) ?No sign shall include the words "nude," "nudity," "naked," "topless," "go-go" or "dancers," or 
words including slang substitutes or materials depicting, describing or relating to "specified 
anatomical areas of the human body" or "specified sexual activities" as defined in section 10-83. 
(2) ?Each letter forming a word on a sign shall be a solid color, and each such letter shall be the 
same print type, size and color. The background behind such lettering on the display surface 
shall be a uniform solid color. 
(Code 1993, § 10-180; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 7-21-1999) 


Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Damage by dogs, F.S. ch. 767; animal care and control, F.S. ch. 828; cruelty to 
animals, F.S. § 828.12; offenses against police dogs, etc., F.S. § 843.19. 


Sec. 14-1. - Acceptance of county ordinance. 
    The city council hereby accepts Orange County, Florida, Code of Ordinances, chapter 5, Animals, as 
amended, to regulate the possession, ownership, care and custody of animals in the interest of the 
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 4-21; Code 1993, § 14-1; Ord. No. 893, § 1, 11-15-1995) 


Sec. 14-2. - City declared bird sanctuary. 
    The entire area within the city is hereby declared to be a bird sanctuary for all birds, whether game 
birds or other birds, which are protected by the laws of the state. 
(Code 1983, § 4-5; Code 1993, § 14-2) 


Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Community Planning Act, adoption of building regulation procedures, F.S. § 
163.3194; contracting regarding buildings, F.S. ch. 489; building construction standards, F.S. ch. 553; 
building codes, F.S. § 553.70 et seq.; Florida Building Code, F.S. § 553.73; inspection warrants, F.S. § 
933.20 et seq. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 18-1. - Building inspections. 
    The city council does hereby establish, approve, and authorize the city building official and the city 
building safety division as the exclusive agents for enforcement of the Florida Building Code and any 
amendments thereto within the city limits, except as provided for by agreement, contract, or law. For 
purposes of this section, the term "enforcement" shall include, but not be limited to, plan and permit 
review and approval; collection of permit fees; inspections; compliance determinations; and issuance of 
directives for corrective actions. 
(Code 1993, § 22-1; Ord. No. 1431, § I, 4-17-2002; Ord. No. 2159, § 1, 4-21-2010) 


Secs. 18-2—18-20. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Adoption of Florida Building Code required, F.S. § 553.73. 


Sec. 18-21. - The Florida Building Code adopted. 
(a) ?The Florida Building Code is hereby adopted by reference as if set out at length herein. 
(b) ?No person shall violate any of the provisions of the publication adopted by reference in subsection 
(a) of this section. 
(c) ?If there shall be any conflict between the provisions of the publication adopted by reference in 
subsection (a) of this section and the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall 
prevail. 
(Code 1993, § 22-36; Ord. No. 1431, § I, 4-17-2002) 
State Law reference— Florida Building Code, F.S. § 553.73. 


Sec. 18-22. - Amendments. 
    The city council adopts the current version of the Building Officials Association of Florida Model 
Administrative Code. 
(Code 1993, § 22-37; Ord. No. 1431, § I, 4-17-2002; Ord. No. 1758, § I(exh. A), 7-6-2005; Ord. 
No. 2453, § I, 10-21-2015) 


Secs. 18-23—18-47. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - PERMIT FEES 


Sec. 18-48. - Building, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing. 
(a) ?Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish or 
change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, 
convert or replace any required impact-resistant coverings, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing 
system, the installation of which is regulated by the Florida Building Code, or to cause any such work 
to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit. These 
permits shall be calculated at $7.50 per $1,000.00 of actual contracted cost or construction 
cost/value, whichever is greater. 
(b) ?All permits for residential new construction of single-family dwellings, duplexes or multifamily 
dwellings and commercial buildings (not including sub-permits) shall incur a nonrefundable 
administrative processing fee of $50.00. 
(c) ?The minimum permit fee shall not be less than $50.00, unless noted in other sections of this Code. 
Any conflict in permit costs/fees shall be resolved by the building official. The building official shall 
obtain a copy of the signed contract for the proposed work to establish the permit cost, or use the 
Building Valuation Data Table, whichever is greater. 
(d) ?In determining the construction cost/value of any project, the latest edition of the Building Valuation 
Data Table, as referenced by the Building Safety Journal as published by the International Code 
Council, shall be used. If this table ever becomes obsolete, the building official shall use industry 
standards for determining square footage costs of construction. 
(e) ?Plan review fees for residential projects shall be one-half of the building permit fee. 
(f) ?Plan review fees for commercial projects shall be three-quarters of one percent of the contracted 
cost or construction cost/value, whichever is greater. 
(Code 1993, § 22-49; Ord. No. 1431, § I, 4-17-2002; Ord. No. 2207, § I(exh. A), 4-21-2010) 


Sec. 18-49. - Rejection, correction notice, stop-work order, or citation fees. 
    The following fees are established for rejections, correction notices, stop-work orders, or citing code 
violations, whichever is applicable: 
(1) ?Rejection or correction notices: $30.00. If a rejection or correction notice has to be issued for 
the same violation on the same job or project a third time, the fee shall be $120.00, as allowed 
by F.S. § 550.80(2)(c). 
(2) ?Stop-work orders: $250.00 
(3) ?Citation fees, as per article V of this chapter, property maintenance code, are established as 
follows: 
a. ?Class I offense: ..... $?50.00 
b. ?Class II offense: ..... 150.00 
c. ?Class III offense: ..... 200.00 
(4) ?Beginning work without a permit shall be charged a fee of $100.00 or double the permit fee, 
whichever is greater. 
(Code 1993, § 22-50; Ord. No. 1431, § I, 4-17-2002; Ord. No. 2207, § I(exh. A), 4-21-2010) 


Sec. 18-50. - Miscellaneous. 
(a) ?The following miscellaneous fees are established: 
(1) ?Temporary sign: ..... $25.00 
(2) ?Mobile home tie-down: ..... ?50.00 
(3) ?Construction trailer permit: ..... ?25.00 
(4) ?Temporary pole: ..... ?50.00 
(5) ?Pre-power agreement: ..... ?25.00 
(6) ?Temporary underground (TUG): ..... ?50.00 
(7) ?Circus. The fee for a circus shall be $100.00 per tented structure. 
(8) ?Carnival. The fee for a carnival shall be: 
a. ?$100.00 for the first ten rides/booths. 
b. ?$150.00 for 11 to 20 rides/booths. 
c. ?$250.00 for 21 or more rides/booths. 
(9) ?Tent. The fee for a revival type tent and a commercial tent, other than for a circus, shall be 
$50.00. 
(10) ?House moving permit (flat fee): ..... $100.00 
(11) ?Site plan review (10,000 square feet or more): ..... ??50.00 
(12) ?Duplicate permit: ..... ???5.00 
(13) ?Re-stamp construction drawing: 
a. ?Residential: ..... ??20.00 
b. ?Commercial (per page): ..... ???5.00 
(14) ?Records retention management, per page: ..... ???2.00 
(15) ?Records retention management for all construction projects (flat rate): ..... ??40.00 
(b) ?Any permit fee not referenced herein shall be charged at three-fourths of one percent of the 
contracted cost of the job, or as determined by the building valuation data tables referenced in 
section 18-48, whichever is greater. 
(c) ?Refunds will not be issued for permit applications and plans review once they have been duly 
submitted and reviewed. Only refunds for hardships will be at the discretion of the chief 
administrative officer or the building official. 
(d) ?Waiver of fees. Only the chief administrative officer or the building official may waive fees with 
cause. 
(Code 1993, § 22-51; Ord. No. 1431, § I, 4-17-2002; Ord. No. 2207, § I(exh. A), 4-21-2010) 


Secs. 18-51—18-73. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - UNINHABITABLE, DILAPIDATED, UNSAFE BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES 


Sec. 18-74. - Existing building code. 
    The Florida Building Code, Existing Building Code, is adopted by reference as if set out at length in 
this section. 
(Code 1993, § 22-70; Ord. No. 1431, § I, 4-17-2002; Ord. No. 1758, § I(exh. A), 7-6-2005) 


Sec. 18-75. - Board defined. 
    Whenever the term "board" is used in this article, it means the board created or the person 
designated by ordinance to enforce this article. 
(Code 1993, § 22-81; Ord. No. 1431, § I, 4-17-2002) 


Sec. 18-76. - Authority of board. 
    The board is authorized to condemn and order to be demolished and removed, or to be put in a 
sound state of repair, any and all buildings and structures within the city found to be in a dilapidated, 
unsanitary, unsafe or uninhabitable condition. 
(Code 1993, § 22-82; Ord. No. 1431, § I, 4-17-2002) 


Sec. 18-77. - Inspections or investigations; notice to owner; hearing. 
(a) ?The building official, the fire chief, and the police chief, or their designees are authorized to 
periodically inspect or investigate buildings and structures within the city. If such officials find any 
building or structure to be in a dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe or uninhabitable condition, then they 
shall report such fact in writing to the owner, specifying in detail the condition of such building or 
structure, including reasonable information or specifications as to the deficiencies justifying such 
condemnation. The building official, fire chief, police chief, or their designees shall order placed upon 
such building or structure a notice of condemnation hearing, and simultaneously therewith direct to 
be delivered to the owner of the property involved, either in person or by certified or registered mail 
to the last-known address as shown by the tax assessment rolls of the county, a notice that such 
building or structure thereon has been found by officials of the city to be in a dilapidated, unsanitary, 
unsafe or uninhabitable condition, and the city intends to condemn the building or structure. Such 
notice shall further provide that a hearing will be held before the board at a stated time and at a 
stated place, and that at such time and place a full determination will be made by the board as to the 
condition of such building or structure. If the owner cannot be located for personal delivery or receipt 
of certified or registered mail of such notice after reasonable inquiry, then such notice shall be 
published once a week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within the 
city, and such service shall be deemed sufficient to show that the notice requirements of this section 
have been met, without regard to whether or not the property owner actually received such notice. 
(b) ?The property owner, at the hearing, shall have a full opportunity to be heard and to present such 
evidence as the owner sees fit. At the time and place of such hearing, the board shall hear all 
evidence produced, and determine, pursuant to the Florida Building Code, Existing Building Code, 
current edition, as adopted in section 18-74, for nonresidential property, and including, but not limited 
to, applicable sanitary, electrical, plumbing, gas, mechanical and fire codes in force in the city, 
whether or not the building or structure shall be condemned. 
(Code 1993, § 22-83; Ord. No. 1431, § I, 4-17-2002; Ord. No. 1758, § I(exh. A), 7-6-2005; Ord. 
No. 2159, § 2, 4-21-2010) 


Sec. 18-78. - Criteria for determination that building or structure is uninhabitable, unsafe or a public 
nuisance. 
(a) ?A building or structure shall be uninhabitable, unsafe and a public nuisance when any of the 
following conditions are found: 
(1) ?It is visited by persons for the purpose of unlawfully procuring or using any controlled 
substance as defined under F.S. ch. 893, or any drugs as defined in F.S. ch. 499; 
(2) ?It is used for the illegal keeping, selling or delivering of such controlled substances or drugs; or 
(3) ?It is found to have one or more of the following characteristics: 
a. ?It is vacant, unguarded and accessible to the public. 
b. ?There is an unwarranted accumulation of combustible material therein. 
c. ?The structure's condition creates hazards with respect to means of egress and fire 
protection as provided for the particular occupancy. 
d. ?There is a falling away, hanging loose or loosening of any siding, block, brick or other 
building material, or any exterior appendage or portion of the building or structure is not 
securely fastened, attached or anchored such that it is capable of resisting wind, seismic or 
similar loads as required by the building code. 
e. ?There is deterioration of the structure or structural parts as to constitute a public nuisance 
by reason of inadequate maintenance, obsolescence or abandonment. 
f. ?The structure is partially destroyed as a result of decay, deterioration or dilapidation or is 
likely to fully or partially collapse. 
g. ?There is an unusual sagging or leaning out of plumb of the structure or any parts of the 
structure, and such effect is caused by deterioration or overstressing. 
h. ?The electrical or mechanical installations or systems create a hazardous condition. 
i. ?An unsanitary condition exists by reason of inadequate or malfunctioning sanitary facilities 
or waste disposal systems. 
j. ?When the structure is declared a fire or safety hazard by the building official or fire official. 
k. ?When the structure creates and unusual or extraordinary hazard by its dilapidated condition 
to emergency response personnel or the general public. 
(b) ?A building or structure shall be presumed to be utilized for the purposes set forth in subsection 
(a)(1) or (2) of this section when there are one or more arrests or police reports of incidents which 
involve the keeping, consumption or delivery of controlled substances or drugs on the premises of 
the subject building or structure. 
(c) ?A building or structure found to be uninhabitable or unsafe as provided in this section shall be 
subject to demolition. 
(Code 1993, § 22-84; Ord. No. 1431, § I, 4-17-2002) 


Sec. 18-79. - Order of condemnation; repair or demolition by owner. 
    If the board determines, upon full hearing as provided in section 18-77, that such building or 
structure should be condemned, such fact shall be stated in writing to the property owner, including 
reasonable specifications as to the deficiencies justifying such condemnation. The property owner shall 
be given a reasonable time, according to the size, condition and location of such building or structure, in 
which to cause the building or structure to be demolished and removed or placed in a state of sound 
repair pursuant to and in conformance with the Florida Building Code, Existing Building Code, adopted in 
section 18-74, for residential property and for nonresidential property, and including, but not limited to, 
applicable sanitary, electrical, plumbing, gas, mechanical and fire codes in force in the city. In the event of 
failure on the part of the property owner within such time period to effect the demolition and removal or 
repair, then such building or structure will be demolished and removed by the city, and the cost of such 
demolition and removal assessed as a lien against the land. The order of condemnation shall be 
delivered to the property owner either in person or by certified or registered mail to the last-known 
address as shown by the tax assessment rolls of the county. The lack of a signed returned receipt shall 
not constitute a failure to notify an owner or interested party. Service shall be deemed complete upon 
mailing. The order of condemnation shall be recorded in the public records of the county. The recordation 
of such order of condemnation as provided in this section shall constitute notice to any subsequent 
purchasers, transferees, grantees, mortgagors, mortgagees, lessees or lienors, and all persons having, 
claiming or acquiring any interest in the property described therein or affected thereby. No condemned 
building or structure shall be occupied or used for any purpose during the period of time the building or 
structure is condemned. 
(Code 1993, § 22-85; Ord. No. 1431, § I, 4-17-2002; Ord. No. 1758, § I(exh. A), 7-6-2005) 


Sec. 18-80. - Demolition by city; lien. 
    If, within the time stated in the order of condemnation provided for in section 18-79, the property 
owner fails to demolish and remove or repair such condemned building or structure, and has not shown 
cause before the board which justifies an extension of time, the board shall forthwith order such building 
or structure to be demolished or removed by the city, and the actual cost, including administrative cost, of 
the demolition or removal assessed as a lien upon the land. The city may enforce its lien and maintain a 
personal action against the property owner at the same time to recover such cost and any and all interest 
accrued thereon. In any suit by the city, either at law or in equity, for the collection of the amount of the 
lien, the city shall be entitled to recover its actual costs and attorney fees for the suit, and the costs and 
attorney fees shall also become a lien upon the land. Any lien for costs and fees incurred pursuant to this 
article shall constitute a lien against the premises to the same extent and character as the lien for special 
assessments, and with the same penalties and rights of collection, foreclosure, sale and forfeiture as 
obtained for special assessment liens. 
(Code 1993, § 22-86; Ord. No. 1431, § I, 4-17-2002) 


Sec. 18-81. - Emergency powers. 
    The building official and fire official shall have the power to promptly cause a building, structure or 
portion thereof to be made safe and inaccessible to the public or cause its removal in cases of emergency 
which have been determined to involve imminent danger to human life or health. For this purpose, they 
may at once enter such structure or land on which the structure stands, or abutting land or structures, 
with such assistance and at such cost as they may deem necessary. They may order the vacation of 
adjacent structures, and may protect the public by appropriate fencing or such other means as may be 
necessary, and for this purpose, may close a public or private way. All costs incurred by the city pursuant 
to this section shall be assessed and enforced as stated in section 18-80. 
(Code 1993, § 22-87; Ord. No. 1431, § I, 4-17-2002) 


Sec. 18-82. - Appeals. 
    An aggrieved party may appeal a final order of the board under this article to the circuit court. Such 
an appeal shall not be a hearing de novo, but shall be limited to appellate review of the record created 
before the board. An appeal shall be filed within 20 days of the execution of the order to be appealed. 
(Code 1993, § 22-88; Ord. No. 1431, § I, 4-17-2002) 


Secs. 18-83—18-107. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE V. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 


Sec. 18-108. - The International Property Maintenance Code adopted. 
(a) ?The current edition of the ICC International Property Maintenance Code adopted by reference as if 
set out at length herein is on file in the building division. 
(b) ?No person shall violate any of the provisions of the publication adopted by reference in subsection 
(a) of this section. 
(c) ?If there shall be any conflict between the provisions of the publication adopted by reference in 
subsection (a) of this section and the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall 
prevail. 
(Code 1993, § 22-100; Ord. No. 2159, § 5, 4-21-2010) 


Sec. 18-109. - Amendments. 
(a) ?The identified sections of the edition of the International Property Maintenance Code, which is on 
file in the city clerk's office, shall hereby be revised as follows, where applicable: 
Remove: [NAME OF JURISDICTION]. 
Insert: "The City of Apopka, Florida" where found throughout the IPMC. 
Remove: [JURISDICTION TO INSERT APPROPRIATE SCHEDULE]. 
Insert: Fees as adopted. 
Fee Schedule 
Class I: $50.00, non-health and/or life-threatening violations. 
Class II: $150.00, health and/or safety violations. 
Class III: $200.00, imminent danger and/or life-threatening violations. 
(b) ?Any person found by competent jurisdictional authority of violating any provision of this article shall 
be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of the city, and shall be punished by a fine of not less 
than $50.00 per day and not to exceed $200.00 per day. Each day that a violation continues after 
due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
Sec
tion 
112
.4 
Re
mo
ve: 
[
A
M
O
U
N
T
] 
[
A
M
O
U
N
T
] 

Ins
ert: 
$
5
0
.
0
0 
$
2
0
0
.
0
0 
Sec
tion 
302
.4 
Re
mo
ve: 
(jur
isdi
ctio
n to 
ins
ert 
hei
ght 
in 
inc
hes
) 

Ins
ert: 
12 
inc
hes 
Sec
tion 
304
.14 
Re
mo
ve: 
[
D
A
T
E
] 
[
D
A
T
E
] 

Ins
ert: 
J
a
n
u
a
r
y 
1 
(
o
f 
a
n
y 
g
i
v
e
n 
y
e
a
r
) 
D
e
c
e
m
b
e
r 
3
1 
(
o
f 
a
n
y 
g
i
v
e
n 
y
e
a
r
) 
Sec
tion 
602
.3 
Re
mo
ve: 
[
D
A
T
E
] 
[
D
A
T
E
] 

Ins
ert: 
O
c
t
o
b
e
r 
1 
(
o
f 
a
n
y 
g
i
v
e
n 
y
e
a
r
) 
M
a
r
c
h 
3
1 
(
o
f 
a
n
y 
g
i
v
e
n 
y
e
a
r
) 
Sec
tion 
602
.4 
Re
mo
ve: 
[
D
A
T
E
] 
[
D
A
T
E
] 

Ins
ert: 
O
c
t
o
b
e
r 
1 
(
o
f 
a
n
y 
g
i
v
e
n 
y
e
a
r
) 
M
a
r
c
h 
3
1 
(
o
f 
a
n
y 
g
i
v
e
n 
y
e
a
r
) 
 
(Code 1993, § 22-101; Ord. No. 2159, § 5, 4-21-2010) 


Secs. 18-110—18-119. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE VI. - FIRE CODES AND STANDARDS 


Sec. 18-120. - Standards adopted pursuant to F.S. § 633.025 (minimum fire safety standards). 
(a) ?The following codes are hereby adopted: the Florida Fire Prevention Code (NFPA 1) and the Life 
Safety Code (NFPA 101), as adopted by the state fire marshal, pursuant to F.S. § 633.0215, are 
hereby adopted by reference as if set out at length herein, except NFPA 1, section 13.3.1.2. Section 
13.3.1.2 shall be adopted as modified in section 18-122. 
(b) ?Any person who shall violate any provisions of the standards adopted in subsection (a) of this 
section shall be subject to enforcement procedures as provided for in this Code. 
If there shall be any conflict between the provisions of the standards adopted in subsection (a) of this 
section and the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter will prevail, as permitted by state 
law. 
(Code 1983, § 10-1; Code 1993, § 46-76; Ord. No. 925, § 1, 2-21-1996; Ord. No. 1185, § 1, 8-
19-1998; Ord. No. 1424, § I, 2-2-2002; Ord. No. 2464, § I, 12-2-2015) 


Sec. 18-121. - Enforcement of regulations of state fire marshal. 
    All regulations issued by the state fire marshal shall be enforceable by the proper authorities of the 
city, and the chief of the fire department and the mayor are hereby authorized to perform within the city 
any duties that may be imposed upon them by such laws and regulations, or in accordance therewith, and 
to have such assistance as they may find necessary from other officials of the city in the discharge of 
such duties. 
(Code 1983, § 10-2; Code 1993, § 46-77) 


Sec. 18-122. - Amendment to section 13.3.1.2 of the Florida Fire Prevention Code (NFPA 1) (2012). 
    The Florida Fire Prevention Code (NFPA 1), chapter 13, Fire protection systems, section 13.3.1.2, 
General, is hereby amended and adopted as follows: 
13.3.1.2 Automatic sprinklers shall be installed and maintained in full operating condition, and 
comply with the standards listed in the Florida Fire Prevention Code, 5th edition. All new assembly, 
mercantile, industrial, educational, storage, business, occupancies including commercial structures, 
apartments, and timesharing arrangements, that are 7,500 square feet or more in gross area, or two 
stories or more in height, shall be protected throughout by an approved automatic sprinkler system in 
accordance with NFPA 13, Standard for the installation of sprinkler systems; NFPA 13R, Standard 
for the installation of sprinkler systems in residential occupancies up to and including four stories in 
height; and NFPA 13D, Standard for the installation of sprinkler systems in one- and two-family 
dwellings and manufactured homes; as appropriate. 
Exception number 1: sections of the Florida Fire Prevention Code or the Life Safety Code adopted in 
section 18-120 that require the installation of an automatic sprinkler system in occupancies or areas of 
less than 7,500 square feet shall apply, and shall not be considered in conflict with the amended section 
13.3.1.2. 
(Code 1993, § 46-78; Ord. No. 1424, § I, 2-2-2002; Ord. No. 2464, § I, 12-2-2015) 


Chapter 22 - CAPITAL FACILITIES AND IMPACT FEES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Community Planning Act, F.S. § 163.3161 et seq.; impact fees, F.S. § 
163.31801; Building and Facilities Act, F.S. § 255.501 et seq. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 22-1—22-18. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - PARKS AND RECREATION IMPACT FEES 


Sec. 22-19. - Intent and purpose. 
(a) ?The purpose of this article is to require payment of parks and recreation impact fees by those who 
engage in parks and recreation impact construction and to provide for the cost of capital 
improvements to the city which are required to accommodate such growth. This article shall not be 
construed to permit the collection of parks and recreation impact fees in excess of the amount 
reasonably anticipated to offset the demand on the city generated by such applicable parks and 
recreation impact construction. 
(b) ?The revision and re-imposition of a parks and recreation impact fee is to provide a source of 
revenue to fund the construction or improvement of city parks and recreation necessitated by growth. 
(c) ?The city council hereby ratifies, adopts, and incorporates herein the "Parks and Recreation Impact 
Fee Study" dated November 28, 2016, prepared by PRMG, as the city's parks and recreation impact 
fee study, particularly as the report relates to the allocation of a fair share of costs of public facilities 
required to provide parks and recreation necessary to serve new development in the city. 
(d) ?All impact fees established herein are calculated based on the city's most recent and localized data. 
Any future amendment to the amount of these impact fees shall be based on the city's most recent 
and localized data available at that the time of amendment. 
(Ord. No. 2544 , § 1(26-180), 1-18-2017) 


Sec. 22-20. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Parks and recreation impact construction means any residential improvement to land which shall 
generate the need for city parks and recreation. 
    Residential includes single-family residences, condominiums, planned unit developments, multifamily 
dwellings, retirement communities, and mobile homes. 
(Ord. No. 2544 , § 1(12-181), 1-18-2017) 


Sec. 22-21. - Imposition. 
(a) ?Any person who seeks to develop real property located in the city by applying for a building permit, 
development order, or other permit for parks and recreation impact construction within the city shall 
pay the following parks and recreation impact fees, which are based on the city's most recent and 
localized data: 
PARKS AND RECREATION  
IMPACT FEE SCHEDULE 
Dev
elo
pm
ent 
Typ
e 
Imp
act 
Fee 
Residenti
al 
Sin
gle-
fam
ily 
resi
den
tial
/un
it 
$1,
060
.00 
Con
do
min
ium
/un
it 
$1,
060
.00 
Pla
nne
d 
unit 
dev
elo
pm
ent
/un
it 
$1,
060
.00 
Mul
tifa
mil
y/u
nit 
$1,
060
.00 
Reti
re
me
nt 
co
mm
unit
y/u
nit 
$1,
060
.00 
Mo
bile 
ho
me
/un
it 
$1,
060
.00 
Hotel or 
motel/u
nit - Not 
applicabl
e 
 
(b) ?The city may charge an administrative charge for the collection of impact fees; however, in no event 
shall such administrative charge exceed the actual cost incurred by the city for collection of the 
impact fees. If the option to establish an administrative charge is exercised, then such administrative 
charge shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(c) ?No less than 90 days' notice shall be provided to the public before the effective date of any 
amendment to the ordinance from which this article is derived which imposes a new or increased 
impact fee. 
(d) ?Any amendment to the amounts of the impact fees established herein shall be calculated based on 
the city's most recent and localized data. 
(Ord. No. 2544 , § 1(12-182), 1-18-2017) 


Sec. 22-22. - Impact fee trust account and use of monies. 
(a) ?There is established a trust account for the parks and recreation impact fees, designated as the 
"parks and recreation impact fee trust account," which shall continue to be maintained separate and 
apart from all other accounts of the city. 
(b) ?The funds collected by reason of establishment of the parks and recreation impact fees in 
accordance with this article shall be used solely for the purpose of acquisition of facilities and 
equipment determined to be needed to provide parks for new development within the city. Said funds 
shall not be used to maintain or repair existing park facilities or equipment or to acquire facilities or 
equipment to serve existing development. 
(c) ?The city shall spend funds on a first in, first out basis. 
(Ord. No. 2544 , § 1(12-183), 1-18-2017) 


Sec. 22-23. - Accounting report and periodic adjustments. 
    The city administrator or his designee shall provide an accounting report annually to the city council 
indicating the amount of fees collected under this article and the amount of fees distributed. The city 
council shall review the report of the city administrator or his designee. The purpose of this review is to 
analyze use and availability of funds, as well as the effects of inflation on the actual costs of capital 
improvements, and to review and revise, if necessary, the fee charged new development to ensure it will 
not exceed its pro rata share for the reasonably anticipated expansion costs of capital improvements for 
parks and recreation services necessitated by new development. 
(Ord. No. 2544 , § 1(12-184), 1-18-2017) 


Sec. 22-24. - Exemptions. 
    The following shall be exempt from payment of parks and recreation impact fees: 
(1) ?An alteration or expansion of an existing dwelling unit where no additional dwelling units are 
created and the use is not changed. 
(2) ?The construction of an accessory building or structure to a residential use which will not create 
additional uses or an increase in density of the residential development. 
(3) ?The replacement of an existing dwelling unit of the same type and use where no additional 
dwelling units are created. 
(4) ?The replacement of a lawfully permitted structure, the building permit for which was issued on 
or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, or the 
replacement of a structure that was constructed subsequent thereto and for which the correct 
parks and recreation impact fees which were owed at the time the building permit was applied 
for were paid or otherwise provided for with a new structure of the same use and at the same 
location with no increase of density or intensity of development. 
(5) ?A building permit for which the parks and recreation impact fees have been or will be paid or 
otherwise provided for pursuant to a written agreement, zoning approval or development order 
pertaining to development which, by the specific written terms thereof, clearly and unequivocally 
was intended to provide for the full mitigation of impacts to parks and recreation facilities by 
enforcement of the agreement, zoning approval or development order, and not by the 
application of this article. 
(6) ?A building permit which pertains to residential development which does not result in any 
additional impact on parks and recreation facilities and hence cannot be classified as parks and 
recreation impact construction; provided, however, that all development shall be presumed to 
be parks and recreation impact construction and cause additional impacts on parks and 
recreation facilities. 
(7) ?An exemption must be claimed by the fee payer at the time of the issuance of a building permit, 
development order, or other permit. Any exemption not so claimed shall be deemed irrevocably 
waived by the fee payer. 
(Ord. No. 2544 , § 1(12-185), 1-18-2017) 


Sec. 22-25. - Individual calculation of parks and recreation impact fees. 
    The city council may adopt administrative regulations by resolution to ensure that any affordable 
housing unit that has received a certificate of affordability from the federal, state, or county government 
remains affordable. 
(Ord. No. 2544 , § 1(12-186), 1-18-2017) 


Sec. 22-26. - Conveyance of land or equipment and impact fee credits; transfer of credits. 
(a) ?In order to provide lands to meet the need for city parks and recreation sites created by parks and 
recreation impact construction or to provide necessary city parks and recreation capital equipment or 
facilities, a developer of parks and recreation impact construction may convey suitable land, capital 
equipment or facilities to the city in lieu of paying the parks and recreation impact fee imposed 
herein, as agreed to by the city. However, no impact fee reduction shall exceed the amount of the 
parks and recreation impact fee imposed in this article. 
(b) ?Any land, capital equipment, or facilities conveyed to the city in lieu of paying the parks and 
recreation impact fee imposed herein must be acceptable to the city in terms of suitable size, 
dimension, soil type, topography, location, accessibility and general character, type and 
specifications. 
(c) ?Subject to the terms and conditions of this section, credit may be granted against the parks and 
recreation impact fee imposed herein for the conveyance of land, or capital equipment or facilities 
that is required pursuant to a development order or permit or made voluntarily in connection with 
parks and recreation impact construction. Such conveyances, equipment or facilities shall be subject 
to the approval and acceptance of the city council. 
(d) ?No credit shall be given for the conveyance of land, capital equipment or construction of facilities 
unless such property is conveyed in fee simple or a bill of sale is executed to the city without further 
consideration. 
(e) ?Prior to issuance of a building permit, or if no building permit is required, prior to the issuance of the 
final development order, the applicant shall submit a proposed plan for conveyance or contributions 
to the city to the city administrator or his designee. The proposed plan shall include: 
(1) ?A designation of the parks and recreation impact construction for which the plan is being 
submitted; 
(2) ?A legal description of any land proposed to be conveyed and a written appraisal prepared in 
conformity with subsection (h) of this section; 
(3) ?A list of the contemplated contributions to the city and an estimate of the proposed construction 
costs certified by a professional architect or engineer or an estimate of the proposed value of a 
proposed conveyance of capital equipment; and 
(4) ?A proposed time schedule for completion of the proposed plan. 
(f) ?Within 60 days after receipt, the city administrator or his designee shall recommend approval or 
denial of the proposed plan in accordance with subsection (g) of this section and, if approval is 
recommended, establish the amount of credit in accordance with subsection (h) of this section. 
(g) ?In reviewing the proposed plan, the city administrator or his designee shall determine: 
(1) ?If such proposed plan is in conformity with needed contemplated improvements and additions 
to the parks and recreation facilities; 
(2) ?If the proposed conveyance of land or capital equipment and construction by the applicant is 
consistent with the public interest; and 
(3) ?If the proposed time schedule is consistent with the capital improvement program for the parks 
and recreation. 
(h) ?The amount of developer contribution credit shall be determined as follows: 
(1) ?The value of conveyed land shall be based upon a written appraisal of fair market value as 
determined by a Member Appraisal Institute (MAI) appraiser who was selected and paid for by 
the applicant, and who used generally accepted appraisal techniques. If the appraisal does not 
conform to the requirements of this section and any applicable administrative regulations, the 
appraisal shall be corrected and resubmitted. In the event the city administrator or designee 
accepts the methodology of the appraisal but disagrees with the appraised value, he may 
engage another MAI appraiser at the city's expense and the value shall be an amount equal to 
the average of the two appraisals. If either party does not accept the average of the two 
appraisals, a third appraisal shall be obtained, with the cost of said third appraisal being shared 
equally by the city and the owner or applicant. The third appraiser shall be selected by the first 
two appraisers and the third appraisal shall be binding on the parties. 
(2) ?The value of the construction of an improvement or the value of conveyed capital equipment 
shall be based upon the actual cost of construction or acquisition of said improvement or capital 
equipment as certified by a professional architect or engineer or as shown by a manufacturer's 
or supplier's invoice. However, as to the construction of improvements to parkland, in no event 
shall any credit be granted in excess of the estimated construction costs provided by a 
professional architect or engineer and approved by the city, unless the construction project is 
competitively bid, in which case, the credit shall be limited to the actual cost of construction. The 
cost of professional services shall be competitively bid in accordance with F.S. § 287.055, in 
order to be eligible for impact fee credits. 
(i) ?If a proposed plan is approved for credit by the city, the applicant or owner and the city shall enter 
into a credit agreement which shall provide for: 
(1) ?The timing of actions to be taken by the applicant and the obligations and responsibilities of the 
applicant, including, but not limited to, the construction standards and requirements to be 
complied with. 
(2) ?The obligations and responsibilities of the city council, if any. 
(3) ?The amount of the credit as determined in accordance with subsection (h) of this section. 
(j) ?Credits shall expire 24 months from the date of the credit agreement. 
(k) ?A credit for the conveyance of land shall be granted at such time as the property has been 
conveyed to and accepted by the city. A credit for the construction of an improvement or conveyance 
of capital equipment to the city shall be granted at such time as the construction is completed, 
approved and accepted by the city or the time the capital equipment is approved and accepted by 
the city. The administration of said contribution credits shall be the responsibility of the city 
administrator or his designee. 
(l) ?Any applicant or owner who submits a proposed plan pursuant to this section and desires the 
issuance of a building permit or other final development order prior to approval of the proposed plan 
shall pay the applicable parks and recreation impact fee imposed herein. Any difference between the 
amount paid and the amount due, should the city administrator or his designee approve and accept 
the proposed plan, shall be refunded to the applicant or owner. 
(m) ?The land or capital equipment or facilities conveyed or constructed shall only provide improvements 
required to accommodate growth. 
(n) ?The actual cost for processing of and fees for legal preparation or review of a credit agreement shall 
be paid by the applicant prior to acceptance of the agreement by city council. 
(o) ?All or a portion of credits provided pursuant to this section may be transferred from one parks and 
recreation impact construction site to another. Untimely requests to transfer credits shall not be 
considered, nor shall the city council consider a request to transfer any parks and recreation impact 
fee credits distributed by the city to any owner of record prior to the effective date of the ordinance 
from which this subsection is derived, unless the project was specifically approved at the time of 
submittal to allow the future transfer of such credits. The owners of the two sites shall submit a 
notarized agreement regarding the transfer which provides a legal description of both properties. The 
actual cost for processing of and fees for legal review of the agreement shall be paid by the parties 
prior to the city accepting the transfer. Costs for transferring credits shall be imposed by resolution of 
the city council. Upon acceptance by city council, the city shall notify both parties by certified mail, 
return receipt requested. The property owner surrendering the credit shall be responsible for paying 
impact fees imposed by this article when the property is developed. 
(Ord. No. 2544 , § 1(12-187), 1-18-2017) 


Sec. 22-27. - Refund of impact fees paid. 
(a) ?If a building permit or final development order expires or is canceled without commencement of the 
construction, the owner of record shall be entitled to a refund, without interest, of the impact fee. The 
owner of record shall submit an application for the refund to the city administrator, or his designee, 
within 180 days of the expiration of the permit or final development order. Failure to submit the 
application for refund within the time specified constitutes a waiver of any claim to such monies. 
Upon review of the completed application, the city administrator shall issue the refund if it is clear the 
building permit or final development order has expired without the commencement of construction. 
(b) ?Any funds not expended or encumbered by the end of the calendar quarter immediately following 
six years from the date the impact fee was paid shall, upon application of the owner of record, be 
returned to such owner of record without interest, provided that the owner of record submits an 
application for a refund to the city administrator or his designee. This six-year period may be 
extended by action of the city council for up to an additional three years. Failure to submit the 
application within the time specified herein constitutes a waiver of any claim to such monies. The city 
council shall issue such refund if a determination is made that the impact fees were not expended or 
encumbered within the time specified. 
(Ord. No. 2544 , § 1(12-188), 1-18-2017) 


Sec. 22-28. - Appeals. 
    Any person who disagrees with a decision or interpretation of this article may appeal to the city 
administrator or his designee by filing a written notice of appeal within ten days after the date of the action 
or decision complained of. The written notice of appeal shall set forth concisely the action or decision 
appealed as well as the grounds upon which the appeal is based. The city administrator or his designee 
shall consider all facts material to the appeal and render a written decision within 30 days of receiving the 
appeal. Any person who disagrees with the decision of the city administrator or his designee may appeal 
to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city administrator's office setting forth 
concisely the decision appealed within ten days after the date of the city administrator's decision. The 
appeal shall be set for the next available city council meeting for consideration. At the meeting, the city 
council shall render a verbal decision. The minutes of the meeting shall constitute the city's final written 
decision and shall constitute final administrative review. 
(Ord. No. 2544 , § 1(12-189), 1-18-2017) 


Secs. 22-29—22-46. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - ROAD IMPACT FEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Impact fees, F.S. § 163.31801. 


Sec. 22-47. - Short title; statutory authority; applicability of article. 
(a) ?This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Apopka Road Impact Fee Ordinance." 
(b) ?The planning for new and expanded roads needed to serve new growth and development that 
generate additional traffic and the implementation of these needs through the comprehensive 
planning process are the responsibility of the city under F.S. § 163.3161 et seq., F.S. ch. 166, and 
various special acts relating to the power of the city undertaking zoning, planning and development 
activities, and is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 21-85; Code 1993, § 26-71) 


Sec. 22-48. - Intent and purpose of article. 
(a) ?This article is intended to be consistent with the principles for allocating a fair share of the cost of 
new public facilities to new users as established by the state supreme court. 
(b) ?The implementation of a regulatory program that requires new development to pay a road impact 
fee that does not exceed a pro rata share of the reasonably anticipated expansion costs of new 
roads needed to serve new growth and development is the responsibility of the city in order to carry 
out the traffic circulation element of its comprehensive plan, as amended and adopted under F.S. § 
163.3161 et seq., and is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the 
city. 
(c) ?The purpose of this article is to enable the city to allow growth and development to proceed in 
compliance with the adopted comprehensive plan and to regulate growth and development so as to 
require it to share in the burdens of growth by paying its pro rata share for the reasonably anticipated 
costs of needed roadway improvements. 
(d) ?It is not the purpose of this article to collect fees from growth and development in excess of the cost 
of the reasonably anticipated improvements to the road network needed to serve the new growth and 
development. It is specifically acknowledged that this article has approached the problem of 
determining the road impact fee in a conservative and reasonable manner. This article will only 
partially recoup the governmental expenditures associated with growth. Existing development will still 
be required to pay a fair share of the cost of needed improvements to the road network. 
(e) ?The technical data, findings, and conclusions herein are based in part on the following studies and 
reports: 
(1) ?City of Apopka Municipal Transportation Impact Fee Update. 
(2) ?City of Apopka 2025 Traffic Circulation Element Update. 
(3) ?Orange County Five-Year Transportation Impact Assessment Program (2003). 
(4) ?FSUTMS Transportation Planning Software. 
(5) ?Institute of Transportation Engineering Trip Generation Report, 7th edition. 
(6) ?Transportation Research Board's 2000 Highway Capacity Manual. 
(7) ?City of Apopka Socioeconomic Data Estimates and projections. 
(Code 1983, § 21-86; Code 1993, § 26-72; Ord. No. 1793, § 1, 12-7-2005) 


Sec. 22-49. - Rules of construction. 
    For the purposes of administration and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise stated in this 
article, the following rules of construction shall apply: 
(1) ?In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this article and any 
caption, illustration, summary table or illustrative table, the text shall control. 
(2) ?The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. 
(3) ?Words used in the present tense shall include the future, and words used in the singular 
number shall include the plural and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates 
the contrary. 
(4) ?The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated 
association or any other similar entity. 
(5) ?Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or more 
items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either…or," 
the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
a. ?"And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
b. ?"Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly 
or in any combination. 
c. ?"Either…or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply 
singly but not in combination. 
(6) ?The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specific example, but is intended to extend its 
meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
(7) ?Where a road right-of-way is used to define benefit area boundaries, that portion of the road 
right-of-way demarcating the boundary may be considered as part of either or both benefit 
areas it bounds. 
(Code 1983, § 21-87; Code 1993, § 26-73) 


Sec. 22-50. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Access improvements means road improvements necessary to provide for safe and adequate 
ingress and egress and for efficient traffic operations. Access improvements include, but are not limited 
to, the following: 
(1) ?Rights-of-way and easements; 
(2) ?Left and right turn lanes; 
(3) ?Acceleration and deceleration lanes; 
(4) ?Traffic control devices, signage and markings; and 
(5) ?Drainage and utilities. 
    Accessory building, structure or use means a detached, subordinate building, structure or use, the 
use of which is clearly incidental to and serves the principal building or use of the land, and which is 
located on the same lot as that of the principal building or use. 
    Applicant means any person who applies for a building permit to proceed with land development 
activity. 
    Arterial roads is a classification of roads which primarily function to accommodate the movement of 
relatively large traffic volumes for relatively long distances at relatively high speeds. Land access, when 
provided, is subservient to the movement function. This classification includes all roads which function 
above the level of a collector road. 
    Average trip length means the average length, in miles, of trips for each major land use category as 
determined from the City of Apopka Municipal Transportation Impact Fee Update and adjusted to reflect 
the travel characteristics of the Apopka study area. 
    Building means any permanent structure designed or built for the support, enclosure, shelter or 
protection of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 
    Building permit means any building or construction permit required under the city building code. 
    Capacity and capacity per lane mean the maximum number of vehicles for a given time period which 
a typical new lane use can safely and efficiently carry at a specified level of service. For the purpose of 
this article, the capacity of typical new lane means 7,300 vehicles per day per through lane at level of 
service D. 
    Capacity per lane mile, of a typical new lane, means, for the purposes of this article, 7,300 vehicles 
per day, per through lane, per mile at level service D. 
    Collector roads is an intermediate classification of roads which provide both land access and 
movement service for medium length trips at relatively moderate speeds. Collector roads connect local 
streets to arterial streets. 
    Development permit includes any building permit, zoning approval, subdivision approval, rezoning, 
development order, special exception or variance, or any other official action of local government having 
the effect of permitting the development of land. 
    Development site means the property under consideration for development and under single 
ownership at the time of application. 
    Diverted traffic and passerby traffic mean traffic that is already on the road network which is attracted 
by the new land development and which may be transferred from another route. 
    Encumbered means funds committed in a capital improvements program for a specified 
improvement on a specified time schedule. 
    Expansion means road and intersection capacity enhancements, which include, but are not limited 
to, extensions, widenings, intersection improvements, upgrading signalization and improving pavement 
conditions. 
    External trip means any trip which has either its origin or destination at the development site and 
which impacts the road network system. 
    Gross leasable area, for purposes of this article, means the total gross square footage, less ten 
percent. 
    Impact means the negative effect of additional vehicles on a roadway segment, i.e., the equivalent of 
one additional vehicle trip for one lane mile on a road produces one unit of impact measured in vehicle 
miles of travel. 
    Internal trip means any trip which has both its origin and destination within the development site. 
    Land development means any building, structure or other land use, including the uses associated 
with the building, structure or land. 
    Land development activity generating traffic means the carrying out of any building activity or the 
making of any material change in the use or appearance of any building, structure or land that attracts or 
produces vehicular trips over and above that produced by the existing use of the land. 
    Level of service C and LOS C mean the average daily condition which is established in this article as 
the minimum acceptable standard for traffic for the city. Level of service C shall have the same meaning 
as set forth in the Transportation Research Board's 1985 Highway Capacity Manual, which is 
substantially as follows: Level of service C is the range of stable flow, but marks the beginning of the 
range of flow in which operations of individual users become significantly affected by interaction with 
others in the traffic stream. Maneuvering within the traffic stream requires substantial vigilance on the part 
of the user. The general level of comfort and convenience declines at this level. 
    Level of service D means the average daily condition which is established in this article as the 
minimum acceptable standard for traffic for the city. Level of service D shall have the same meaning as 
set forth in the Transportation Research Board's 1985 Highway Capacity Manual, which is substantially 
as follows: Level of service D represents high-density, but stable, flow. Speed and freedom to maneuver 
are severely restricted and the driver or pedestrian experiences a generally poor level of comfort and 
convenience. Small increases in traffic flow will generally cause operational problems at this level. 
    Local roads is a classification of roads which primarily function to accommodate land access for 
abutting property. Local roads may provide service for relatively small traffic volumes for relatively short 
distances at relatively low speeds. Through traffic movement, when provided, is subservient to the land 
access function. This classification includes all roads which function below the level of a collector road. 
    Major road network means the interconnecting system of roads classified as arterial and collector 
roads established by the city traffic circulation elements. The major road network includes: 
(1) ?Existing arterial and collector roads or trafficways; 
(2) ?Planned extensions to existing arterial and collector roads or trafficways; and 
(3) ?Planned new arterial and collector roads or trafficways. 
    Non-site-related improvements means road improvements, including rights-of-way, which are 
necessary to provide safe and adequate travel service for the movement of vehicular traffic, and which 
are in excess of or in addition to site-related improvements. 
    Off-site improvements means road improvements located outside of the boundaries of the 
development site which are necessary to provide safe and adequate travel service for vehicular traffic. 
    On-site improvements means road improvements located within the boundaries of the development 
site which are necessary to provide safe and adequate travel service for vehicular traffic. 
    Road impact fee, impact assessment and fee mean the fee required to be paid in accordance with 
this article. 
    Road improvements means a physical asset, constructed, dedicated or purchased, that is necessary 
to provide safe and adequate travel service for vehicular traffic. The acquisition, expansion or 
development of road improvements includes transportation planning, preliminary engineering, 
engineering design studies, land surveys, right-of-way acquisition, engineering, permitting and 
construction of all the necessary features for any road construction project, including, but not limited to: 
(1) ?Construction of the through lanes; 
(2) ?Construction of turn lanes; 
(3) ?Construction of bridges; 
(4) ?Construction of drainage facilities in conjunction with roadway construction; 
(5) ?Purchase and installation of traffic signalization, signage and markings; 
(6) ?Construction of curbs, medians and shoulders; and 
(7) ?Relocating utilities to accommodate roadway construction. 
    Road network means the interconnecting system of streets, roads, highways and other public ways 
open to vehicular travel by the public generally and dedicated to the public use. The term "road network" 
includes existing public roads, planned extensions to existing public roads, and planned new roads. 
    Site-related improvements means road improvements, including rights-of-way, which are necessary 
to provide safe and adequate travel service for the movement of vehicular traffic between the traffic-
generating land uses within the development, between the development and the major road network and 
access improvements. Site-related improvements may include on-site or off-site improvements to the 
road network. The road impact fee formula contained in section 22-55 is not intended to assess an 
amount that constitutes an approximation of the costs to construct site-related road improvements, 
therefore, an assessment for or the construction of site-related road improvements shall be considered as 
an addition to the assessment calculated pursuant to the terms of this article. 
    Specialty retail center means small shopping centers developed around entertainment shops 
specializing in quality apparel or hard goods merchandised as a theatrical presentation and restaurants 
with theme or ethnic entertainment and food. A specialty retail center is made up of stores that have food 
or merchandise unique enough to attract customers because it cannot be found at conventional shopping 
centers. A specialty retail center is usually marketed toward tourists and workers, rather than households. 
A specialty retail center is typically anchorless, because customers are attracted by the unusual 
merchandise mix of the shops and the entertainment atmosphere. 
    Square feet, as referred to in the road impact fee schedule, means total gross leasable square 
footage. 
    Structure means anything constructed, erected or placed, the use of which requires more or less 
permanent location on or in the ground, or attached to something having a permanent location on or in 
the ground. 
    Traffic-generating land uses and traffic-generating development mean any building, structure or 
other use of the land that increases the generation of vehicular trips over and above that generated by the 
previous use. 
    Trafficways is a classification of roads, related to planning and design criteria, which primarily 
function to facilitate the through movement of traffic rather than providing direct access to abutting 
properties. 
    Trip means a one-way movement of vehicular travel from an origin (one trip end) to a destination (the 
other trip end). For the purposes of this article, the term "trip" shall have the meaning which it has in 
commonly accepted traffic engineering practice and which is substantially the same as that definition in 
the previous sentence. 
    Trip generation means the attraction or production of trips caused by the use or activity associated 
with a given type or classification of land development. 
    Trip rate and trip generation rate mean the average number of vehicle trip ends (one-way trips) 
which can be attributed to a specific type of land use activity, per unit of development, per day, as 
documented in the current ITE Trip Generation Report. 
    Unit of development means the standard incremental measure of land development activity for a 
specific type of land use upon which the trip generation rate is based. 
    Vehicle miles of travel means the product of the average trip length times the number of trips 
generated by a specific type of land use activity or its equivalent. 
(Code 1983, § 21-88; Code 1993, § 26-74; Ord. No. 1793, § 1, 12-7-2005) 


Sec. 22-51. - Penalty for violation of article; additional remedies. 
    Violations of this article shall constitute a violation enforceable in accordance with section 1-14, or, in 
the alternative, by an injunction or other legal or equitable relief in the circuit court against any person 
violating this article, or in an appropriate case by both criminal and civil injunctive relief. 
(Code 1983, § 21-99.5; Code 1993, § 26-75) 


Sec. 22-52. - Issuance of building permits. 
(a) ?Any person who applies for the issuance of a building permit for land development activity which will 
generate additional traffic shall be required to pay a road impact fee in the manner and amount set 
forth in this article. 
(b) ?Except as provided elsewhere in this article, no building permit for any land development activity 
generating traffic requiring payment of a road impact fee pursuant to this article shall be issued 
unless and until the road impact fee required by this article has been paid. 
(c) ?Except as provided elsewhere in this article, no person shall carry out any land development activity 
generating traffic unless and until the road impact fee required by this article has been paid and a 
building permit has been issued. 
(Code 1983, § 21-89; Code 1993, § 26-76) 


Sec. 22-53. - Determination. 
    The road impact fee for any land development activity generating traffic shall be determined either by 
using the fee rate schedule set forth in section 22-54 or by using the independent method of calculation 
set forth in section 22-55. 
(Code 1983, § 21-90; Code 1993, § 26-77) 


Sec. 22-54. - Rate schedule. 
(a) ?Any person may determine the road impact fee by using the fee rate schedule which is on file in the 
community development department. The fee rate schedule is presented for the convenience of the 
public and may be used in lieu of the independent method of calculation set forth in section 22-55. 
The fee rates have been calculated using the method of calculation presented in section 22-55, 
using recognized and accepted trip generation rates based upon acceptable national averages. For 
the convenience of the public, the fee rates which are based on trip generation have been converted 
to dollar amounts per unit of development, i.e., per dwelling unit, per 1,000 square feet, per room, 
etc., depending upon the type or classification of land development. 
(1) ?The road impact fee rate schedule shall be as provided in exhibit A which is on file in the 
community development department. 
(2) ?The total road impact fee assessment for a specified type of land development activity 
generating traffic for which an application for a building permit has been made is calculated by 
multiplying the net impact fee rate for the specified type of land development activity by the 
number of units of development of the specified type of development activity. 
(3) ?When a land development activity for which an application for a building permit has been made 
includes two or more buildings, structures or other land uses in any combination, including two 
or more uses within a building or structure, the total road impact fee assessment shall be the 
sum of the products, as calculated pursuant to subsection (a)(2) of this section, for each and 
every use within a building or structure, unless otherwise provided for in this article. 
(4) ?In the case of a change of use, redevelopment or modification of an existing building, structure 
or other land development activity which requires the issuance of a building permit, the impact 
fee shall be based upon the net increase in the impact fee for the new or proposed land 
development activity as compared to the existing or last previous land use or activity. 
(5) ?If an applicant for a building permit contends that the land use for which the building permit is 
proposed is not within the categories set out in this section or fits within a different category, 
then the city planner or his designee shall make a determination as to the appropriate land use 
designation. Such determination may be appealed to the city council. 
(b) ?Impact fees will continue to increase at an annual rate, which is on file in the community 
development department, until a future analysis has been completed. 
(Code 1983, § 21-91; Code 1993, § 26-78; Ord. No. 1793, § 1, 12-7-2005) 


Sec. 22-55. - Independent fee calculation. 
(a) ?Generally. 
(1) ?If an applicant believes that the cost of non-site-related improvements to the road network 
needed to serve his proposed development is less than the fee established in section 22-55, the 
applicant may submit an independent fee calculation to the city engineer or his designee 
pursuant to the provisions of this section. If the city engineer or his designee finds that the data, 
information and assumptions used by the applicant to calculate the independent impact fee 
satisfy the requirements of this section, the independent impact fee shall be deemed the impact 
fee due and owing for the proposed development. 
(2) ?Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, the city reserves the right to conduct an 
independent impact fee study pursuant to the requirements of this section and to calculate 
impact fees based on such study. 
(b) ?Formulas. The independent impact fee shall be calculated by use of the following formulas: 
(1) ?Calculation of new miles of travel. 
NMT = (TGR)(ATL)(NTF) 
Where: 
NMT = New miles of travel for a specific land use. 
TGR = Trip generation rate in average daily trip ends generated per unit of development. 
ATL = Average trip length. 
NTF = New travel factor. This represents the percentage of traffic or vehicle miles of travel, 
expressed as a decimal, that constitutes new or additional vehicle traffic added to the 
road network. This factor is used to adjust the new miles of travel for passerby or 
diverted trips already on the road network. 
(2) ?Calculation of new lane miles of travel. 
NLM = (NMT)/((2)(CAP)) 
Where: 
NLM = New lane miles of travel for a specific land use. 
NMT = New miles of travel. 
2 = A constant that assigns one-half of the new lane miles of travel to the land 
development at the other end of the trip. 
CAP = Typical new capacity per lane mile expressed in vehicles per day. The typical new 
capacities reflect an adjustment for capacity at level of service D. 
(3) ?Calculation of the base impact fee rate. 
BFR = (NLM)($CC) 
Where: 
BFR = Base impact fee rate for a specific land use. 
NLM = New lane miles of travel. 
$CC = Typical construction cost, including right-of-way, for one lane mile of an at-grade 
roadway. 
(4) ?Calculation of revenue credit rate. 
RCR = TL 
Where: 
RCR = Revenue credit rate for motor fuel and license fee tax payments for a specific land 
use. This rate is fixed per annual adjustment by the city council. 
TL = Applicable credits. This represents the present value of the portion of motor fuel and 
license fee tax payments that fund road improvements. 
(5) ?Calculation of net impact fee rate. 
NFR = BFR - RCR 
Where: 
NFR = Net impact fee rate for a specific land use. 
BFR = Base impact fee rate for a specific land use. 
RCR = Revenue credit rate. 
(c) ?Use of alternate data, information and assumptions. The independent impact fee calculations shall 
be based on data, information or assumptions contained in this article or independent sources, 
provided that: 
(1) ?The independent source is an accepted standard source of transportation engineering or 
planning data; or 
(2) ?The independent source is based on actual studies or surveys conducted in the Apopka urban 
area or, with the specific approval of the city planner or his designee, in other urban areas, and 
carried out by a qualified transportation planner or engineer pursuant to an accepted 
methodology of transportation planning or engineering. 
(d) ?Calculation of total fee. The total road impact fee assessment for a specified type of land 
development activity generating traffic for which an application for a building permit has been made 
is calculated by multiplying the net impact fee rate for the specified type of land development activity 
by the number of units of development of the specified type of development activity. 
(e) ?Multiple uses. When a land development activity for which an application for a building permit has 
been made includes two or more buildings, structures or other land uses in any combination, 
including two or more uses within a building or structure, the total road impact fee assessment shall 
be the sum of the products, as calculated pursuant to subsection (d) of this section, for each and 
every building, structure or other use, including each and every use within a building or structure, 
unless otherwise provided for in this article. 
(f) ?Modification of existing development. In the case of a change of use, redevelopment or modification 
of an existing building, structure or other land development activity which requires the issuance of a 
building permit, the impact fee shall be based upon the net increase in the impact fee for the new or 
proposed land development activity as compared to the existing or last previous land use or activity. 
(g) ?Appeals. A determination by the city engineer or his designee that the independent calculation does 
not satisfy the requirements of this section may be appealed to the city council. 
(Code 1983, § 21-92; Code 1993, § 26-79; Ord. No. 821, § 1, 4-6-1994) 


Sec. 22-56. - Presumption of maximum impact. 
    Development is presumed to have the maximum impact on the road network. The proposed 
development activity for which an application for a building permit has been filed shall be presumed by 
the city engineer or his designee to generate the maximum number of average daily vehicle trips, vehicle 
miles of travel and lane miles of travel. 
(Code 1983, § 21-93; Code 1993, § 26-80) 


Sec. 22-57. - Credits. 
(a) ?An applicant shall be entitled to a credit against the road impact fee required pursuant to this article 
in an amount equal to: 
(1) ?The cost of non-site-related improvements to the road network, including on-site and site-
adjacent arterial roads and major collectors to the extent such improvements are not attributable 
to traffic generated by the development; 
(2) ?The contribution of land, money or services for non-site-related improvements to the road 
network, including on-site and adjacent arterial roads and major collectors to the extent such 
improvements are not attributable to traffic generated by the development; or 
(3) ?Non-site-related roadway improvements previously contributed, paid for or committed to by the 
applicant or his predecessor in interest as a condition of any development permit issued by the 
city, including on-site and adjacent arterial roads and major collectors to the extent such 
improvements are not attributable to traffic generated by the development. 
a. ?No credit shall be granted pursuant to this subsection unless the cost of the improvements 
was paid for and the contributions made within the last three years. 
b. ?Any petition for the issuance of credits pursuant to this subsection must be filed with the 
city planner within one year of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is 
derived. 
(b) ?The credits shall be based on criteria including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1) ?The actual cost or estimated cost of improvements based on recent bid sheet information of the 
city or the county. 
(2) ?A pro rata share of the appraised land value of the parent parcel as determined by the Member 
Appraisal Institute (MAI) appraiser selected and paid for by the applicant. If the city planner or 
his designee disagrees with the appraised value, he may engage, at the city's expense, another 
appraiser, and the value shall be an amount equal to the average of the two appraisals. 
(3) ?An offset as follows: any credit issued shall take into account as an offset to the credit an 
amount equal to the impact fee imposed by section 22-55 multiplied by the number of units of 
development permitted to date as if this article had been in effect at the time of issuance of the 
permits. 
(4) ?The marginal cost of the required improvement, taking into consideration the difference 
between the cost of the required improvement and the cost of the needed site-related 
improvement that would have been required in any case. 
(c) ?Previous development permits wherein voluntary road impact fees were specified and paid shall be 
binding as to any building permit already issued on land subject to the development permit. Road 
improvements required by previous development permits shall not be given a credit unless they meet 
the requirements of subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(d) ?Any credit issued pursuant to this section may be transferred by the holder of the credits to any 
successor in interest of land. 
(e) ?Any agreement for the issuance of credits against any road impact fee assessed pursuant to this 
article shall be included in an impact agreement as set forth in this section. 
(f) ?Any petition for the issuance of credits against any road impact fee assessed pursuant to this article 
must contain: 
(1) ?A notarized sworn statement that the petitioner is the current owner of the property; 
(2) ?A copy of the binding agreements for the issuance of such credits; 
(3) ?A certified copy of the latest recorded deed; and 
(4) ?Such other information which may be reasonably necessary to ascertain current ownership of 
the property and the current status of the agreements for credits. 
(Code 1983, § 21-94; Code 1993, § 26-81) 


Sec. 22-58. - Vested rights. 
(a) ?A developer or successor in interest of land who has filed an application for a building permit as of 
the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be exempted from the 
provisions of this article based on the following criteria: 
(1) ?The property is properly zoned for the development proposed and the development is 
consistent with the adopted comprehensive plan of the city, as amended. 
(2) ?The application for a building permit is complete, with all required plans submitted and fees 
paid. 
(b) ?The city shall not permit the extension of a building permit beyond the initial time period for 
activation without the applicant complying with the provisions of this article. 
(c) ?If a previously approved development order or other binding agreement contained conditions 
regarding traffic impacts, road impact fees and their designated uses or off-site transportation 
improvements, the developer or his successor may request a modification of such prior approvals in 
order to bring the approval conditions into consistency with this article. Any such modification of prior 
approvals and amendments to development orders so accomplished shall not be deemed a 
substantial deviation under F.S. ch. 380. 
(d) ?If a previously approved development order or other binding agreement provides for the mitigation 
of the traffic impacts of the development, and if the city engineer or his designee determines that 
such traffic impact mitigation measures are substantially consistent with the requirements of this 
article, then the road impact fee payable for such development under this article shall be revised 
accordingly to reflect the presumed traffic impact of the development. There shall be a presumption 
that the traffic impact mitigation provisions of any development order approved more than three 
years prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived are not substantially 
consistent with the requirements of this article. This subsection shall not apply where a development 
order previously approved provides that, at such time as the city adopts a transportation impact fee 
ordinance, thereafter the provisions and terms of the adopted impact fee ordinance will apply to the 
development project. 
(Code 1983, § 21-95; Code 1993, § 26-82) 


Sec. 22-59. - Limited access or grade-separated road improvements. 
    The road impact fee formula contained in this article is designed to calculate costs inherent in the 
construction of at-grade roadway improvements, and is not intended to assess an amount that constitutes 
an approximation of the cost to construct limited access or grade-separated road improvements. 
Therefore, if an assessment for limited access or grade-separated road improvements is required, then, 
to the extent permitted by law, such assessment shall be considered as an addition to the assessment 
calculated pursuant to the terms of this article. 
(1) ?The provisions of this section shall only apply where the city council has established a limited 
access or grade-separated road improvement assessment area designed to assess the 
properties within such assessment area an amount equal to the pro rata share of the cost of 
such improvements based on the units of development to occur within the assessment area. 
(2) ?The assessment for required limited access or grade-separated road improvements calculated 
pursuant to the terms of this section shall be adjusted to ensure that the development's impacts 
on the road network are not counted twice. 
(Code 1983, § 21-96; Code 1993, § 26-83) 


Sec. 22-60. - Site-related road improvements. 
    The road impact fee formula contained in this article is designed to calculate the costs inherent in the 
construction of non-site-related improvements to the road network, and is not intended to assess an 
amount that constitutes an approximation of the costs to construct site-related roadway improvements. 
Therefore, if an assessment for or the construction of site-related roadway improvements is required as a 
condition of development approval, then, to the extent permitted by law, such assessment or construction 
requirements shall be considered as an addition to the assessment calculated pursuant to the terms of 
this article. 
(Code 1983, § 21-97; Code 1993, § 26-84) 


Sec. 22-61. - Exemptions. 
    The following shall be exempted from payment of the road impact fee: 
(1) ?All land development activities which have received a building permit prior to the effective date 
of the ordinance from which this article is derived, except as provided for in other sections of 
this article. 
(2) ?Alteration or expansion of an existing dwelling unit where no additional units are created or the 
use is not changed. 
(3) ?The construction of accessory buildings or structures to the extent that there is no increase in 
trip generation and which will not increase the external trip generation of the principal building, 
structure or use. 
(4) ?The replacement of a destroyed or partially destroyed building, structure or use with a new 
building or structure of like size, capacity and use to the extent that there is no increase in trip 
generation. 
(5) ?City-owned and city-operated buildings, structures or uses used solely for general 
governmental purposes. 
(6) ?The initial interior finishing and alteration of a building for which a building permit was issued 
prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived for the construction 
of the foundation, floors, exterior walls, roof and weatherization, but leaving the interior 
unfinished, to the extent that the size, capacity or use of the building is not changed from that 
indicated in the originally approved plans. 
(Code 1983, § 21-98; Code 1993, § 26-85) 


Sec. 22-62. - Trust fund. 
(a) ?The impact fees collected by the city pursuant to this article shall be accounted for separately from 
other revenue of the city. 
(b) ?Funds withdrawn from this account must be used solely in accordance with the provisions of this 
article. The disbursal of such funds shall require the approval of the city council, upon 
recommendation of the mayor. 
(Code 1983, § 21-99; Code 1993, § 26-86) 


Sec. 22-63. - Collection. 
(a) ?Except as provided for in sections 22-57 and 22-61, the road impact fee assessment shall be due 
and payable at the time of issuance of the building permit for the land development activity 
generating traffic. 
(b) ?The road impact fee shall be collected by the finance director or his designee. 
(Code 1983, § 21-99.1; Code 1993, § 26-87) 


Sec. 22-64. - Use of funds. 
(a) ?The funds collected by reason of establishment of the road impact fee in accordance with this article 
shall be used solely for the purpose of planning, acquisition, expansion and development of non-site-
related improvements to the road network determined to be needed to serve new development, 
including, but not limited to: 
(1) ?Corridor studies, environmental assessments, capital facility fee studies, and comprehensive 
plan element studies; 
(2) ?Engineering, design and construction plan preparation; 
(3) ?Right-of-way acquisition; 
(4) ?Construction of new through lanes; 
(5) ?Construction of new turn lanes; 
(6) ?Construction of new bridges; 
(7) ?Construction of new drainage facilities in conjunction with new roadway construction or 
roadway drainage problems created by new growth; 
(8) ?Purchase and installation of traffic signalization; and 
(9) ?Construction of new curbs, medians, shoulders and sidewalks. 
(b) ?All funds shall be used exclusively within the Apopka urban area, as established in Ordinance 
Number 330, from which they were collected, and in a manner consistent with the principles set forth 
in state case and statutes law, and otherwise consistent with all requirements of the Constitution of 
the United States and the state constitution and all applicable laws. Such funds shall not be used to 
maintain or repair any roads. 
(c) ?Any funds on deposit not immediately necessary for expenditure shall be invested in interest-
bearing accounts. All income derived shall be deposited in the applicable trust account. 
(d) ?The city shall be entitled to retain an amount not to exceed five percent of all impact fee funds it 
collects to offset the actual administrative costs associated with the collection of the funds and 
administering this article. 
(Code 1983, § 21-99.2; Code 1993, § 26-88) 


Sec. 22-65. - Refunds. 
    If it is determined by the city that fee assessments collected pursuant to this article have not been 
spent or encumbered or expended by the end of the calendar quarter immediately following ten years 
from the date the fee was received, or if the development for which the fees were paid was never begun, 
then such funds shall be eligible for refund to the then-present owner in accordance with the following 
procedures: 
(1) ?The then-present owner must petition the city council for the refund within one year following 
the end of the calendar quarter immediately following nine years from the date on which the fee 
was received by the city. 
(2) ?The petition must be submitted to the mayor and must contain: 
a. ?A notarized sworn statement that the petitioner is the current owner of the property; 
b. ?A copy of the dated receipt issued for payment of the fee; 
c. ?A certified copy of the latest recorded deed; 
d. ?A copy of the most recent ad valorem tax bill; and 
e. ?Such other information which may be reasonably necessary to ascertain current ownership 
of the property. 
(3) ?Within 60 days from the date of receipt of a petition for refund, the mayor or his designee shall 
advise the petitioner and the city council of the status of the fee requested for refund. For the 
purpose of determining whether fees have been spent or encumbered, the first money placed in 
a trust fund account shall be deemed to be the first money taken out of that account when 
withdrawals have been made. 
(4) ?When the money requested is still in the trust fund account and has not been spent or 
encumbered by the end of the calendar quarter immediately following ten years from the date 
the fees were paid, the money shall be returned. 
(Code 1983, § 21-99.3; Code 1993, § 26-89) 


Sec. 22-66. - Review of article. 
    This article shall be reviewed by the city council annually or as deemed necessary. The review shall 
include trip generation rates, trip lengths, construction and right-of-way acquisition costs, ordinance 
provisions, impact fee rates and other applicable items. The purpose of this review is to analyze the 
effects of inflation on the actual costs of roadway improvements, to review and revise, if necessary, the 
transportation improvement program, and to ensure that the fee charged new land development activity 
generating traffic will not exceed its pro rata share for the reasonably anticipated expansion costs of road 
improvements necessitated solely by its presence. Failure of the city to undertake such a review shall 
result in the continued use and application of the existing fee schedule and other data. 
(Code 1983, § 21-99.4; Code 1993, § 26-90) 


Secs. 22-67—22-90. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - WATER, SEWER AND REUSE CAPITAL FACILITY FEES AND FUND 


Sec. 22-91. - Rules of construction. 
(a) ?The provisions of this article shall be liberally construed so as to effectively carry out its purpose in 
the interest of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(b) ?For the purpose of administration and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise stated in this 
article, the following rules of construction shall apply to the text of this article: 
(1) ?In case of any difference of meaning or implication between text of this article and any caption, 
illustration, summary table or illustrative table, the text shall control. 
(2) ?The phrase "used for" includes the term "arranged for," "designed for," "maintained for," or 
"occupied for." 
(3) ?The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specific example, but is intended to extend its 
meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
(Code 1993, § 26-111; Ord. No. 1404, § I, 6-20-2001) 


Sec. 22-92. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means a person who is obligated to remit or who has remitted all or any portion of the 
capital facility fees described in this article. 
    Capital facility fee means the fee required to be paid in accordance with this article. 
    Capital improvement includes land acquisition, right-of-way acquisition, site improvements, 
engineering fees, permitting fees, buildings and equipment, or debt service for such expansion or capital 
improvement, but excludes maintenance and operation. 
    City permit means a permit from the city allowing an applicant to hook up to the city water, sewer, 
and/or reuse systems or to receive additional capacity from the water, sewer, and/or reuse systems. 
    Comprehensive plan means that plan, which may consist of several maps, data and other descriptive 
matter, for the physical development of the city or any portion thereof, including any amendments, 
extensions or additions thereto, indicating the general location for major streets, parks, open spaces or 
other public utilities, zoning districts or other similar information. The comprehensive plan shall be based 
upon and include appropriate studies of the location and extent of present and anticipated population, 
social and economic resources and problems, and other useful data regarding the future development of 
the city. 
    DEP means the state department of environmental protection. 
    ERU (reuse) means equivalent residential unit, defined as having the average demand of 600 
gallons per day. 
    ERU (sewer) means equivalent residential unit, defined as having the average demand of 300 
gallons per day. 
    ERU (water ) means equivalent residential unit, defined as having the average demand of 400 
gallons per day, without reclaimed water available, and having the average demand of 300 gallons per 
day with reclaimed water available. 
    Impact fee means the capital facility fee. 
    Land development activity means an activity in which the construction of a facility requires water, 
sewer, and/or reuse capital facility fees as defined in this article. 
    Living unit means any temporary or permanent unit utilized for human habitation. 
(Code 1993, § 26-112; Ord. No. 1404, § I, 6-20-2001; Ord. No. 2474, § I, 2-17-2016) 


Sec. 22-93. - Sanitary sewer subsystems. 
    A sanitary sewer system includes two broad categories of subsystems, which are: 
(1) ?Primary system. 
a. ?Effluent disposal facilities; 
b. ?Treatment plants; 
c. ?Pump stations; 
d. ?Force mains; and 
e. ?Interceptors. 
(2) ?Secondary or local collection system. 
a. ?House laterals; and 
b. ?Eight-inch or smaller collector sewers. 
(Code 1993, § 26-113; Ord. No. 1404, § I, 6-20-2001) 


Sec. 22-94. - Water subsystems. 
    The water system includes two broad categories of subsystems, which are: 
(1) ?Primary system. 
a. ?Wells and well pumps; 
b. ?Raw water mains; 
c. ?High service pumps; 
d. ?Storage and re-pumping; 
e. ?Treatment plant; and 
f. ?Transmission mains. 
(2) ?Secondary or local distribution system. 
a. ?House service, including metering; and 
b. ?Eight-inch and smaller water mains. 
(Code 1993, § 26-114; Ord. No. 1404, § I, 6-20-2001) 


Sec. 22-95. - Reuse subsystems. 
    The reuse system includes two broad categories of subsystems, which are: 
(1) ?Primary system. 
a. ?Treatment facilities; 
b. ?Storage facilities and pumps; 
c. ?Transmission lines; and 
d. ?Distribution lines. 
(2) ?Secondary or local distribution system. 
a. ?House service, including metering; and 
b. ?Eight-inch and smaller reuse mains. 
(Code 1993, § 26-115; Ord. No. 1404, § I, 6-20-2001) 


Sec. 22-96. - Applicability. 
(a) ?After the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the following shall be 
required to pay a water, sewer, and reuse capital facility fee in the amount set forth in this article and 
in the manner as set forth in this article: 
(1) ?Any person who seeks to develop land by applying for issuance of a DEP permit. 
(2) ?Any person who seeks to acquire water, sewer, and/or reuse capacity and applies to the city 
for a permit for new capacity or additional capacity, if a DEP permit is not required. 
(b) ?No building permit for any activity requiring the payment of a capital facility fee shall be issued 
unless and until the water, sewer, and/or reuse capital facility fees required by this article have been 
paid in a manner as set forth in this article. 
(c) ?An exemption from the payment of the impact fees shall be granted if: 
(1) ?Impact fees for water, sewer, and/or reuse have already been paid to the city; or 
(2) ?Neither the development nor the application for a DEP permit will create a need for new or 
additional water, sewer, and/or reuse capacity, extension of services or other additional 
utilization of the water, sewer, and/or reuse systems. 
(Code 1993, § 26-116; Ord. No. 1404, § I, 6-20-2001) 


Sec. 22-97. - Water capital facility fee. 
(a) ?A capital facility fee, which represents the capital cost of the primary system capacity expansion, as 
described in exhibit A, which is on file in the city clerk's office, will be charged and paid in the manner 
described in this section. The city reserves the right to also require additional contributions or in-kind 
contributions, including, but not limited to, constructed donated facilities, as may be necessary to 
extend services or to further expand the primary system to facilitate the providing of services to the 
applicant's property, and if any oversizing is required, the applicant shall be reimbursed in 
accordance with this article. The city additionally reserves the right to amend this article so as to 
prospectively adjust the fees and charges assessed in this section. The applicant will be required to 
build or to provide the cost of construction of the secondary or local distribution system and all water 
facilities on the site, regardless of size, necessary to provide service to the land development activity. 
(b) ?The water capital facility fee charged shall be calculated as follows: 
(1) ?Residential capital facility fee, without reclaimed water available. If a DEP permit or city permit 
is issued in the calendar year, the fee inside the city is as on file in the city clerk's office and the 
fee outside the city is as on file in the city clerk's office. 
(2) ?Residential capital facility fee, with reclaimed water available. If a DEP permit or city permit is 
issued in the calendar year, the fee inside the city is as on file in the city clerk's office and the 
fee outside the city is as on file in the city clerk's office. 
(3) ?Adjustments to commercial capital facility fee. As to commercial users or residential units 
having commercial uses or which have been converted to legal commercial uses, the city, in its 
discretion, may assess an adjusted or additional water capital facility fee if at any time the 
usage of the connected unit changes or if it is determined by the city that the projected annual 
usage was less than the actual annual usage. 
(Code 1993, § 26-117; Ord. No. 1404, § I, 6-20-2001; Ord. No. 2474, § I, 2-17-2016) 


Sec. 22-98. - Sewer capital facility fee. 
(a) ?A capital facility fee shall be assessed by the city which represents the capital cost of the primary 
system capacity expansion as described in exhibit A, which is on file in the city clerk's office. 
(b) ?The city reserves the right to also require additional contributions or in-kind contributions, including, 
but not limited to, constructed donated facilities, as may be necessary to extend services or to further 
expand the primary system to facilitate the providing of services to the applicant's property, and if 
any oversizing is required, the applicant shall be reimbursed in accordance with this article. The city 
additionally reserves the right to amend this article so as to prospectively adjust the fees and 
charges assessed in this section. The applicant will be required to build or to provide the cost of 
construction of the secondary or local collection system and all wastewater facilities on the site, 
regardless of size, necessary to provide service to the land development activity. 
(c) ?The sewer capital facility fee charged shall be calculated as follows: 
(1) ?Residential capital facility fee. If a DEP permit or city permit is issued in the calendar year, the 
fee inside the city is as on file in the city clerk's office and the fee outside the city is as on file in 
the city clerk's office. 
(2) ?Adjustments to commercial capital facility fee. As to commercial users or residential units 
having commercial uses or which have been converted to legal commercial uses, the city, in its 
discretion, may assess an adjusted or additional sewer capital facility fee if at any time the 
usage of the connected unit changes or if it is determined by the city that the projected annual 
usage was less than the actual annual usage. 
(d) ?Any existing single-family home within the city limits with a fully functional septic system at the time 
the city installs sewer lines, or at the time the property annexes into the city, will not be required to 
connect to the city's sewer system. However, if the septic system should fail and require 
replacement, the owner, tenant, or occupant of the lot or parcel of land would lose this exemption 
and then be required to connect to the city system. 
(Code 1993, § 26-118; Ord. No. 1404, § I, 6-20-2001; Ord. No. 2474, § I, 2-17-2016) 


Sec. 22-99. - Reuse capital facility fee. 
(a) ?A capital facility fee shall be assessed by the city which represents the capital cost of the primary 
system capacity expansion as described in exhibit A, which is on file in the city clerk's office. 
(b) ?The reuse capital facility fee charged per ERU shall be calculated as follows: 
(1) ?Residential capital facility fee. If a DEP permit or city permit is issued in the calendar year, the 
fee inside the city is as on file in the city clerk's office and the fee outside the city is as on file in 
the city clerk's office. 
(2) ?Single-family residential ERU shall be as follows: 
a. ?Parcel size equal to or less than one-quarter of an acre equals one ERU. 
b. ?Parcel size more than one-quarter up to one-half of an acre equals 1.25 ERU. 
c. ?Parcel size greater than one-half of an acre equals 1.5 ERU. 
(3) ?Commercial reuse capital facility fee shall be equal to one ERU or greater based on the 
following: amount of area to be irrigated in square feet divided by 10,000 square feet. 
(4) ?Adjustments to commercial facility fee. As to commercial users or residential units having 
commercial uses or residential units which have been converted to legal commercial uses, the 
city, in its discretion, may assess an adjusted or additional reuse capital facility fee if at any time 
the usage of the connected unit changes or if it is determined by the city that the projected 
annual usage was less than the actual annual usage. 
(Code 1993, § 26-119; Ord. No. 1404, § I, 6-20-2001; Ord. No. 2474, § I, 2-17-2016) 


Sec. 22-100. - Payment. 
(a) ?The capital facility fees described in this article shall be due and payable as follows: 
(1) ?One hundred percent of the capital facility fees for all units in a proposed development or land 
development activity shall be due and payable to the city at the time of application for a DEP 
permit, or, if no such permit is required, at the time application is made to the city for a permit for 
water, sewer, and/or reuse capacity. 
(2) ?If the applicant owns the land to be developed as a residential development, the applicant may 
enter into a standard written agreement with the city for the following minimum scheduled 
payments: 
a. ?Ten percent of all capital facility fees for all units are due at the time of applying to DEP for 
a permit, or, if no such permit is required, at the time application is made to the city for 
water, sewer, and/or reuse capacity. 
b. ?Twenty percent of all capital facility fees are due at the time of receiving the DEP approval 
or permit, or if no such permit is required, at the time the city council grants approval or a 
permit for water, sewer, and/or reuse capacity, or 120 days from the date of application, 
whichever occurs first. 
c. ?Ten percent of all capital facility fees are due at the time of issuance of a certificate of 
acceptance by the city, or 120 days from the date of issuance of the DEP permit, or city 
permit if no DEP permit is required, whichever occurs first. 
d. ?Twenty percent of all capital facility fees are due 12 months after the date of issuance of 
the DEP permit, or city permit if no DEP permit is required, as set forth in subsection 
(a)(2)b of this section. 
e. ?Twenty percent of all capital facility fees are due not later than 24 months after the date of 
issuance of the DEP permit, or city permit if no DEP permit is required, as set forth in 
subsection (a)(2)b of this section. 
f. ?All capital facility fees are due not later than 36 months after the date of issuance of the 
DEP permit, or city permit if no DEP permit is required, as set forth in subsection (a)(2)b of 
this section. 
g. ?All capital facility fees are due at the time of the final building inspection before a certificate 
of occupancy is issued. 
(3) ?If the applicant owns the land to be developed as a commercial or industrial development, the 
applicant may enter into a standard written agreement with the city for the following minimum 
scheduled payments: 
a. ?Thirty percent of all capital facility fees for the development are due at the time of applying 
to DEP for a permit, or, if no such permit is required, at the time application is made to the 
city for water, sewer, and/or reuse capacity. 
b. ?Thirty-five percent of all capital facility fees are due at the time of receiving the DEP 
approval or permit, or, if no such permit is required, 60 days after the date of issuance of 
the city building permit. 
c. ?Thirty-five percent of all capital facility fees are due 120 days after the date of issuance of 
the DEP permit, or city building permit if no DEP permit is required. 
d. ?All capital facility fees are due at the time the final building inspection is called for, or, if 
more than one building permit is involved, at the time the first final building inspection is 
called for on any permit in the development, no matter how many days have elapsed since 
issuance of the DEP permit, or city building permit if no DEP permit is required. 
(b) ?The capital facility fees shall be based on the fee schedule in effect at the time payment is actually 
made to the city. If the minimum payment schedule is authorized, unless otherwise directed by the 
city council, the fees set forth therein are the minimum due and payable. Capital facility fees shall be 
due and payable by the applicant prior to or simultaneously with application for building permits for 
each individual lot or land development activity. During the time period following the issuance of the 
DEP permit, or city permit if no DEP permit is required, until all capital facility fees are paid, the 
amount due and payable shall always be the greater of the scheduled fees or the fees due upon 
applying for building permits during this period. Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, if 
any one or more of the DEP permit, city permit or building permit expires prior to the commencement 
of construction and re-application for any of such permits is made, the applicant shall be required to 
pay fees at the rate in effect at the time re-application is made. If the capital facility fees paid in 
conjunction with the application for building permits are less than the fees currently due pursuant to 
this section, the applicant must remit the difference as it comes due pursuant to the schedule. If the 
amount due based on the rate in effect at the time application is made for building permits exceeds 
the amount due pursuant to the schedule, the amount due based on the rate in effect at the time 
application is made for building permits shall be the amount due and payable regardless of the 
amount of the schedule payment. 
(c) ?The 40 percent first paid in accordance with this section will apply to the last 40 percent of the 
building permits applied for by the applicant. A failure of the applicant to pay all sums due in 
accordance with this section shall be considered a default pursuant to subsection (d)(2) of this 
section, and all of the capital facility fees shall be due and payable and all other rights and remedies 
associated with a default shall be available to the city. 
(d) ?No lots, units or interests in the property, development or units may be sold until 100 percent of all 
the capital facility fees on those lots or units to be sold have been paid. 
(1) ?No capacity may be transferred, sold or bartered to any other land development activity. 
(2) ?If the applicant should default on any of the fees described in this section, the city shall have 
the right to record a lien on all remaining lots owned by the applicant for unpaid fees and to 
demand the return of unused capacity. This right is in addition to all other rights available to the 
city under state law. 
(e) ?All funds collected shall be properly identified and promptly transferred to the finance department of 
the city for deposit in the capital facility fee trust fund, and used solely for the purpose established by 
this article. 
(Code 1993, § 26-120; Ord. No. 1404, § I, 6-20-2001) 


Sec. 22-101. - Use of funds. 
    The funds collected by reason of the establishment of the water, sewer, and reuse capital facility fee 
in accordance with this article shall be used solely for the purpose of provision of water, sewer, and reuse 
capital improvements made necessary for expansion of the system, debt service for such expansion or 
capital improvement, system studies or comprehensive plan element update. The collected funds shall 
not be used for operation expenses. 
(Code 1993, § 26-121; Ord. No. 1404, § I, 6-20-2001) 


Sec. 22-102. - Refunds. 
(a) ?If a DEP permit expires and the DEP has released all permitted capacity back to the city and no 
construction has been commenced, then the applicant shall be entitled to a refund of the capital 
facility fees paid as a condition for its issuance, except that the city shall retain three percent of the 
refunded funds as a fee to offset the costs of collection and refund. 
(b) ?If the development has not proceeded by the end of the calendar quarter immediately following two 
years from the date the water, sewer, and/or reuse capital facility fee was paid in full, if the applicant 
is in default under this article, or if the DEP permit issued to the applicant has expired, the city may 
petition the DEP to recapture the committed capacity. If the capacity is released in full back to the 
city, the city may refund the capital facility fees as set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c) ?If no DEP permit is required, and no construction has commenced, and the city approval or permit 
for the applicant's request for water, sewer, and/or reuse capacity has expired, then the applicant 
shall be entitled to a refund of the capital facility fees paid as a condition of such approval or permit, 
except that the city shall retain three percent of the refunded funds as a fee to offset the costs of 
collection and refund. 
(d) ?If the development has not proceeded by the end of the calendar quarter immediately following two 
years from the date the water, sewer, and/or reuse capital facility fee was paid in full, if the applicant 
is in default under this article, or if the city permit issued to the applicant has expired, the city may 
refund the capital facility fees as set forth in subsection (c) of this section. 
(Code 1993, § 26-122; Ord. No. 1404, § I, 6-20-2001) 


Sec. 22-103. - Maintenance fees. 
    At the option of the city, encumbered or committed water, sewer, and/or reuse may be subjected to a 
maintenance fee to be assessed the applicant by the city. The amount of such fee will be determined by 
amendment of this article by the city council, and shall be based upon the costs of maintaining the 
committed capacity for the applicant. Such fees shall not be a capital facility fee as described in this 
article. 
(Code 1993, § 26-123; Ord. No. 1404, § I, 6-20-2001) 


Sec. 22-104. - Trust fund. 
(a) ?There is hereby established a separate fund to be known as the water, sewer, and reuse capital 
facility fee trust fund. Water, sewer, and reuse capital facility fees shall be accounted for separately 
from other city funds. 
(b) ?Funds may be withdrawn from the fund for use solely in accordance with the provisions of section 
22-101. The disbursement of such funds shall require the approval of the city council. 
(c) ?Any funds not necessary for expenditure shall be invested in interest-bearing sources to generate 
earned income for the benefit of the utility's users. 
(Code 1993, § 26-124; Ord. No. 1404, § I, 6-20-2001) 


Sec. 22-105. - Exemptions. 
    The following shall be exempted from payment of the water, sewer, and/or reuse capital facility fees: 
(1) ?Alteration or expansion of an existing residential dwelling unit where no additional living units 
are created. 
(2) ?The construction of residential accessory buildings or structures, which are not dwelling units. 
(3) ?The replacement of a destroyed or partially destroyed building or structure with a new building 
or structure of the same ERU count. 
(4) ?Government buildings and/or facilities constructed by the city. 
(Code 1993, § 26-125; Ord. No. 1404, § I, 6-20-2001) 


Sec. 22-106. - Review of fee structure. 
(a) ?The water, sewer, and reuse capital facility fee structure shall be reviewed by the city council 
annually, or as necessary, in conjunction with the city's budget approval process. 
(b) ?The city council may, by resolution, delay the implementation of the capacity fee increase. 
(Code 1993, § 26-126; Ord. No. 1404, § I, 6-20-2001) 


Secs. 22-107—22-125. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE V. - FIRE/EMS IMPACT FEES 


Sec. 22-126. - Intent and purpose. 
(a) ?The city council expressly finds that the improvements and additions to the fire department to be 
funded by fire/EMS impact fees provide a benefit to all fire/EMS impact construction within the city 
that is in excess of the actual fire/EMS impact fees. The capital facilities funded by impact fees shall 
provide fire/EMS services to the new users within the city. 
(b) ?The purpose of this article is to require payment of fire/EMS impact fees by those who engage in 
fire/EMS impact construction and to provide for the cost of capital improvements to the fire 
department which are required to accommodate such growth. This article shall not be construed to 
permit the collection of fire/EMS impact fees in excess of the amount reasonably anticipated to offset 
the demand on the city fire department generated by such applicable fire/EMS impact construction. 
(c) ?The revision and re-imposition of a fire/EMS impact fee is to provide a source of revenue to fund the 
construction or improvement of the fire department necessitated by growth. 
(d) ?The city council hereby ratifies, adopts, and incorporates herein the "Municipal Impact Fee Study" 
dated August 31, 2016, prepared by PRMG, as the city's fire/EMS impact fee study, particularly as 
the report relates to the allocation of a fair share of costs of public facilities required to provide fire 
prevention and protection services necessary to serve new development in the city. 
(e) ?All impact fees established herein are calculated based on the city's most recent and localized data. 
Any future amendment to the amount of these impact fees shall be based on the city's most recent 
and localized data available at the time of amendment. 
(Ord. No. 2543 , § 1(26-140), 1-18-2017) 


Sec. 22-127. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fire/EMS impact construction means any improvement to land which shall generate the need for 
fire/EMS services. 
    Nonresidential includes all land uses not otherwise specified as residential or exempted as set forth 
herein. The term "nonresidential" shall include, but is not limited to, day care facilities, residential care 
facilities, nursing homes, boardinghouses, educational facilities, cultural facilities, churches, all 
commercial uses, all transient lodging and entertainment facilities except those which are temporary in 
nature, all automotive facilities and/or structures, all miscellaneous business uses and services, and all 
industrial uses. 
    Residential includes single-family dwellings, duplex dwellings, mobile homes, multiple-family dwelling 
units, accessory dwelling units, and accessory residential structures. 
(Ord. No. 2543 , § 1(12-141), 1-18-2017) 


Sec. 22-128. - Imposition. 
(a) ?Any person who seeks to develop real property located in the city by applying for a building permit, 
development order, or other permit for fire/EMS impact construction within the city shall pay the 
following fire/EMS impact fees, which are based on the city's most recent and localized data: 
FIRE/EMS IMPACT FEE SCHEDULE 
Dev
elo
pm
ent 
Typ
e 
Imp
act 
Fee 
Residenti
al 
Dw
elli
ng 
$70
8.0
0 
Nonresid
ential 
Ret
ail 
and 
foo
d 
ser
vice 
$0.
64/
sq. 
ft. 
Offi
ce 
$0.
49/
sq. 
ft. 
Gov
ern
me
nt, 
inst
itut
ion
al, 
hot
el 
$0.
87/
sq. 
ft. 
Ind
ustr
ial 
$0.
07/
sq. 
ft. 
All 
oth
ers 
$0.
44/
sq. 
ft. 
 
(b) ?The city may charge an administrative charge for the collection of impact fees; however, in no event 
shall such administrative charge exceed the actual cost incurred by the city for collection of the 
impact fees. If the option to establish an administrative charge is exercised, then such administrative 
charge shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(c) ?No less than 90 days' notice shall be provided to the public before the effective date of any 
amendment to the ordinance from which this article is derived which imposes a new or increased 
impact fee. 
(d) ?Any amendment to the amounts of the impact fees established herein shall be calculated based on 
the city's most recent and localized data. 
(Ord. No. 2543 , § 1(12-142), 1-18-2017) 


Sec. 22-129. - Impact fee trust account and use of monies. 
(a) ?There is established a trust account for the fire/EMS impact fees, designated as the "fire/EMS 
impact fee trust account," which shall continue to be maintained separate and apart from all other 
accounts of the city. 
(b) ?The funds collected by reason of establishment of the fire/EMS impact fees in accordance with this 
article shall be used solely for the purpose of acquisition of facilities and equipment determined to be 
needed to provide fire/EMS protection for new development within the city. Said funds shall not be 
used to maintain or repair existing fire facilities or equipment or to acquire facilities or equipment to 
serve existing development. 
(c) ?The city shall spend funds on a first in, first out basis. 
(Ord. No. 2543 , § 1(12-143), 1-18-2017) 


Sec. 22-130. - Accounting report and periodic adjustments. 
    The city administrator or his designee shall provide an accounting report annually to the city council 
indicating the amount of fees collected under this article and the amount of fees distributed. The city 
council shall review the report of the city administrator or his designee. The purpose of this review is to 
analyze use and availability of funds, as well as the effects of inflation on the actual costs of capital 
improvements, and to review and revise, if necessary, the fee charged new development to ensure it will 
not exceed its pro rata share for the reasonably anticipated expansion costs of capital improvements for 
fire/EMS services necessitated by new development. 
(Ord. No. 2543 , § 1(12-144), 1-18-2017) 


Sec. 22-131. - Exemptions. 
    The following shall be exempt from payment of fire/EMS impact fees: 
(1) ?An alteration or expansion of an existing dwelling unit where no additional dwelling units are 
created and the use is not changed. 
(2) ?The construction of an accessory building or structure to a residential use which will not create 
additional uses or an increase in density of the residential development. 
(3) ?The replacement of an existing dwelling unit of the same type and use where no additional 
dwelling units are created. 
(4) ?The replacement of a lawfully permitted structure, the building permit for which was issued on 
or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, or the 
replacement of a structure that was constructed subsequent thereto and for which the correct 
fire/EMS impact fees which were owed at the time the building permit was applied for were paid 
or otherwise provided for with a new structure of the same use and at the same location with no 
increase of density or intensity of development. 
(5) ?A building permit for which the fire/EMS impact fees have been or will be paid or otherwise 
provided for pursuant to a written agreement, zoning approval or development order pertaining 
to development which, by the specific written terms thereof, clearly and unequivocally was 
intended to provide for the full mitigation of impacts to fire/EMS public safety facilities by 
enforcement of the agreement, zoning approval or development order, and not by the 
application of this article. 
(6) ?A building permit which pertains to residential development which does not result in any 
additional impact on fire/EMS public safety facilities and hence cannot be classified as fire/EMS 
impact construction; provided, however, that all development shall be presumed to be fire/EMS 
impact construction and cause additional impacts on fire/EMS public safety facilities. 
(7) ?An exemption must be claimed by the feepayer at the time of the issuance of a building permit, 
development order or other permit. Any exemption not so claimed shall be deemed irrevocably 
waived by the feepayer. 
(Ord. No. 2543 , § 1(12-145), 1-18-2017) 


Sec. 22-132. - Individual calculation of fire/EMS impact fees. 
(a) ?In the event fire/EMS impact construction involves a particular land use, and it is unclear which land 
use category set forth herein applies, the city administrator or his designee shall determine the 
impact to be generated by the proposed fire/EMS impact construction and shall calculate the 
appropriate fire/EMS impact fees utilizing the methodology contained in the fire/EMS impact fee 
study. The city administrator or his designee shall utilize as a standard in this determination the 
impact assumed in the most similar fire/EMS impact fee land use category or any other generally 
accepted standard source of planning and cost impact analysis. 
(b) ?In the event a fire/EMS impact construction involves more than one fire/EMS impact fee land use 
category, the city administrator or his designee shall calculate the fire/EMS impact fees based upon 
the impact to be generated by each separate fire/EMS impact fee land use category included in the 
proposed fire/EMS impact construction. 
(c) ?The city council may adopt administrative regulations by resolution to ensure that any affordable 
housing unit that has received a certificate of affordability from the federal, state, or county 
government remains affordable. 
(Ord. No. 2543 , § 1(12-146), 1-18-2017) 


Sec. 22-133. - Conveyance of land or equipment and impact fee credits; transfer of credits. 
(a) ?In order to provide lands to meet the need for city fire department sites created by fire/EMS impact 
construction or to provide necessary city fire department capital equipment or facilities, a developer 
of fire/EMS impact construction may convey suitable land, capital equipment or facilities to the city in 
lieu of paying the fire/EMS impact fee imposed herein, as agreed to by the city. However, no impact 
fee reduction shall exceed the amount of the fire/EMS impact fee imposed in this article. 
(b) ?Any land, capital equipment, or facilities conveyed to the city in lieu of paying the fire/EMS impact 
fee imposed herein must be acceptable to the city in terms of suitable size, dimension, soil type, 
topography, location, accessibility and general character, type and specifications. 
(c) ?Subject to the terms and conditions of this section, credit may be granted against the fire/EMS 
impact fee imposed herein for the conveyance of land, or capital equipment or facilities that is 
required pursuant to a development order or permit or made voluntarily in connection with fire/EMS 
impact construction. Such conveyances, equipment or facilities shall be subject to the approval and 
acceptance of the city council. 
(d) ?No credit shall be given for the conveyance of land, capital equipment or construction of facilities 
unless such property is conveyed in fee simple or a bill of sale is executed to the city without further 
consideration. 
(e) ?Prior to issuance of a building permit, or if no building permit is required, prior to the issuance of the 
final development order, the applicant shall submit a proposed plan for conveyance or contributions 
to the city fire department to the city administrator or his designee. The proposed plan shall include: 
(1) ?A designation of the fire/EMS impact construction for which the plan is being submitted; 
(2) ?A legal description of any land proposed to be conveyed and a written appraisal prepared in 
conformity with subsection (h) of this section; 
(3) ?A list of the contemplated contributions to the fire department and an estimate of the proposed 
construction costs certified by a professional architect or engineer, or an estimate of the 
proposed value of a proposed conveyance of capital equipment; and 
(4) ?A proposed time schedule for completion of the proposed plan. 
(f) ?Within 60 days after receipt, the city administrator or his designee shall recommend approval or 
denial of the proposed plan in accordance with subsection (g) of this section and, if approval is 
recommended, establish the amount of credit in accordance with subsection (h) of this section. 
(g) ?In reviewing the proposed plan, the city administrator or designee shall determine: 
(1) ?If such proposed plan is in conformity with needed contemplated improvements and additions 
to the fire department; 
(2) ?If the proposed conveyance of land or capital equipment and construction by the applicant is 
consistent with the public interest; and 
(3) ?If the proposed time schedule is consistent with the capital improvement program for the fire 
department. 
(h) ?The amount of developer contribution credit shall be determined as follows: 
(1) ?The value of conveyed land shall be based upon a written appraisal of fair market value as 
determined by a Member Appraisal Institute (MAI) appraiser who was selected and paid for by 
the applicant, and who used generally accepted appraisal techniques. If the appraisal does not 
conform to the requirements of this section and any applicable administrative regulations, the 
appraisal shall be corrected and resubmitted. In the event the city administrator or designee 
accepts the methodology of the appraisal but disagrees with the appraised value, he may 
engage another MAI appraiser at the city's expense and the value shall be an amount equal to 
the average of the two appraisals. If either party does not accept the average of the two 
appraisals, a third appraisal shall be obtained, with the cost of said third appraisal being shared 
equally by the city and the owner or applicant. The third appraiser shall be selected by the first 
two appraisers and the third appraisal shall be binding on the parties. 
(2) ?The value of the construction of an improvement to the fire department or the value of 
conveyed capital equipment shall be based upon the actual cost of construction or acquisition of 
said improvement or capital equipment as certified by a professional architect or engineer or as 
shown by a manufacturer's or supplier's invoice. However, as to the construction of 
improvements to the fire department, in no event shall any credit be granted in excess of the 
estimated construction costs provided by a professional architect or engineer and approved by 
the city unless the construction project is competitively bid, in which case, the credit shall be 
limited to the actual cost of construction. The cost of professional services shall be competitively 
bid in accordance with F.S. § 287.055, in order to be eligible for impact fee credits. 
(i) ?If a proposed plan is approved for credit by the city, the applicant or owner and the city shall enter 
into a credit agreement which shall provide for: 
(1) ?The timing of actions to be taken by the applicant and the obligations and responsibilities of the 
applicant, including, but not limited to, the construction standards and requirements to be 
complied with. 
(2) ?The obligations and responsibilities of the city council, if any. 
(3) ?The amount of the credit as determined in accordance with subsection (h) of this section. 
(j) ?Credits shall expire 24 months from the date of the credit agreement. 
(k) ?A credit for the conveyance of land shall be granted at such time as the property has been 
conveyed to and accepted by the city. A credit for the construction of an improvement or conveyance 
of capital equipment to the fire department shall be granted at such time as the construction is 
completed, approved and accepted by the city or the time the capital equipment is approved and 
accepted by the city. The administration of said contribution credits shall be the responsibility of the 
city administrator or his designee. 
(l) ?Any applicant or owner who submits a proposed plan pursuant to this section and desires the 
issuance of a building permit or other final development order prior to approval of the proposed plan 
shall pay the applicable fire/EMS impact fee imposed herein. Any difference between the amount 
paid and the amount due, should the city administrator or his designee approve and accept the 
proposed plan, shall be refunded to the applicant or owner. 
(m) ?The land or capital equipment or facilities conveyed or constructed, shall only provide 
improvements required to accommodate growth. 
(n) ?The actual cost for processing of and fees for legal preparation or review of a credit agreement shall 
be paid by the applicant prior to acceptance of the agreement by city council. 
(o) ?All or a portion of credits provided pursuant to this section may be transferred from one fire/EMS 
impact construction site to another. Untimely requests to transfer credits shall not be considered, nor 
shall the city council consider a request to transfer any fire/EMS impact fee credits distributed by the 
city to any owner of record prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this subsection is 
derived, unless the project was specifically approved at the time of submittal to allow the future 
transfer of such credits. The owners of the two sites shall submit a notarized agreement regarding 
the transfer which provides a legal description of both properties. The actual cost for processing of 
and fees for legal review of the agreement shall be paid by the parties prior to the city accepting the 
transfer. Costs for transferring credits shall be imposed by resolution of the city council. Upon 
acceptance by city council, the city shall notify both parties by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
The property owner surrendering the credit shall be responsible for paying impact fees imposed by 
this article when the property is developed. 
(Ord. No. 2543 , § 1(12-147), 1-18-2017) 


Sec. 22-134. - Refund of impact fees paid. 
(a) ?If a building permit or final development order expires or is canceled without commencement of the 
construction, the owner of record shall be entitled to a refund, without interest, of the impact fee. The 
owner of record shall submit an application for the refund to the city administrator, or his designee, 
within 180 days of the expiration of the permit or final development order. Failure to submit the 
application for refund within the time specified constitutes a waiver of any claim to such monies. 
Upon review of the completed application, the city administrator shall issue the refund if it is clear the 
building permit or final development order has expired without the commencement of construction. 
(b) ?Any funds not expended or encumbered by the end of the calendar quarter immediately following 
six years from the date the impact fee was paid shall, upon application of the owner of record, be 
returned to such owner of record without interest, provided that the owner of record submits an 
application for a refund to the city administrator or his designee. This six-year period may be 
extended by action of the city council for up to an additional three years. Failure to submit the 
application within the time specified herein constitutes a waiver of any claim to such monies. The city 
council shall issue such refund if a determination is made that the impact fees were not expended or 
encumbered within the time specified. 
(Ord. No. 2543 , § 1(12-148), 1-18-2017) 


Sec. 22-135. - Appeals. 
    Any person who disagrees with a decision or interpretation of this article may appeal to the city 
administrator or his designee by filing a written notice of appeal within ten days after the date of the action 
or decision complained of. The written notice of appeal shall set forth concisely the action or decision 
appealed as well as the grounds upon which the appeal is based. The city administrator or his designee 
shall consider all facts material to the appeal and render a written decision within 30 days of receiving the 
appeal. Any person who disagrees with the decision of the city administrator or his designee may appeal 
to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city administrator's office setting forth 
concisely the decision appealed within ten days after the date of the city administrator's decision. The 
appeal shall be set for the next available city council meeting for consideration. At the meeting, the city 
council shall render a verbal decision. The minutes of the meeting shall constitute the city's final written 
decision and shall constitute final administrative review. 
(Ord. No. 2543 , § 1(12-149), 1-18-2017) 


Secs. 22-136—22-153. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE VI. - POLICE IMPACT FEES 


Sec. 22-154. - Intent and purpose. 
(a) ?The city council expressly finds that the improvements and additions to the police department to be 
funded by police impact fees provide a benefit to all police impact construction within the city that is 
in excess of the actual police impact fees. The capital facilities funded by impact fees shall provide 
law enforcement services to the new users within the city. 
(b) ?The purpose of this article is to require payment of police impact fees by those who engage in police 
impact construction and to provide for the cost of capital improvements which are required to 
accommodate such growth. This article shall not be construed to permit the collection of police 
impact fees in excess of the amount reasonably anticipated to offset the demand on the city police 
department generated by such applicable police impact construction. 
(c) ?The revision and re-imposition of a police impact fee is to provide a source of revenue to fund the 
construction or improvement of the police department necessitated by growth. 
(d) ?The city council hereby ratifies, adopts, and incorporates herein the "Municipal Impact Fee Study" 
dated August 31, 2016, prepared by PRMG, as the city's police impact fee study, particularly as the 
report relates to the allocation of a fair share of costs of public facilities required to provide police 
protection services necessary to serve new development in the city. 
(e) ?All impact fees established herein are calculated based on the city's most recent and localized data. 
Any future amendment to the amount of these impact fees shall be based on the city's most recent 
and localized data available at that the time of amendment. 
(Ord. No. 2543 , § 2(12-160), 1-18-2017) 


Sec. 22-155. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Nonresidential includes all land uses not otherwise specified as residential or exempted as set forth 
herein. The term "nonresidential" shall include, but is not limited to, day care facilities, residential care 
facilities, nursing homes, boardinghouses, educational facilities, cultural facilities, churches, all 
commercial uses, all transient lodging and entertainment facilities except those which are temporary in 
nature, all automotive facilities and/or structures, all miscellaneous business uses and services, and all 
industrial uses. 
    Police impact construction means any improvement to land which shall generate the need for police 
services. 
    Residential includes single-family dwellings, duplex dwellings, mobile homes, multiple-family dwelling 
units, accessory dwelling units, and accessory residential structures. 
(Ord. No. 2543 , § 2(12-161), 1-18-2017) 


Sec. 22-156. - Imposition. 
(a) ?Any person who seeks to develop real property located in the city by applying for a building permit, 
development order, or other permit for police impact construction occurring within the city shall pay 
the following police impact fees, which are based on the city's most recent and localized data: 
POLICE IMPACT FEE SCHEDULE 
Dev
elo
pm
ent 
Typ
e 
Imp
act 
Fee 
Residenti
al 
Dw
elli
ng 
$74
7.0
0 
Nonresid
ential 
Ret
ail 
and 
foo
d 
ser
vice 
$1.
00/
sq. 
ft. 
Offi
ce 
$0.
29/
sq. 
ft. 
Gov
ern
me
nt, 
inst
itut
ion
al, 
hot
el 
$0.
54/
sq. 
ft. 
Ind
ustr
ial 
$0.
07/
sq. 
ft. 
All 
oth
ers 
$0.
41/
sq. 
ft. 
 
(b) ?The city may charge an administrative charge for the collection of impact fees; however, in no event 
shall such administrative charge exceed the actual cost incurred by the city for collection of the 
impact fees. If the option to establish an administrative charge is exercised, then such administrative 
charge shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(c) ?No less than 90 days' notice shall be provided to the public before the effective date of any 
amendment to the ordinance from which this article is derived which imposes a new or increased 
impact fee. 
(Ord. No. 2543 , § 2(12-162), 1-18-2017) 


Sec. 22-157. - Impact fee trust account and use of monies. 
(a) ?There is established a trust account for the police impact fees, designated as the "police impact fee 
trust account," which shall continue to be maintained separate and apart from all other accounts of 
the city. 
(b) ?The funds collected by reason of establishment of the police impact fees in accordance with this 
article shall be used solely for the purpose of acquisition of facilities and equipment determined to be 
needed to provide police protection for new development within the city. Said funds shall not be used 
to maintain or repair existing police facilities or equipment or to acquire facilities or equipment to 
serve existing development. 
(c) ?The city shall spend funds on a first in, first out basis. 
(Ord. No. 2543 , § 2(12-163), 1-18-2017) 


Sec. 22-158. - Accounting report and periodic adjustments. 
    The city administrator or his designee shall provide an accounting report annually to the city council 
indicating the amount of fees collected under this article and the amount of fees distributed. The city 
council shall review the report of the city administrator or his designee. The purpose of this review is to 
analyze use and availability of funds, as well as the effects of inflation on the actual costs of capital 
improvements, and to review and revise, if necessary, the fee charged new development to ensure it will 
not exceed its pro rata share for the reasonably anticipated expansion costs of capital improvements for 
police services necessitated by new development. 
(Ord. No. 2543 , § 2(12-164), 1-18-2017) 


Sec. 22-159. - Exemptions. 
    The following shall be exempt from payment of police impact fees: 
(1) ?An alteration or expansion of an existing dwelling unit where no additional dwelling units are 
created and the use is not changed. 
(2) ?The construction of an accessory building or structure to a residential use which will not create 
additional uses or an increase in density of the residential development. 
(3) ?The replacement of an existing dwelling unit of the same type and use where no additional 
dwelling units are created. 
(4) ?The replacement of a lawfully permitted structure, the building permit for which was issued on 
or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, or the 
replacement of a structure that was constructed subsequent thereto and for which the correct 
police impact fees which were owed at the time the building permit was applied for were paid or 
otherwise provided for with a new structure of the same use and at the same location with no 
increase of density or intensity of development. 
(5) ?A building permit for which the police impact fees have been or will be paid or otherwise 
provided for pursuant to a written agreement, zoning approval or development order pertaining 
to development which, by the specific written terms thereof, clearly and unequivocally was 
intended to provide for the full mitigation of impacts to police facilities by enforcement of the 
agreement, zoning approval or development order, and not by the application of this article. 
(6) ?A building permit which pertains to residential development which does not result in any 
additional impact on police facilities and hence cannot be classified as police impact 
construction; provided, however, that all development shall be presumed to be police impact 
construction and cause additional impacts on police facilities. 
(7) ?An exemption must be claimed by the feepayer at the time of the issuance of a building permit, 
development order, or other permit. Any exemption not so claimed shall be deemed irrevocably 
waived by the feepayer. 
(Ord. No. 2543 , § 2(12-165), 1-18-2017) 


Sec. 22-160. - Individual calculation of police impact fees. 
(a) ?In the event police impact construction involves a particular land use, and it is unclear which land 
use category set forth herein applies, the city administrator or his designee shall determine the 
impact to be generated by the proposed police impact construction and shall calculate the 
appropriate police impact fees utilizing the methodology contained in the police impact fee study. 
The city administrator or his designee shall utilize as a standard in this determination the impact 
assumed in the most similar police impact fee land use category or any other generally accepted 
standard source of planning and cost impact analysis. 
(b) ?In the event a police impact construction involves more than one police impact fee land use 
category, the city administrator or his designee shall calculate the police impact fees based upon the 
impact to be generated by each separate police impact fee land use category included in the 
proposed police impact construction. 
(c) ?The city council may adopt administrative regulations by resolution to ensure that any affordable 
housing unit that has received a certificate of affordability from the federal, state, or county 
government remains affordable. 
(Ord. No. 2543 , § 2(12-166), 1-18-2017) 


Sec. 22-161. - Conveyance of land or equipment and impact fee credits; transfer of credits. 
(a) ?In order to provide lands to meet the need for police department sites created by police impact 
construction or to provide necessary city police capital equipment or facilities, a developer of police 
impact construction may convey suitable land, capital equipment or facilities to the city in lieu of 
paying the police impact fee imposed herein, as agreed to by the city. However, no impact fee 
reduction shall exceed the amount of the police impact fee imposed in this article. 
(b) ?Any land, capital equipment, or facilities conveyed to the city in lieu of paying the police impact fee 
imposed herein must be acceptable to the city in terms of suitable size, dimension, soil type, 
topography, location, accessibility and general character, type and specifications. 
(c) ?Subject to the terms and conditions of this section, credit shall be granted against the police impact 
fee imposed herein for the conveyance of land, capital equipment or facilities that is required 
pursuant to a development order or permit or made voluntarily in connection with police impact 
construction. Such conveyance, equipment or facilities shall be subject to the approval and 
acceptance of city council. 
(d) ?No credit shall be given for the conveyance of land, capital equipment or construction of facilities 
unless such property is conveyed in fee simple or a bill of sale is executed to the city without further 
consideration. 
(e) ?No impact fee reduction shall be allowed for private security measures or improvements with only 
an indirect benefit for police protection to the general public. 
(f) ?Prior to issuance of a building permit, or if no building permit is required, prior to the issuance of the 
final development order, the applicant shall submit a proposed plan for conveyance or contributions 
to the police department to the city administrator or his designee. The proposed plan shall include: 
(1) ?A designation of the police impact construction for which the plan is being submitted; 
(2) ?A legal description of any land proposed to be conveyed and a written appraisal prepared in 
conformity with subsection (i) of this section; 
(3) ?A list of the contemplated contributions to the police department and an estimate of the 
proposed construction costs certified by a professional architect or engineer or an estimate of 
the proposed value of a proposed conveyance of capital equipment; and 
(4) ?A proposed time schedule for completion of the proposed plan. 
(g) ?Within 60 days after receipt, the city administrator or his designee shall recommend approval or 
denial of the proposed plan in accordance with subsection (h) of this section and, if approval is 
recommended, establish the amount of credit in accordance with subsection (i) of this section. 
(h) ?In reviewing the proposed plan, the city administrator or his designee shall determine: 
(1) ?If such proposed plan is in conformity with needed contemplated improvements and additions 
to the police department; 
(2) ?If the proposed conveyance of land or capital equipment and construction by the applicant is 
consistent with the public interest; and 
(3) ?If the proposed time schedule is consistent with the capital improvement program for the police 
department. 
(i) ?The amount of developer contribution credit shall be determined as follows: 
(1) ?The value of conveyed land shall be based upon a written appraisal of fair market value as 
determined by a Member Appraisal Institute (MAI) appraiser who was selected and paid for by 
the applicant, and who used generally accepted appraisal techniques. If the appraisal does not 
conform to the requirements of this section and any applicable administrative regulations, the 
appraisal shall be corrected and resubmitted. In the event the city administrator or his designee 
accepts the methodology of the appraisal but disagrees with the appraised value, he may 
engage another MAI appraiser at the city's expense and the value shall be an amount equal to 
the average of the two appraisals. If either party does not accept the average of the two 
appraisals, a third appraisal shall be obtained, with the cost of said third appraisal being shared 
equally by the city and the owner or applicant. The third appraiser shall be selected by the first 
two appraisers and the third appraisal shall be binding on the parties. 
(2) ?The value of the construction of an improvement to the police department or the value of 
conveyed capital equipment shall be based upon the actual cost of construction or acquisition of 
said improvement or capital equipment as certified by a professional architect or engineer or as 
shown by a manufacturer's or supplier's invoice. However, as to the construction of 
improvements to the police department, in no event shall any credit be granted in excess of the 
estimated construction costs provided by a professional architect or engineer and approved by 
the city, unless the construction project is competitively bid, in which case, the credit shall be 
limited to the actual cost of construction. The cost of professional services shall be competitively 
bid in accordance with F.S. § 287.055, in order to be eligible for impact fee credits. 
(j) ?If a proposed plan is approved for credit by the city, the applicant or owner and the city shall enter 
into a credit agreement which shall provide for: 
(1) ?The timing of actions to be taken by the applicant and the obligations and responsibilities of the 
applicant, including, but not limited to, the construction standards and requirements to be 
complied with. 
(2) ?The obligations and responsibilities of the city council, if any. 
(3) ?The amount of the credit as determined in accordance with subsection (i) of this section. 
(k) ?Credits shall expire 24 months from the date of the credit agreement. 
(l) ?A credit for the conveyance of land shall be granted at such time as the property has been conveyed 
to and accepted by the city. A credit for the construction of an improvement or conveyance of capital 
equipment to the police department shall be granted at such time as the construction is completed, 
approved and accepted by the city or the time the capital equipment is approved and accepted by 
the city. The administration of said contribution credits shall be the responsibility of the city 
administrator or his designee. 
(m) ?Any applicant or owner who submits a proposed plan pursuant to this section and desires the 
issuance of a building permit or other final development order prior to approval of the proposed plan 
shall pay the applicable police impact fee imposed herein. Any difference between the amount paid 
and the amount due, should the city approve and accept the proposed plan, shall be refunded to the 
applicant or owner. 
(n) ?The land or capital facilities conveyed or constructed, or the equipment conveyed, shall only provide 
improvements required to accommodate growth. 
(o) ?The actual cost for processing of and fees for legal preparation or review of a credit agreement shall 
be paid by the applicant prior to acceptance by the city council. 
(p) ?All or a portion of credits provided pursuant to this section may be transferred from one police 
impact construction site to another. Untimely requests to transfer credits shall not be considered, nor 
shall the city council consider a request to transfer any police impact fee credits distributed by the 
city to any owner of record prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this subsection is 
derived, unless the project was specifically approved at the time of submittal to allow the future 
transfer of such credits. The owners of the two sites shall submit a notarized agreement regarding 
the transfer which provides a legal description of both properties. The actual cost for processing of 
and fees for legal review of the agreement shall be paid by the parties prior to the city accepting the 
transfer. Costs for transferring credits shall be imposed by resolution of the city council. Upon 
acceptance by the city council, the city shall notify both parties by certified mail, return receipt 
requested. The property owner surrendering the credit shall be responsible for paying impact fees 
imposed by this article when the property is developed. 
(Ord. No. 2543 , § 2(12-167), 1-18-2017) 


Sec. 22-162. - Refund of impact fees paid. 
(a) ?If a building permit or final development order expires or is canceled without commencement of the 
construction, the owner of record shall be entitled to a refund, without interest, of the impact fee. The 
owner of record shall submit an application for the refund to the city administrator, or his designee, 
within 180 days of the expiration of the permit or final development order. Failure to submit the 
application for refund within the time specified constitutes a waiver of any claim to such monies. 
Upon review of the completed application, the city administrator or designee shall issue the refund if 
it is clear the building permit or final development order has expired without the commencement of 
construction. 
(b) ?Any funds not expended or encumbered by the end of the calendar quarter immediately following 
six years from the date the impact fee was paid shall, upon application of the owner of record, be 
returned to such owner of record without interest, provided that the owner of record submits an 
application for a refund to the city administrator or his designee. This six-year period may be 
extended by action of the city council for up to an additional three years. Failure to submit the 
application within the time specified herein constitutes a waiver of any claim to such monies. The city 
council shall issue such refund if a determination is made that the impact fees were not expended or 
encumbered within the time specified. 
(Ord. No. 2543 , § 2(12-168), 1-18-2017) 


Sec. 22-163. - Appeals. 
    Any person who disagrees with a decision or interpretation of this article may appeal to the city 
administrator or his designee by filing a written notice of appeal within ten days after the date of the action 
or decision complained of. The written notice of appeal shall set forth concisely the action or decision 
appealed as well as the grounds upon which the appeal is based. The city administrator or his designee 
shall consider all facts material to the appeal and render a written decision within 30 days of receiving the 
appeal. Any person who disagrees with the decision of the city administrator or his designee may appeal 
to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city administrator's office setting forth 
concisely the decision appealed within ten days after the date of the city administrator's decision. The 
appeal shall be set for the next available city council meeting for consideration. At the meeting, the city 
council shall render a verbal decision. The minutes of the meeting shall constitute the city's final written 
decision and shall constitute final administrative review. 
(Ord. No. 2543 , § 2(12-169), 1-18-2017) 


Chapter 26 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Cemeteries and funerals, F.S. § 497.001 et seq.; burial transit permits, F.S. § 
382.007; disposition of unclaimed remains, F.S. § 406.50; purchases of commemorative objects of 
deceased persons, F.S. § 812.052; sale of cemetery lots, etc., F.S. § 817.35; disturbing funeral, etc., F.S. 
§ 871.015. 


Sec. 26-1. - Reserved rights. 
(a) ?The city reserves the right to enlarge, reduce, re-plat, or change the boundaries or grading of the 
sections from time to time, and the right to modify and change the locations of or remove or re-grade 
roads, drives and walkways, or any part thereof, is hereby expressly reserved. The right to lay, 
maintain, and operate or alter pipe lines is expressly reserved, as is the right to use cemetery 
property not sold as burial space. 
(b) ?The city council is authorized to adopt new rules and regulations, or amend, alter or repeal these 
rules, for the operation of the Edgewood/Greenwood Cemetery, a copy of which shall be maintained 
in the office of the city clerk. 
(c) ?Special cases may arise in which the literal enforcement of a rule may impose unnecessary 
hardship. The city therefore reserves the right, without notice, to make exceptions, suspensions, or 
modifications in any of these rules and regulations when, in its judgment, the same appears 
advisable; and such temporary exception, suspension, or modification shall in no way be construed 
as affecting the general application of such rule. 
(d) ?The city council shall have sole authority to subdivide the cemetery into blocks, sections, burial 
spaces and streets and to determine the dimensions and location of each. 
(e) ?The city has the right, without prior approval of the burial space owner or his legal representative, to 
correct errors made in good faith in any phase of cemetery administration, operation or maintenance 
without incurring liability of any kind whatsoever. 
(Code 1993, § 30-1; Ord. No. 2456, § I, 10-21-2015) 


Sec. 26-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings 
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Block and/or section means a platted area within the cemetery that consists of more than one burial 
space. 
    Burial space means a single space within a platted section and/or block designed for the interment of 
human and cremated remains. (Regular burial spaces are approximately 3½ feet by ten feet. Cremation 
spaces are 3½ feet by 2½ feet and two feet by two feet.) 
    Cemetery or municipal cemetery , when used in this chapter, means the municipal cemetery of the 
city, commonly referred to as "Edgewood/Greenwood Cemetery." 
    Cemetery personnel refers to the individuals designated to maintain the cemetery grounds, mark for 
burials and monuments, and report code violations. 
    Contractor means any person, firm, corporation or anyone engaged in placing, erecting or repairing 
any monument/marker/memorial, or performing any work on the cemetery grounds, other than an 
employee of the city. 
    Disinterment means the removal of human or cremated remains from a burial space for relocation. 
    Double interment shall designate two stacked regular burials in the same space. 
    Human remains means the bodies of deceased persons, and includes bodies in any stage of 
decomposition and cremated remains. 
    Immediate family refers to a father, mother, wife, husband, brother, sister, son, daughter, stepson, 
stepdaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, grandchildren, grandparents, or a 
related person named via notarized affidavit. 
    Interment means the final disposition of the remains and cremated remains of a deceased person by 
earth burial. 
    Mausoleum or columbaria refers to a structure or building which is substantially exposed above the 
ground and intended to be used for the entombment of human remains and/or cremated remains in crypts 
or niches. 
    Monument/marker/memorial shall designate a monument, marker, tablet, or headstone for a family 
or individual for the purpose of identification or in memory of the interred. 
    Nonresident refers to a person not residing within the incorporated limits of the city. 
    Owner refers to an individual to whom a right of interment has been issued, or to whom a right of 
interment has been transferred, or by signed affidavit by the prior owner. 
    Resident refers to a person residing within the incorporated limits of the city. 
    Right of interment certificate refers to a document issued by the city clerk's office upon payment of 
the established fee evidencing a right of burial in a certain space in the cemetery (formerly known as a 
cemetery deed). 
    Right of interment restrictions refers to restrictions placed on certain sections of the cemetery where 
specific requirements must be met (e.g., double interments, monuments/markers/memorials, etc.). 
    Scatter garden refers to a garden area specifically designated and intended to be used for the 
scattering of cremated remains. 
    Section means platted property within the cemetery which consists of more than one block. 
    Vault refers to a primary receptacle made of concrete which is sealed and has a domed or step-up 
top for the placing of a casket containing a deceased person. 
(Code 1993, § 30-2; Ord. No. 2456, § I, 10-21-2015) 


Sec. 26-3. - Sale of spaces; transfers; burial permits; double interments. 
(a) ?A person may purchase a burial space in the city cemetery at prices adopted by the city council, 
and procure a right of interment certificate from the city clerk. Such right of interment certificate shall 
be properly executed by the mayor, or his designee, and attested by the city clerk. All burial spaces 
shall be sold subject to the rules and regulations in force and on file in the city clerk's office. Such 
spaces shall be used for no other purpose than the burial of human remains or cremated remains. 
(b) ?The city may require evidence of the street address of the last permanent residence of the 
owner/deceased, prior to the purchase of a burial space or issuance of a burial permit. The city will 
sell burial spaces in the cemetery only for the fees adopted by the city council. Spaces must be paid 
in full prior to interment or placement of grave markers. 
(c) ?Legal notices. Notice by mail, sent to the burial space owner or his legal representatives or heirs, at 
the last address on file in the office of the city clerk shall be deemed sufficient and proper legal 
notification. It shall be the duty of the burial space owner to notify the city of any changes in his 
mailing address. 
(d) ?The right of interment certificate to a cemetery burial space vests in the burial space owner/heir the 
right to use such burial space for burial purposes only, for himself or his immediate family as defined 
in section 26-2. 
(e) ?All burial rights for cemetery property purchased from the city occupy the same position as real 
estate at the death of the owner. Only such person as named or appears on the cemetery records of 
the city will be recognized as an owner of the cemetery property. If the death of the property owner 
occurs, and if the cemetery property is disposed of by a will, a certified copy of the will must be 
delivered to the city clerk's office before the city will recognize the change in ownership. If the 
deceased property owner left no will, the heirs must present proof that they are the only living heirs. 
If there is more than one heir, all heirs have equal rights to the property. 
(f) ?Burial permit. In order to eliminate any errors in burials, authorization in the form of a burial permit for 
said burial of human and cremated remains shall be obtained from the city clerk's office as described 
in section 26-7. 
(g) ?The city shall not be held responsible for any information provided by telephone or for any mistakes 
occurring from the lack of precise written instructions from cemetery property owners, funeral 
directors, or their representatives. 
(h) ?Double interments may only take place in the area of the cemetery designated for double 
interments. A double-depth vault must be installed within 60 days of purchase. 
(Code 1993, § 30-3; Ord. No. 2456, § I, 10-21-2015) 


Sec. 26-4. - Fees. 
(a) ?The cemetery fees shall be amended by the city council by means of adoption of a resolution and 
are on file in the city clerk's office. 
(b) ?Time payments. Cemetery burial spaces, excluding mausoleum crypts, may be purchased by time 
payment unless the purchase is for an immediate need. If purchasing property "at need," payment in 
full is required. "Pre-need" purchases are available by payment of 25 percent of the purchase price 
and an administrative fee which is on file in the city clerk's office for each space placed on time 
payment. Thereafter, a minimum amount which is on file in the city clerk's office shall be paid to the 
city on the first business day of the month until the balance is paid in full. A right of interment 
certificate shall be issued by the city clerk upon receiving payment in full. 
(c) ?The city shall not be responsible for mailing reminders or statements. When at any time the payment 
account becomes 60 days delinquent, payment of the balance in full may be demanded. If payment 
in full is demanded on delinquent accounts and the purchaser cannot or will not pay the full balance, 
the city may reimburse the purchaser the full amount paid, less 50 percent of the minimum down 
payment, and said purchaser shall not be eligible for future time purchases of burial spaces. 
(d) ?Re-purchase by the city. Owners of a burial space may make application to the city clerk's office for 
the re-purchase of their space by the city. Re-purchase of burial spaces will be at 75 percent of the 
city's current resident rate, less the deed transfer fee. The original right of interment certificate (or 
cemetery deed) must be surrendered. The city clerk will determine if the burial space can be re-
purchased by the city. 
(Code 1993, § 30-4; Ord. No. 2456, § I, 10-21-2015) 


Sec. 26-5. - Transfer of right of interment. 
    Cemetery property owners who wish to transfer or convey the right of interment to another person 
shall have the appropriate affidavit executed with the city clerk. An affidavit will be executed as transfer 
documentation and appropriate fees paid. The affidavit shall be attached to the original right of interment 
certificate (or cemetery deed) in order to ensure the right of interment is on record. The city shall have the 
right to refuse consent to a transfer or assignment if there is any indebtedness on a burial space due to 
the city. 
(Code 1993, § 30-5; Ord. No. 2456, § I, 10-21-2015) 


Sec. 26-6. - Rules and regulations. 
(a) ?The cemetery gates will be open from dawn to dusk, unless otherwise posted. The city clerk's office 
will be open from 8:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, excluding official city holidays. 
(b) ?The city is not liable for the identity of the remains brought for interment, nor for the embalming of 
the body. 
(c) ?A map or plat of the survey of the cemeteries which shall set forth each burial space shall be 
maintained in the city clerk's office. 
(d) ?The cemetery personnel shall be responsible for reporting violations of ordinances, rules, 
regulations, policies, and procedures pertaining thereto. The cemetery personnel shall also 
supervise all workers within the boundaries of the cemetery grounds. 
(e) ?The city clerk shall be responsible for the cemetery records, issuing right of interment certificates, 
transfers, permits for interment and/or disinterment, grave marker permits, collecting fees, and 
executing applicable cemetery documents. 
(f) ?Entrance into the cemetery shall be by Highland Avenue and Fayette Street only, or as determined 
by the city. 
(g) ?The cemetery personnel shall be contacted by the city clerk's office to assist burial space owners 
and visitors from 8:00 a.m. until 3:30 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays, and city holidays. If deemed 
necessary by the cemetery personnel, staffing may be adjusted to meet certain needs for weekend 
and/or holiday requests. 
(h) ?Any person found on the cemetery grounds after dark will be considered trespassing and is subject 
to law enforcement action. 
(i) ?All persons are prohibited from gathering flowers, either wild or cultivated, or breaking trees, shrubs 
or plants on the cemetery grounds. 
(j) ?No person shall be permitted to sit on monuments within the cemetery. 
(k) ?Loud talking which would reasonably disturb the average person shall not be permitted within the 
cemetery grounds. 
(l) ?Rubbish is to be removed from the cemetery, or disposed of properly in waste containers provided 
by the city. 
(m) ?Automobiles shall not be driven through the cemetery at a speed greater than five miles per hour. 
No person shall park any automobile or any vehicle so as to obstruct cemetery driveways, and no 
person shall drive or park vehicles on burial spaces, except for burial equipment or grounds 
maintenance equipment. Motorists damaging any cemetery property shall be responsible for all costs 
incurred in restoring damaged property to its original condition. 
(n) ?The city reserves the right of ingress and egress on and over any space not occupied or previously 
purchased. 
(o) ?The sounding of horns, sirens, or other automobile signals within the cemetery is prohibited, except 
in an emergency. 
(p) ?The playing of loud music from any amplifying device is prohibited, unless approved by the 
cemetery personnel as a part of the burial ceremony. 
(q) ?Heavy hauling trucks or commercial vehicles of any kind are not permitted within the cemetery 
grounds, except those on business in connection with cemetery work, and only by permission of the 
city. 
(r) ?Peddling of flowers, plants, or soliciting the sale of any commodity is absolutely prohibited within the 
confines of the cemetery. 
(s) ?No advertisements of any kind shall be permitted within the cemetery. 
(t) ?Pets shall not be allowed on the cemetery grounds except in the case of a companion animal to 
assist a challenged visitor. 
(u) ?Funeral directors, vault companies and monument companies will be held responsible for the 
actions of their drivers and other employees within the cemetery. 
(v) ?The city clerk and the cemetery personnel, or their designee, are hereby expressly empowered to 
enforce these rules and regulations, and to expel from the cemetery grounds any person violating 
the same, including employees of outside agencies, burial space owners, and visitors. 
(w) ?Employees within the cemetery shall conduct themselves with decorum at all times and with strict 
accordance with these rules and regulations. This applies to outside workers, stone masons, florists, 
etc., as well as to those persons directly employed by the city. 
(x) ?No ground sweeping instruments (e.g., metal detectors) shall be allowed in the cemetery. 
(y) ?No person may consume alcoholic beverages within the cemetery or be in possession of alcoholic 
beverages on the premises. 
(z) ?All orders, inquiries, and complaints by property owners or visitors shall be reported to the city clerk. 
(aa) ?There shall be no loitering on the cemetery grounds. 
(Code 1993, § 30-6; Ord. No. 2456, § I, 10-21-2015) 


Sec. 26-7. - Funerals; interment; disinterment. 
(a) ?Interment and disinterment are not permitted in the cemetery on any of the holidays of New Year's 
Day, Martin Luther King, Jr. Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Veterans Day, 
Thanksgiving and the day following Thanksgiving, Christmas Eve, Christmas Day, or New Year's 
Eve, or any other days which hereafter may be designated by the city council, without the permission 
of the mayor or his designee. 
(b) ?Funeral processions entering the cemetery shall be under the control of the funeral director with 
direction from the cemetery personnel. Funeral directors shall be present and conduct the services 
as provided by F.S. § 497.372 and city ordinances. 
(c) ?All burial spaces must be open to such a depth that upon closing there shall remain a minimum of 
18 inches of soil above the vault to the average ground level. 
(d) ?The city will not be responsible for the opening or closing of any grave site. Opening and closing of 
grave sites shall be performed by a city-authorized vault company only. The opening of all burial 
spaces in the cemetery shall be approved and monitored by the city personnel. 
(e) ?Notice to the city clerk's office of weekend services is required no later than Thursday prior to 3:30 
p.m. to ensure availability of cemetery personnel for the space openings. 
(f) ?Notice to the city clerk's office is required no later than 3:00 p.m., Friday, for Monday services. 
However, if special circumstances (e.g., a late Friday death) prevent such notification and a Monday 
service is desired, the following applies: 
(1) ?The service must be scheduled for no earlier than 2:00 p.m. on Mondays. 
(2) ?The city clerk must be notified of the request for the afternoon service no later than 9:00 a.m. 
on Monday, and must confirm that all requirements are met for the burial. 
(g) ?A burial permit, when possible, should be completed at least 24 hours prior to burial. Such permit is 
issued by the city clerk's office. No interments shall be made until the burial permit is signed by the 
funeral director or family representative, and the appropriate fees paid. Cemetery personnel are 
prohibited from marking spaces, except in compliance with this rule. 
(h) ?When designating the location of the interment, the owners or representatives should confer with 
the city clerk's office and cemetery personnel to designate the location of the burial space. The city 
shall not be responsible for errors in the location of burial spaces arising from improper instruction 
from burial space owners. Orders from funeral directors shall be construed as orders from owners. 
(i) ?Sealed concrete vaults with a domed or step-up top are required for all standard burials. Cremated 
remains are to be buried in a sealed permanent container of non-biodegradable material. Concrete 
liners are not permitted. Exceptions: 
(1) ?Those persons having pre-need contracts with a licensed funeral home prior to March 3, 1999. 
The pre-need contract must be presented to the city clerk's office at the time the burial permit is 
obtained. 
(2) ?Cremated remains being scattered in a city-designated scatter garden. 
(j) ?When two or more funerals arrive at the cemetery at the same time, the first funeral to arrive shall 
have precedence in entering the cemetery. 
(k) ?The funeral directors are responsible for insuring that the burial spaces are opened and closed, and 
the surplus soil is removed, as necessary, to designated areas following the closing of the burial 
space. Any costs incurred for these functions are the sole responsibility of the funeral director or 
designee. The city will not bear any of these costs. 
(l) ?A licensed funeral director is required to be present for any cremains burial. 
(m) ?The cemetery workers shall suspend their activity or work within the immediate vicinity of a funeral 
until the conclusion of all services. 
(n) ?When a burial space is held jointly, a permit for interment may be granted to either owner or heirs if 
applicable. Any owner or joint owner of a burial space has the right to grant right of interment by 
means of a sworn affidavit. 
(o) ?Each regular burial space may be used for the following: 
(1) ?One adult interment and one cremated remains; or 
(2) ?Two cremated remains; or 
(3) ?One adult interment and one infant, age one year old or under. 
(p) ?One cremated remains burial shall be allowed in a cremation space, except that two cremation 
burials shall be allowed in a single cremation space in the event a marker containing niches for the 
two cremated remains is pre-installed. A burial permit is required for placement of each cremated 
remains. 
(q) ?The city reserves the right to require at least ten days' notice prior to disinterment. No disinterment 
will be made on any Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, or on the day upon which a holiday is legally 
observed by the city. All disinterments shall be performed at the convenience of the cemetery 
personnel. 
(r) ?No disinterment will be made without a court order of a court of competent jurisdiction, or written 
permission from a person having authority to permit same. No disinterment can be made for autopsy 
purposes without a court order. All disinterments must be monitored by cemetery and law 
enforcement personnel. 
(s) ?The city shall not be liable for damages for any delay in the interment of a body where a protest, just 
or unjust, to the interment has been made, or where the regulations have not been complied with, or 
where a burial space has not been fully paid, or where the burial permit has not been authorized. 
The city reserves the right, under such circumstances, to refuse to accept the body for interment. 
(t) ?The cemetery personnel, or person in charge of any premises in which interments are made, shall 
not permit any burials until a burial permit has been issued by the city clerk. 
(Code 1993, § 30-7; Ord. No. 2456, § I, 10-21-2015) 


Sec. 26-8. - Monuments; markers; memorials. 
(a) ?A permit must be obtained for any work performed in the cemetery (except maintenance performed 
by city personnel in the course of their official duties). 
(b) ?Maximum marker sizes: 
Des
crip
tion 
Lot 
Di
me
nsi
ons 
Ma
xim
um  
Ma
rke
r 
Size 
Sin
gle 
mar
ker 
3.5' 
by 
10' 
40" 
or 
3'4" 
Do
ubl
e 
mar
ker 
7' 
by 
10" 
82" 
or 
6'1
0" 
Bab
yla
nd 
2' 
by 
3.5' 
22" 
or 
1'1
0" 
Chil
dre
n 
30" 
by 
6' 
28" 
or 
2'4" 
Tod
dler
lan
d 
2.5' 
by 
7' 
28" 
or 
2'4" 
Cre
mai
ns  
(fla
t 
onl
y) 
3.5' 
by 
2.5' 
40" 
by 
28" 
or  
3'4" 
by 
2'4" 
ED
A - 
Sec
tion 
C 
2' 
by 
2' 
22" 
 
(c) ?Minimum marker size shall be a 12-inch by 24-inch bronze plaque with a concrete or granite base, 
unless being placed by the city under the rules for the marker deposit. 
(d) ?All coping and ledgers must be of polished granite or marble and installed even with the ground. 
Ledgers shall be a minimum of four inches in thickness and a maximum size of seven feet by three 
feet. Coping is not permitted in designated cremation sections, Babyland, Toddlerland, or other 
restricted areas of the cemetery. 
(e) ?The use of tiles, bricks, rocks, gravel, crushed rock, oyster shells, mulch, cinders or other material 
on any burial space in the cemetery is strictly forbidden. The cemetery personnel may remove and 
dispose of said material without notice to the burial space owner. 
(f) ?Homemade markers, coping, or ledgers of any kind, including that associated with countertop 
granite or yard decoration, are prohibited. 
(g) ?Persons erecting monuments, other structures, or work of any kind, will not be permitted to scatter 
material or rubbish over adjoining lots. They shall be required to set their work or complete their 
labors as soon as possible after entering the cemetery, under the instructions and direction of the 
cemetery personnel. All rubbish is to be removed at once, and, in the case of neglect, such removal 
will be made by the city at the expense of the burial space owner/heir or contractor. 
(h) ?Private contractor firms will be held responsible for any damage done by them whatsoever in the 
cemetery, and shall at all times be subject to the control and direction of the cemetery personnel. 
(i) ?Private contractor firms and others are prohibited from placing their names on any signs with a view 
of advertising within the limits of the cemetery. 
(j) ?Any memorialization of a second interment in a double interment space must be by way of a single, 
flat marker at the foot of the space, installed at grade level, if not memorialized on the monument at 
the head of the space. 
(k) ?Symbols, as of faith, hope and love, as well as religious symbols, and emblems of fraternal and 
military organizations contribute to the significance of a memorial. The addition of symbols, epitaphs 
and historical inscriptions added to monuments, markers and memorials whenever possible are 
encouraged. 
(l) ?Only one monument, marker, or memorial will be allowed at the head of each burial space and one 
flat marker is permitted at the foot of the space. 
(m) ?Monuments shall be etched, grooved or embossed with the deceased's name to create a durable 
record of the deceased. Memorials or inscriptions deemed to be offensive by the city shall be 
removed or corrected at the expense of the owner. Markers in restricted cemetery sections are 
limited to ground level markers only, and coping is not permitted in these sections (e.g., cremation 
section and certain other specified sections reserved for regular burials). 
(n) ?Burial spaces must be paid in full before the installation of monuments, markers, or memorials will 
be allowed. 
(o) ?The city will assume no responsibility for the correct location of the monument, marker, or memorial. 
Any changes ordered by the owner will be made at his expense. 
(p) ?Should any monument, marker, or memorial become damaged or a menace to safety, the city may, 
at the expense of the burial space owner/heir, repair, improve or remove it, after an attempt to 
contact the burial space owner/heir has been made. 
(q) ?Private contractors shall set monuments in conformity with cemetery requirements and in 
accordance with the trade standards of proper methods of handling and setting. A grave marker 
permit must be completed at least 24 hours prior to monument installation. Such permit is issued by 
the city clerk's office. All monument installation policies must be adhered to by the private contractor 
installing the monument. 
(r) ?No curbing, edging, grave mounds, boarders, enclosures, mausoleums, or walks of any kind shall be 
allowed to be built or placed on any burial space in the cemetery. The city reserves the right to 
remove and dispose of or add the same without recourse. 
(s) ?The bottom of every stone should be dressed to an even level bed so that it will stand plumb, resting 
firmly and level on a foundation. All joints shall be sealed against moisture and with non-staining 
material. 
(t) ?No permanent monuments, markers, or memorials will be permitted in the cemetery when made of 
wood, iron, plaster of paris, cement, limestone, soapstone, artificial stone, slate, metal composition, 
or PVC piping. All monuments shall be constructed of granite, standard bronze, marble, or like 
material and set upon a base. 
(u) ?The provisions of this article shall not be construed to be retroactive, and any existing monuments, 
markers, or memorials which conform to the regulations in effect when such monuments, markers, or 
memorials were installed, shall not be rendered illegal or in violation through the adoption of these 
regulations. If any nonconforming or grandfathered monuments, markers, or memorials are replaced, 
for any reason, the nonconforming or grandfathered use shall be deemed abandoned and shall not 
thereafter be permitted to continue. 
(Code 1993, § 30-8; Ord. No. 2456, § I, 10-21-2015) 


Sec. 26-9. - Decoration of lots. 
(a) ?Artificial or fresh cut flowers may be placed in a metal or plastic vase at the top/head of the space at 
any time. However, they will be discarded when wilted, faded, broken, or anything of a similar nature. 
(b) ?Sprays, wreaths and baskets made from fresh cut flowers will be allowed up to two weeks, or when 
they no longer conform to the decorum of the cemetery, or become a safety hazard. 
(c) ?Items placed on cemetery spaces in celebration of a holiday must be removed within ten days 
following the holiday, with the exception of Christmas, which items must be removed within 30 days 
following the holiday. If not removed within this time frame, the items will be removed and disposed 
of by the city. 
(d) ?Fences around burial spaces are strictly prohibited. Fences installed will be removed and disposed 
of by the city and may not be replaced. 
(e) ?The planting of any kind of trees, vines or shrubs is strictly prohibited without approval of the 
cemetery personnel. 
(f) ?Sod may be installed at grade level only. 
(g) ?Burial space owners/heirs are responsible for the appearance of their burial spaces; however, the 
city reserves the right to regulate the method of decorating burial spaces, and reserves the right, 
without notice, to prohibit or remove and dispose of benches, chairs, settees, hanging plant hooks, 
vases, artificial flowers, ceramic figurines, picture frames containing glass, grave corners, toys or any 
articles that do not conform to the decorum or rules and regulations of the cemetery, or that become 
a safety hazard. 
(h) ?The city shall not be held liable for lost, misplaced or broken vases, any other decorations, or 
damage by the elements, thieves, vandals, or by causes beyond its control. 
(i) ?Any furnishings or structures that are deemed unsafe by the cemetery personnel shall be removed 
and disposed of. 
(j) ?The cemetery personnel shall have the authority to order the pruning, transplanting or removal of 
trees, shrubs, vines, plants or anything growing upon a burial space when they may consider such 
action in the best interest of the cemetery. 
(Code 1993, § 30-9; Ord. No. 2456, § I, 10-21-2015) 


Sec. 26-10. - Restricted areas. 
    The city may designate a right of interment restricted section of the cemetery, and the following shall 
apply to those sections: 
(1) ?Flat markers only are permitted in a right of interment restricted section of the cemetery. A vase 
is permissible within the perimeter of the monument as an invertible vase only. No structures, 
benches, fences, or mounds shall be permitted. Full grave slabs which cover any portion of the 
spaces except for the monument headstone are prohibited in this section. No planting shall be 
permitted except in designated areas by permission of the cemetery personnel. Memorials or 
headstones located on the west end of the site must be in accordance with the general layout of 
the cemetery. 
(2) ?Only one bouquet of flowers may be placed on each burial space, providing they are placed in 
an approved ground level vase or in a vase that is part of the memorial. 
(3) ?The marking of each burial space is restricted and limited to a flat monument set flush with the 
turf and of such dimensions, materials, design, finish and construction as designated by this 
Code. 
(4) ?For the safety and maintenance of the cemetery, any item consisting of glass, brick, wood, or 
metal (except temporary metal markers), and any toys, souvenirs, yard decorations, or other 
items set out in this chapter as being prohibited, are prohibited from being placed upon any 
burial space in restricted sections of the cemetery. 
(Code 1993, § 30-10; Ord. No. 2456, § I, 10-21-2015) 


Sec. 26-11. - Liability. 
(a) ?The city shall take reasonable precaution to protect the property rights of owners within the 
cemetery from loss or damage, but shall not be liable and distinctly disclaims all responsibility for 
loss or damage to plants, markers, monuments, corner markers, vases, or other property or rights of 
burial space owners arising from causes beyond its reasonable control. This includes damage 
caused by the elements, an act of God, vandals, demonstrators, malicious mischief, explosions, 
unavoidable accidents, insurrections, riots or orders of any military or civil authority, whether the 
damage is indirect or deliberate. 
(b) ?Any person, while on any portion of the cemetery grounds other than the roads, drives, or walks, 
shall in no way hold the city liable for any injury sustained. 
(Code 1993, § 30-11; Ord. No. 2456, § I, 10-21-2015) 


Sec. 26-12. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided 
for by the applicable section of this Code, and general law. 
(Code 1993, § 30-12; Ord. No. 2456, § I, 10-21-2015) 


Chapter 30 - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Elections, article IV. 
State Law reference— Florida Election Code, F.S. chs. 97 through 106; municipal electors, F.S. § 
166.032; municipal elections, F.S. § 100.3605. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 30-1. - State election code adopted. 
    The provisions of the Florida Election Code, F.S. chs. 97 through 106, are hereby adopted by 
reference with the same force and effect as if set out at length in this section, except those provisions 
which by their very nature could have no application within a city, and except for those provisions which 
are in conflict with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1983, § 9-1; Code 1993, § 34-1) 
State Law reference— State law applicable in city elections, F.S. § 100.3605. 


Secs. 30-2—30-20. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - ELECTION OF CITY OFFICIALS 


Sec. 30-21. - Election date; qualifying period; early voting. 
(a) ?The general elections within the city shall be held on the second Tuesday of March, and all run-off 
elections shall be held on the second Tuesday in April, in those years when required for the election 
of a city official, or as amended by ordinance or law at least six months prior to the city general 
election. 
(b) ?The qualifying period for the city general elections shall be in accordance with the provisions of the 
Florida Election Code, unless amended by ordinance. If any portion of that period falls on a weekend 
or legal holiday, the qualifying period shall be extended by one day for each day during the specified 
interval which falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
(c) ?Early voting municipal elections. Pursuant to F.S. § 100.3605, the city shall not be subject to the 
provisions of F.S. § 101.657(1)(a) through (d) for municipal elections. However, the city council shall 
retain the ability to conduct early voting or contract with the county supervisor of elections to conduct 
early voting pursuant to F.S. § 101.657 as and when the city council determines early voting would 
be in the best interest of the city. Such early voting shall be conducted on dates and times set forth 
by resolution, applicable only to the present general election. Said resolution shall be adopted not 
less than 60 days prior to the city general election. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2; Code 1993, § 34-36; Ord. No. 1222, § 2, 9-1-1999; Ord. No. 1804, § 1, 1-4-
2006; Ord. No. 2139, § 1, 12-16-2009) 
State Law reference— Early voting, F.S. § 101.657. 


Sec. 30-22. - Council seats. 
    The four commissioner seats on the city council are established in Charter section 2.02. Every 
candidate for commissioner on the city council shall designate the seat for which he desires his name to 
appear on the ballot. 
(Code 1983, § 9-3; Code 1993, § 34-37) 
Charter reference— Election and terms, § 2.02. 


Sec. 30-23. - Election proclamation. 
    The mayor shall issue a proclamation calling any city election at least 30 days prior to any such 
election, and publish such proclamation in a newspaper published in the city, in at least one issue, 30 
days prior to such election. The mayor's proclamation shall designate the municipal offices to be filled by 
the election, and the terms thereof, and the time and place of voting in such election. 
(Code 1983, § 9-4; Code 1993, § 34-38; Ord. No. 1804, § 2, 1-4-2006) 


Sec. 30-24. - Procedure when only one candidate running for office. 
    If there is only one candidate running for mayor or only one candidate running for any city council 
seat, such person shall be declared elected in the first election. 
(Code 1983, § 9-5; Code 1993, § 34-39) 
Charter reference— Similar provision, § 2.02. 


Sec. 30-25. - Run-off elections. 
(a) ?Any candidate for city office who receives a majority of the votes cast in the first city election for 
such office shall be declared elected to such office. 
(b) ?If, at the first election, no candidate for the office of mayor receives a majority of the votes cast for 
such office, a run-off election shall be held between the two candidates for such office who received 
the highest number of votes at the first election. The candidate receiving the highest number of votes 
for the office of mayor in the run-off election shall be declared to have been elected to the office of 
mayor. 
(c) ?If at the first election no candidate for a city commissioner's seat receives a majority of the votes 
cast in such election for such seat, a run-off election shall be held between the two candidates for 
the seat who received the highest number of votes. In such run-off election, the person receiving the 
highest number of votes for the seat shall be declared elected to such council seat. 
(d) ?All run-off elections shall be held on the second Tuesday of April of the election year. 
(Code 1983, § 9-6; Code 1993, § 34-40; Ord. No. 1804, § 3, 1-4-2006) 


Sec. 30-26. - Canvassing board; canvass and certification of votes. 
(a) ?The city canvassing board shall be composed of the city clerk and two members of the city council 
who are not candidates. Two citizens shall be selected by majority vote of the city council to serve as 
first and second alternate canvassing board members. The canvassing board members and the 
alternate canvassing board members shall be appointed at least 60 days before December 1 prior to 
a general election. Said terms shall expire on May 1 of the election year. At the close of the polls of 
the city election, the board shall meet and proceed to publicly canvass the absentee electors' ballots 
and then publicly canvass the vote as shown by the election clerk. In the event of provisional ballots, 
the canvassing board shall reconvene by Monday following the election to canvass the provisional 
ballots and certify the election results. However, in years when there may be a countywide election, 
the city council may approve the canvassing of absentee and provisional electors' ballots by the 
county canvassing board. The city clerk shall be designated the city's representative. The city clerk 
shall review the ballots accepted by the county canvassing board. The city absentee ballots are to be 
counted simultaneously with the county ballots in the presence of the city clerk, who is to observe 
and report any discrepancies to the city council. 
(b) ?The canvassing board shall prepare and sign a certificate containing the number of votes cast for 
each person or other measure voted on. The certification shall be presented to the city council for 
ratification, and placed on file with the city clerk. 
(Code 1993, § 34-41; Ord. No. 1625, § I, 1-7-2004; Ord. No. 1804, § 4, 1-4-2006; Ord. No. 
2329, § 1, 9-18-2013) 


Sec. 30-27. - Qualifying fees for candidates. 
    All candidates for city council, qualifying as provided in this chapter, and in accordance with certain 
other provisions of Florida Statutes, shall pay a qualifying fee as established in F.S. § 99.093 based on 
the minimum salary as set by the city council in the pay grade schedule in effect on July 1 immediately 
preceding the first day of qualifying. 
(Code 1993, § 34-42) 
State Law reference— City candidate election assessment, F.S. § 99.093. 


Sec. 30-28. - Continued residency required. 
    Members of the city council shall have the qualifications of electors in the city and shall be residents 
and reside within the municipal limits while in office. 
(Code 1993, § 34-43; Ord. No. 960, § 1, 9-4-1996) 


Chapter 34 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Emergency management, F.S. § 252.31 et seq.; emergency medical services, 
F.S. § 201.101 et seq.; medical transportation services, F.S. § 401.2101 et seq.; alarm systems, F.S. § 
489.501 et seq. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 34-1—34-18. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Alarm systems, F.S. § 489.501 et seq. 


Sec. 34-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm system means any mechanical, electrical, or radio-controlled device or system which is 
designed to emit, transmit or relay a signal or message and which, when activated, is intended to 
summon, or that would reasonably be expected to summon, police, fire or emergency medical services of 
the city including, but not limited to, local alarms. Alarm system does not include: 
(1) ?An alarm installed on a vehicle, unless the vehicle is permanently located at a site; or 
(2) ?An alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants of a premises, and which does not constitute a 
local alarm. 
    Audible alarm means any alarm system designed to audibly indicate the condition of forced entry or 
attempted forced entry, or any condition that has set off the alarm for any reason. 
    Burglary alarm means an alarm system designed to indicate a condition of forced entry or attempted 
forced entry. 
    False alarm means the activation of an alarm system signal or message which elicits notification to 
and response by the police department or fire department when there is no evidence of a crime, fire, 
medical emergency or other activity which warrants a call for immediate police, firefighting or emergency 
medical assistance. This may include, but is not limited to, an alarm discovered by a police officer or 
firefighter before notification of an alarm from a monitor or from a local alarm system that is not monitored. 
    Fire alarm means an alarm system designed to indicate the presence of fire or smoke. 
    Fire alarm incident report means a document issued by the enforcement official indicating that the 
activation was deemed to be the result of fire alarm activation due to fire, a nuisance fire alarm or a false 
fire alarm. 
    Robbery alarm means an alarm system designed to indicate that a robbery (holdup) is in progress or 
over with. 
    Telephone alarm system means any alarm system which automatically transmits by telephone line a 
recorded electronic or mechanical signal to a telephone instrument at the city police or fire department. 
Such systems are totally automated and require no relaying or action by a human being. 
(Code 1983, § 13-25; Code 1993, § 38-36) 
State Law reference— Definitions, F.S. § 489.505. 


Sec. 34-20. - Penalty for violation of article; additional remedies. 
    A violation of this article shall be punishable according to law; however, in addition to or in lieu of any 
criminal prosecution, the city shall have the power to sue for relief in civil court to enforce the provisions of 
this article. 
(Code 1983, § 13-30; Code 1993, § 38-37) 


Sec. 34-21. - Appeals. 
    Any party aggrieved by any action of the city pursuant to this article shall have the right to appeal the 
action to the city council within 30 days of the date of the action to be grieved. The failure to file an 
application with the city clerk within 30 days from the date of the action to be appealed shall be deemed a 
waiver of any objection thereto. The filing of any appeal under this section shall not stay any 
administrative actions of the city pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1983, § 13-29; Code 1993, § 38-38) 


Sec. 34-22. - Information to be provided to city. 
    Prior to the installation or use of an alarm system which is defined in subsection (1) or (3) of the 
definition of the term "alarm system" in section 34-19, the owner or lessee of the premises shall furnish 
the city police and fire departments with such information as the departments deem necessary to provide 
adequate response to the alarm. 
(Code 1983, § 13-26(a); Code 1993, § 38-39) 


Sec. 34-23. - Resetting or disabling following activation. 
    Owners or lessees of any alarm system shall provide response to the alarm location, when 
requested, in order to reset or disable the alarm system, within one hour of activation. Failure to provide 
such response shall result in a charge of $25.00 for each such occurrence. 
(Code 1983, § 13-26(c); Code 1993, § 38-40) 


Sec. 34-24. - Maintenance; alarms caused by power outages or power surges. 
(a) ?All alarm systems shall be properly maintained. System malfunctions due to faulty maintenance 
shall not be grounds for an excused false alarm. 
(b) ?False alarms attributable to power outages or power surges shall be excused. 
(Code 1983, § 13-26(d), (e); Code 1993, § 38-41) 


Sec. 34-25. - False alarms. 
(a) ?For each response by the police and fire departments to an alarm, the departments will cause a 
report to be filed, classifying the alarm as one of the following: 
(1) ?False alarm or system test with no notification. 
(2) ?Valid alarm for cause designated. 
(b) ?Upon the reception of a second false alarm within six months, the police and fire departments shall 
issue a warning notice to the owner, lessee or management of the premises involved. The owner, 
lessee or manager shall file a written report with the police and fire departments within five working 
days indicating any and all measures taken to reduce false alarms. 
(c) ?There shall be a service fee charged for false alarms according to the following schedule: 
(1) ?First response within six months: no fee. 
(2) ?Second response within six months: warning. 
(3) ?Third response within six months: $100.00. 
(4) ?Fourth response within six months: $250.00. 
(d) ?If, within ten days from the occurrence of a false alarm, the owner, lessee or manager can 
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the police chief or fire chief that the alarm system in question has 
actually been examined by a repair service authorized by the system manufacturer and that the 
system has been either repaired, if the repaired malfunction was the cause of the false alarm, or 
certified to be in good working order, then, providing the false alarm was not caused by employee 
error, the false alarm shall not be considered a false alarm for the purpose of subsection (c) of this 
section providing for the assessment of a service fee. 
(e) ?Upon failure of an owner, lessee or manager of any premises to pay a fee specified within ten days, 
the police chief or fire chief shall be authorized to disconnect or order the disconnection of the alarm 
system, and it shall be unlawful to reconnect or fail to disconnect such alarm system unless and until 
appropriate corrective action has been taken and such connection of an alarm system is authorized 
by the police chief or fire chief. Before such disconnection takes place, the police chief or fire chief 
shall notify the owner or lessee in writing, by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by hand-
delivery of the written notice, which notice shall be signed for by the owner or lessee. No 
disconnection or deactivation shall be ordered or made as to any premises required by law to have 
an alarm system in operation. The owner or lessee or manager shall be responsible for all costs 
incurred in collecting the service fee, including any attorney fees. 
(Code 1983, § 13-27; Code 1993, § 38-42) 


Sec. 34-26. - Failure to correct malfunctions or pay fine. 
    Failure of the owner to correct malfunctions or pay such fines as applicable pursuant to this article 
will result in the police or fire department not being required to respond to the alarm location. 
(Code 1983, § 13-28; Code 1993, § 38-43) 


Sec. 34-27. - Telephone alarm devices. 
    Telephone alarm devices will be so constructed or installed as to not seize or otherwise hold or 
preempt the telephone lines of the police or fire department. 
(Code 1983, § 13-28; Code 1993, § 38-44) 


Secs. 34-28—34-57. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC SAFETY RADIO AMPLIFICATION SYSTEM 


Sec. 34-58. - General. 
(a) ?Current editions of Florida building and fire codes are necessary for the reasonable protection of life 
and property by ensuring buildings are constructed to maximize their ability to withstand the forces of 
nature; the hazards of fire and explosion due to the storage, use, or handling of hazardous materials, 
substances and devices; and conditions hazardous to life or property in the use or occupancy of 
buildings and premises. 
(b) ?Given the probability police officers or firefighters may be called to assist the owners or occupants of 
commercial structures during a time of crisis, it is imperative, and in the public good, that adequate 
two-way communications are provided emergency responders. 
(Code 1993, § 38-45; Ord. No. 1760, § I, 8-17-2005) 


Sec. 34-59. - Public safety radio coverage requirement. 
(a) ?The following must comply with provisions of this article: 
(1) ?Any existing structure that is equal to or in excess of 5,000 square feet of floor space that 
changes use, or more than 50 percent of the existing structure is remodeled, or there is a 
change in the building in such a way as to inhibit the city's public safety radio coverage within it; 
(2) ?Any existing structure that is not equal to or in excess of 5,000 square feet of floor space, but is 
altered in any manner to increase its size to be equal to or in excess of 5,000 square feet of 
floor space; and 
(3) ?Any new structure which is equal to or in excess of 5,000 square feet of floor space; 
and shall provide adequate radio coverage for the city's radio communications system so that a non-
modified public safety portable radio is able to clearly transmit and receive voice transmissions from 
within the structure. 
(b) ?For purposes of this section, adequate radio coverage shall include the following: 
(1) ?A minimum signal strength of -95 dBm available in the prescribed floor space of each floor of 
the identified structure when transmitted from the city's radio communications system. 
(2) ?The minimum signal strength of -95 dBm received at the city's radio communications system 
when transmitted from the prescribed floor space of each floor of the identified structure. 
(3) ?The public safety radio coverage shall be installed and maintained in accordance with this 
article, the currently adopted Florida Fire Prevention Code, National Fire Protection Association 
(NFPA) 1221, and best engineering practices in effect at the time of construction. 
(4) ?The non-modified public safety portable radio is able to clearly transmit and receive voice 
transmissions from the testing area to the city's communications center. 
(Code 1993, § 38-46; Ord. No. 1760, § I, 8-17-2005; Ord. No. 2455, § II, 10-21-2015) 


Sec. 34-60. - Amplification systems allowed. 
(a) ?Buildings and structures which cannot support the required level of radio coverage shall be 
equipped with a radiating cable system or an internal multiple-antenna system with or without FCC 
type accepted bi-directional amplifiers, as needed, or any equivalent device as accepted by the 
authority having jurisdiction, in order to achieve the required adequate radio coverage. 
(b) ?Any part of the installed system containing an electrically-powered component shall be capable of 
operating on an independent battery and/or generator system for a period of at least 12 hours 
without external power input. The battery system shall automatically charge in the presence of an 
external power input. In buildings with multiple occupancies, the system shall be tied to the main 
house panel as approved by the authority having jurisdiction. 
(c) ?Nothing in this section is intended to prevent the use of systems, methods, or devices, of equivalent 
or superior quality, strength, effectiveness, or durability, provided technical documentation is 
submitted and the device is approved for the intended purpose. 
(Code 1993, § 38-47; Ord. No. 1760, § I, 8-17-2005; Ord. No. 2455, § III, 10-21-2015) 


Sec. 34-61. - Acceptance test procedure. 
(a) ?When construction falls under section 34-59, the designee of the fire chief shall witness an 
acceptance test when the building owner contracts a private radio installation company, as part of 
the occupancy's final inspection. 
(b) ?The acceptance test shall be undertaken as follows to ensure that two-way coverage on each floor 
of the building is adequate: 
(1) ?Floor test areas. 
a. ?Open areas: for each open area of more than 2,000 square feet, the area shall be divided 
into a grid of approximately 20 equal areas. A maximum of one of the areas will be allowed 
to fail the test. If the system continues to fail, it will be the building owner's responsibility to 
have the building altered to meet the 95 percent coverage requirement. Open areas are 
considered warehouse areas, open office space with cubicles, or showrooms with stock or 
accessories. 
b. ?Closed office or room areas: each enclosed area of less than 2,000 square feet shall be 
considered a single test area. Any failure within this test area will be considered a failure of 
the building. It will be the building owner's responsibility to have the building altered to 
meet the coverage requirement. Divided office areas are those spaces with walls from floor 
to ceiling and doors (or doorways, whether or not there are doors) or hallways to connect 
such areas in order to enclose or separate the spaces. 
c. ?Closet, ancillary, or storage space, or hallways of less than 150 square feet, shall not be 
evaluated in the test. (Excepted are elevators and associated shafts.) 
(2) ?The test shall be conducted using approved FCC testing equipment. As referenced in NFPA 
1221, the minimum acceptable signal strength is -95 decibel/milliwatts (dBm). A location 
approximately in the center of the grid area (or single room) will be selected for the test, then 
the dBm will be measured. Once the location has been selected, prospecting for a better 
location within the grid area will not be permitted. 
(3) ?The occupant or building owner is required to provide two floor plans of each floor for the test, 
with any active or passive repeaters or antennas so indicated upon them, to the designee of the 
fire chief. 
(4) ?The gain values found at all test locations and of all amplifiers (as needed) shall be measured 
and the test measurement results shall be kept on file (on the premises) with the building owner 
so that the measurements can be verified during the fire marshal's fire inspection. In the event 
that the measurement results become lost, the building owner will be required to re-run the 
acceptance test to re-establish the gain values. 
(c) ?When an in-building radio is required, it shall be the building owner's responsibility to have all active 
components of the system, such as amplifiers and power supplies and backup batteries, tested and 
proof of testing provided to the designee of the fire chief at the acceptance test. Amplifiers shall be 
tested to ensure that the gain is within manufacturer tolerances. Backup batteries and power 
supplies shall be tested under load to verify that they will properly operate during an actual power 
outage. All other active components shall be checked to determine that they are operating within the 
manufacturer's specifications for the intended purpose. Such testing and documentation shall be 
provided by a licensed two-way radio communications company. 
(Code 1993, § 38-48; Ord. No. 1760, § I, 8-17-2005; Ord. No. 2455, § III, 10-21-2015) 


Sec. 34-62. - Annual test procedure. 
(a) ?When construction falls under section 34-59, the building owner will provide annual certification from 
a private radio maintenance company, as part of the occupancy's required fire inspections. The 
annual test shall be undertaken to ensure that two-way coverage on each floor of the building is 
adequate as directed in section 34-61. 
(b) ?When an in-building amplification system is required, it shall be the building owner's responsibility to 
have all active components of the system, such as amplifiers and power supplies and backup 
batteries, tested a minimum of once every 12 months, and proof of such testing must be provided to 
the designee of the fire chief. Amplifiers shall be tested to ensure that the gain remains within 
manufacturer tolerances. Backup batteries and power supplies shall be tested under load to verify 
that they will properly operate during an actual power outage. All other active components shall be 
checked to determine that they are operating within the manufacturer specifications for the intended 
purpose. Such testing and documentation shall be provided by a licensed two-way radio 
communications company. 
(Code 1993, § 38-49; Ord. No. 1760, § I, 8-17-2005; Ord. No. 2455, § IV, 10-21-2015) 


Sec. 34-63. - Test records and technical documentation. 
(a) ?All tests shall be approved by a designee of the city fire chief. All test records shall be retained on 
the inspected premises by the building owner and shall be subject to inspection by the designee of 
the fire chief, and copies of any and all tests shall be provided upon request. 
(b) ?Any and all technical sheets, alteration records, repair and maintenance records, or any other such 
documentation (or legible copy thereof) shall be kept with the structure, for the life of the structure, 
regarding any in-building amplifier system, whether active or passive. 
(c) ?When construction falls under section 34-59, the developer/contractor must provide the designee of 
the fire chief technical documentation of adherence with this article. 
(d) ?Any technical documentation shall be provided by a licensed private radio maintenance company 
approved by the authority having jurisdiction. Such documentation may include Distributed Antenna 
System (DAS) design plans, if the size and scope of construction requires such installation. Such 
plans shall be submitted with the building plans during the plans review process. 
(e) ?If construction falls in a size and scope that does not require DAS installation, a certification letter of 
such shall be submitted. Such certification letter plans shall be submitted with the building plans 
during the plans review process. 
(f) ?Should the city require the plans and/or certification letter to be reviewed by the city's radio 
frequency engineer, the developer will be required to submit the fees with the technical 
documentation. 
(g) ?Nothing in this section shall alleviate any testing requirement, either at the acceptance or annual 
phase. 
(Code 1993, § 38-50; Ord. No. 1760, § I, 8-17-2005; Ord. No. 2455, § IV, 10-21-2015) 


Sec. 34-64. - Field testing. 
    Police and fire personnel, after providing reasonable notice to the owner or his representative, shall 
have the right to enter onto the property to conduct field testing to be certain that the required level of 
radio coverage is present. 
(Code 1993, § 38-51; Ord. No. 1760, § I, 8-17-2005; Ord. No. 2455, § IV, 10-21-2015) 


Sec. 34-65. - Exemptions. 
    This article does not apply to buildings less than 5,000 square feet or any R-1 or R-2 occupancy. 
(Code 1993, § 38-52; Ord. No. 1760, § I, 8-17-2005; Ord. No. 2455, § IV, 10-21-2015) 


Sec. 34-66. - Fees. 
    The following fees shall apply: 
Acc
ept
anc
e 
test 
Incl
ude
d in 
buil
din
g 
per
mit. 
Fail
ure
/re-
ins
pec
tion 
$30
.00 
eac
h 
ins
pec
tion
. 
Pla
ns 
revi
ew 
Any 
con
stru
ctio
n 
me
etin
g 
the 
req
uire
me
nts 
set 
fort
h 
wit
hin 
sec
tion 
34-
59 
shal
l 
req
uire 
the 
con
trac
tor/
dev
elo
per 
to 
re
mit 
act
ual 
cos
ts 
plu
s 
thr
ee 
per
cen
t 
ad
min
istr
atio
n 
for 
con
sult
ing 
ser
vice
s 
whi
ch 
ma
y 
be 
con
trac
ted 
by 
the 
city
. 
Suc
h 
cos
ts 
ma
y 
be 
neg
otia
ted 
by 
staf
f. 
Fail
ure 
to 
re
mit 
suc
h 
cos
ts 
ma
y 
res
ult 
in 
den
ial 
of a 
cert
ific
ate 
of 
occ
upa
ncy 
and 
fina
l 
app
rov
al 
of 
the 
dev
elo
pm
ent. 
 
(Code 1993, § 38-53; Ord. No. 1760, § I, 8-17-2005; Ord. No. 2455, § IV, 10-21-2015) 


Sec. 34-67. - Penalties. 
(a) ?All test results shall be approved by a designee of the city fire chief prior to a certificate of 
occupancy, certificate of completion, or occupational license being issued. Any approval or denial of 
the certificate of occupancy shall be in consultation with the police chief, the director of 
communications, and the building official. 
(b) ?A violation of any provision of this article may be enforced through the code enforcement process as 
described within this Code and F.S. ch. 162. 
(c) ?The city may bring a lawsuit in a court of competent jurisdiction to pursue temporary or permanent 
injunctive relief or any other legal or equitable remedy authorized by law to cure, remove, prevent, or 
end a violation of any provision of this article, and furthermore, in the event the city enforces a 
violation of this provision, the offender may be responsible for the cost of such enforcement. 
(Code 1993, § 38-54; Ord. No. 1760, § I, 8-17-2005; Ord. No. 2455, § IV, 10-21-2015) 


Chapter 38 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisance abatement, F.S. §§ 60.05, 60.06; motor vehicle exhaust systems, F.S. 
§ 316.272; mufflers on certain vehicles, F.S. § 316.293; vehicles operated on water, F.S. § 327.65; 
highway construction noise abatement, F.S. § 335.17; airport noise, F.S. § 333.03; environmental 
protection, F.S. ch. 403; motor vehicle noise, F.S. § 403.415; federal law preemption, F.S. § 403.4153; 
public nuisances, F.S. § 823.01 et seq.; sport shooting ranges, F.S. § 823.16. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 38-1. - Littering. 
(a) ?It shall be unlawful, except as authorized by ordinance, for any person to dump, throw, place, 
discard or deposit, or cause to be thrown, placed, discarded, dumped or deposited, any litter in or on 
any public highway, road, street, thoroughfare or gutter. 
(b) ?It shall be unlawful for any person, while operating a motor vehicle, to permit any litter to fall or be 
blown from such vehicle onto any public highway, road, street, thoroughfare or gutter. 
(c) ?As used in this section, the term "litter" means any abandoned car, garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, 
can, bottle, container, paper, lighted or unlighted cigarette or cigar, or flaming or glowing material. 
(Code 1983, § 11-2; Code 1993, § 42-1) 
State Law reference— Vehicles scattering load, F.S. § 316.520; Florida Litter Law of 1971, 
F.S. § 403.413. 


Secs. 38-2—38-20. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - NUISANCE ABATEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisance abatement, F.S. §§ 60.05, 60.06; nuisances, F.S. ch. 823. 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 38-21. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known as the "City of Apopka Nuisance Abatement Property Code" or "Nuisance 
Property Code." 
(Code 1993, § 42-36; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Sec. 38-22. - Public nuisance abatement program established. 
    There is hereby established a city nuisance abatement program for the purpose of abating public 
nuisances as defined in section 38-24. The owner of any property located within the city who creates, 
suffers, or permits a nuisance to exist upon his property, shall be responsible for abating the nuisance 
and, if the owner fails to abate the nuisance in accordance with the notice given pursuant to this article, 
the city may abate the nuisance and the city shall be reimbursed for the costs associated with the 
abatement pursuant to the provisions of this article for the recovery of those costs. 
(Code 1993, § 42-37; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Sec. 38-23. - Public nuisance abatement program trust fund established. 
    There is hereby established an interest-bearing public nuisance abatement program trust fund for the 
deposit, maintenance, and distribution of any assessment funds collected or expended as a result of the 
public nuisance abatement program. The assessment imposed on a benefited property and collected by 
the city shall include the actual costs of abating the nuisance, the cost of serving notice, the cost of 
obtaining title information, the cost of lien recordation, the cost of inspections, and all other specifically 
related cost. Any funds in the trust fund may be used to abate public nuisances on property to which title 
is not clear, abate nuisances on government property, which may not be assessed, or for other purposes 
directly related to the abatement of nuisances. 
(Code 1993, § 42-38) 


Sec. 38-24. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings 
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Action plan means a detailed, written plan outlining the specific measures the property owner will 
take to curtail or eliminate the re-occurrence of nuisance activities on the property and that must be 
provided to the city no later than 15 days from the date of the preliminary finding of nuisance property. 
    Assessed real property or benefited real property means a nuisance property that is subject to the 
levy of a non-ad valorem assessment that may be collected pursuant to the uniform method provided in 
F.S. § 197.3632. The term "assessed real property" means all parcels of land included on the assessment 
roll that receive a special benefit from the delivery of nuisance services. 
    Assessment roll means the special assessment roll relating to the delivery of nuisance services 
required by F.S. § 197.3632. 
    Bill means a bill for nuisance service costs sent to the owner of a nuisance property. 
    Call for service means a call for law enforcement service resulting in a dispatch. 
    Declaration of nuisance property means the notice sent by the city to the owner of real property upon 
which a pattern of nuisance activity occurred, after the property owner has been notified of a preliminary 
finding of nuisance property and remains in violation of this article. 
    Dispatch means the notification to a law enforcement officer by dispatch operations personnel to 
respond to a property location identified in a call for service. 
    Distressed vacant property means any vacant real property located in any zoning district within the 
city showing evidence of distress. 
    Evidence of distress means any condition that on its own or combined with other conditions present 
would lead a reasonable person to believe that a vacant property is neglected, abandoned or otherwise 
not being regularly maintained. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, a repeat violation of any 
provision of this Code, as defined in F.S. § 162.045(5); overgrown and/or dead vegetation; the 
accumulation of trash, junk and/or debris; the accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers and/or mail; 
unclaimed notices posted; unsecured doors, windows or other openings; the presence of an unsanitary, 
stagnant swimming pool; and the presence of boards over doors, windows or other openings. 
    Extra duty detail means any law enforcement detail hired by an alcoholic beverage establishment. 
    Final assessment resolution means the resolution levying special assessment required by F.S. § 
197.3632. 
    Foreclosing mortgagee means any individual or entity holding a mortgage secured by real property 
located within the city and who has filed a notice of lis pendens pursuant to F.S. § 48.23, in an action to 
foreclose such mortgage on real property. 
    General enforcement of municipal codes means code enforcement through the procedure 
established in section 42-27 et seq. and chapter III, article 11, section 11.03.00, of the Land Development 
Code. 
    General law enforcement activity means patrols and investigative services. 
    Good faith effort means a documented effort by the property owner to curtail or eliminate the 
reoccurrence of nuisance activities. 
    Hearing officer means an attorney eligible to practice law in the state who has been delegated the 
authority under this article to uphold or reject declarations of nuisance property, enter nuisance service 
orders and decide appeals on behalf of the city council. The term "hearing officer" shall be synonymous 
with special master or magistrate. The hearing officer will be appointed by the city administrator or his 
designee. 
    Home rule means that municipalities have governmental, corporate and proprietary powers under 
state law to enable them to conduct municipal government, perform municipal functions, render municipal 
services, and exercise any power for municipal purposes except as otherwise provided by law. 
    Improved property means a piece of land or real estate upon which a structure has been placed, a 
marketable crop is growing (including timber), or other property improvements have been made by 
providing utilities and other services. These include one or more of the following: electricity, telephone, 
water, sewer, cable, natural gas, etc. 
    Invitee means a person who has an express or implied invitation to enter or use a property. 
    Nuisance means any of the following: 
(1) ?Any public nuisance known as common law or in equity jurisprudence or as provided by the 
statutes of the state or ordinances of the city, including this article. 
(2) ?Any accumulation of rubbish, trash, refuse, junk, and other abandoned materials, metals, 
lumber, or other things, which, based upon the facts and circumstances of the accumulation has 
become a public nuisance in fact. 
(3) ?The existence of excessive accumulation or untended growth of weeds, grass, undergrowth, 
brush, of other dead or living plant life upon an improved lot, tract or parcel of land, within 100 
feet of any improved property within the city to the extent and in the manner that such improved 
lot, tract or parcel of land is or may become a breeding place for mosquitoes; pose a fire 
hazard; threaten or endanger the public health and welfare; pose an attractive nuisance for 
children; reasonably cause disease; or adversely affect and impair the economic welfare of any 
adjacent property. 
(4) ?Any attractive nuisance or condition which may prove detrimental to the health and safety of 
children, whether on an improved or unimproved lot, tract or parcel of land, including, but not 
limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, excavations, abandoned appliances, abandoned or 
inoperable motor vehicles, and any structurally unsound fences or structures, lumber, trash, 
debris, or vegetation such as poison ivy, oak or sumac, which may prove a hazard for inquisitive 
minors. 
(5) ?Any unfit, unsanitary, abandoned, or unsafe dwelling, structure, or improvement upon real 
property. 
(6) ?The keeping of a deposit of green or dry hides or filthy rags, bones, guano or any other matter 
or thing of offensive or noisome odors. 
(7) ?Any underbrush, weeds, or untended grass which exceeds 12 inches in height located on 
improved property. 
(8) ?The decaying flesh or vegetable matter or other noisome thing or carcasses of animals or fowl 
not disposed of within a reasonable time after death. 
(9) ?The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or body of water by sewage, 
dead animals, industrial waste, or other substances. 
(10) ?Any building, structure or other place or location where activity in violation of local, state, or 
federal law is conducted, performed, or maintained, and which, under the facts and 
circumstances surrounding the activity, constitutes a public nuisance in fact. 
(11) ?Any accumulation of stagnant water or sewage permitted or maintained on any improved lot, 
premises, or piece of ground. 
(12) ?The discharge on any street or alley, or on his own premises or the premises of another, of 
any foul or fetid water. 
(13) ?Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot or cinders in unreasonable quantities. 
(14) ?Unsheltered storage for a period of 30 days or more within the corporate limits of the city 
(except in licensed junkyards) of old, unused, stripped junk and other automobiles not in good 
and safe operating conditions, and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements or equipment 
or personal property of any kind which is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it 
was manufactured, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and a danger to the public health, 
safety and welfare. 
(15) ?Any condition or use of premises or of building exteriors which is detrimental to the property of 
others or which causes or tends to cause substantial diminution in the value of other property in 
the neighborhood in which the premises are located. 
(16) ?Such other acts or conditions which are determined and declared by other ordinances or by 
resolution of the city council to be or constitute public nuisances. 
    Nuisance activity means the engagement or performance of any of the activities prohibited in the 
following Code provisions or state laws by the property owner, agent, tenant, or invitee of the property 
owner, agent or tenant: 
(1) ?City Code chapter 6, Alcoholic beverages. 
(2) ?City Code chapter 42, article III, Sexual offenders and sexual predators. 
(3) ?F.S. § 767.12, Dangerous dogs. 
(4) ?F.S. § 790.15(1), Discharging firearm in public. 
(5) ?F.S. § 796.06, Renting space to be used for prostitution. 
(6) ?F.S. § 796.07, Prostitution. 
(7) ?F.S. § 800.03, Exposure of sexual organs. 
(8) ?F.S. § 806.13, Criminal mischief. 
(9) ?F.S. § 810.08, Trespass in structure or conveyance. 
(10) ?F.S. § 810.09, Trespass on property other than structure or conveyance. 
(11) ?F.S. § 812.014, Theft. 
(12) ?F.S. § 812.019, Dealing in stolen property. 
(13) ?F.S. § 812.173, Convenience business security. 
(14) ?F.S. § 823.01, Nuisances. 
(15) ?F.S. § 828.12, Cruelty to animals. 
(16) ?F.S. § 856.011, Disorderly intoxication. 
(17) ?F.S. § 856.15, Open house parties. 
(18) ?F.S. § 856.021, Loitering or prowling. 
(19) ?F.S. § 856.022, Loitering or prowling in close proximity to children. 
(20) ?F.S. § 874.01, Any offence under the Criminal Gang Prevention Act. 
(21) ?F.S. § 877.03, Breach of peace; disorderly conduct. 
(22) ?F.S. § 893.01, Any offense under the Florida Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and 
Control Act. 
(23) ?Any other offense under state or federal law that is punishable by a term of imprisonment not 
exceeding six months. 
    Nuisance inspector means the city administrator or the designee thereof. 
    Nuisance property means real property located within the corporate boundary of the city upon which 
a pattern of nuisance activity has occurred and that has received a nuisance service order. 
    Nuisance service cost means the amounts established by resolution of the city council to fund all or 
any portion of the cost of nuisance services that provide a direct, special benefit to assessed real 
property. The term "nuisance service cost" shall not include any amount attributable to general law 
enforcement activities or the general enforcement of municipal codes upon a property that has not been 
declared by the city to be a nuisance and that has not received a nuisance order from the hearing officer. 
    Nuisance service order means an order entered by the hearing officer finding that the owner of a 
nuisance property has failed to satisfy a requirement of this article. 
    Non-ad valorem assessment means a special assessment that is not based upon millage, that can 
become a lien against a homestead as permitted in Fla. Const. art. X, § 4, and which may be collected 
pursuant to the uniform method provided in F.S. § 197.3632. 
    Parcel control number means an identification number assigned to each parcel of real property by 
the property appraiser. 
    Pattern of nuisance activity means the police department has responded to three or more nuisance 
activities at a property within six months, or seven or more nuisance activities at the property within one 
year. 
    Private security means any security personnel employed by an alcoholic beverage establishment, 
including bouncers, door keepers, crowd controllers and extra duty detail. 
    Property appraiser means the county officer charged with determining the value of all property within 
the county, with maintaining certain records connected therewith, and with determining the tax on taxable 
property after taxes have been levied. 
    Property owner or owner means any individual, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, 
business entity, trustee, legal representative or duly authorized agent who, alone or jointly or severally 
with others, holds legal title to an improved or unimproved parcel of real property located within the 
corporate boundary of the city. 
    Refuse means leaves, dregs, rubbish, trash or waste material. 
    Special assessment means an assessment levied pursuant to the home rule power of the city that 
provides a direct, special benefit to assessed real property and is fairly and reasonably apportioned 
among the properties that receive the special benefit. 
    Tax collectors means the tax collector for Orange County, Florida. 
    Underbrush means any undergrowth or brush conducive to the collection of insects and rodents, 
which may be or may become a fire hazard, or may negatively impact adjoining property. 
    Unfit or unsafe dwelling or structure means any dwelling or structure, or portions thereof, and 
accessory buildings which are structurally unsafe, unstable, or unsanitary; inadequately provided with exit 
facilities; constitute a fire hazard; unsuitable or improper for the use or occupancy to which they are put; 
constitute a hazard to health or safety because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence or 
abandonment; dangerous to life or property of the occupant thereof or of the surrounding areas; unfit for 
human habitation if so intended or used; or otherwise in violation of the housing, building, electrical, 
plumbing, mechanical, sanitation and/or fire codes of the city. 
    Weeds means any plants that are useless, invasive, or injurious to crops, grasses, landscaping, 
shrubs, trees, or flowers. 
(Code 1993, § 42-39; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Sec. 38-25. - Nuisance abatement program; supplemental means of enforcement. 
(a) ?Pursuant to F.S. §§ 162.13 and 166.0415(7), the nuisance abatement program is a supplemental 
means of enforcing city codes and ordinances. A public nuisance also constitutes a code violation 
and the city is not limited to a choice of remedy to ensure compliance with its codes. Code 
enforcement proceedings are punitive and involve fines levied against the subject property, which 
may be collected pursuant to F.S. § 162.09. In contrast, nuisance abatement pursuant to this article 
is remedial in nature and specifically designed to immediately, or as soon as practicable, bring the 
property into compliance, thereby protecting the public welfare and directly improving and benefiting 
the property upon which the nuisance is abated. 
(b) ?In addition to nuisance abatement proceedings, the city may institute code enforcement 
proceedings against a property for an occurrence of a violation. However, once the subject 
violation/nuisance is abated, that occurrence of the code violation has ceased and no further code 
enforcement penalties may accrue for that specific occurrence. 
(c) ?Repeat nuisance violations. Following the first notice under this article to abate a nuisance as 
described herein, any subsequent violation of the same nuisance classification on the same property 
within a 12-month period may be abated by the city without further notice so long as the initial notice 
and order of abatement specifically provides for such subsequent abatement therein. All costs of 
abating the repeat nuisance, including administrative fees and costs, shall constitute a special 
assessment against said property. 
(Code 1993, § 42-40; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Sec. 38-26. - Powers and duties of the nuisance inspector. 
(a) ?The nuisance inspector and/or his designee (e.g., code enforcement personnel) shall be charged 
with the duty of administering the applicable standards and reporting noncompliance therewith, and 
in furtherance of this responsibility, the nuisance inspector and/or his designee shall make such 
inspections, compile such facts and evidence, and prepare such reports as may be necessary to 
effectuate the purpose and intent of this article. The nuisance inspector's findings, evidence and 
reports shall be sent to the manager appointed to oversee code enforcement issues for review. 
(b) ?The nuisance inspector and his designee are hereby authorized to enter upon private property in 
order to enforce the provisions of this article, and shall be immune from all civil and criminal liability 
while under the discharge of duties imposed herein. When necessary to obtain such entry, the 
nuisance inspector may institute appropriate proceedings to obtain a warrant. 
(c) ?In the case of an obvious unfit and unsafe dwelling, structure, or other condition which, after 
inspection is determined to be uninhabited, the nuisance inspector shall cause to be posted a "No 
Trespassing" sign in an attempt to warn third parties who might be exposed to the risk of danger 
created by the unsafe condition. However, the city does not assume any liability for harm to third 
parties caused by the unfit and unsafe dwelling, structure, or condition under any circumstances. 
(Code 1993, § 42-41; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Secs. 38-27—38-55. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE 


Sec. 38-56. - Publication of annual notice. 
(a) ?The city council shall cause to be published in a newspaper of regular published and in general 
circulation within the city, once a week for two consecutive weeks each year hereafter, a notice 
reading substantially as follows: 
    "ATTENTION OWNERS, AGENTS, CUSTODIANS, LESSEES AND OCCUPANTS OF REAL 
PROPERTY WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS OF THE CITY OF APOPKA: 
    You are hereby notified that you are required by law to cut and prevent the excessive 
accumulation of weeds, underbrush, grass or other dead and living plant life upon your improved 
property; to remove any trash, debris, refuse, inoperable or abandoned vehicles or appliances, or 
other nocuous matter located on any property owned, controlled or occupied by you in the City of 
Apopka; and also to repair, restore or demolish any unfit or unsafe structure located upon such 
property; and that upon failure to do so, the City of Apopka will institute nuisance abatement 
proceedings against your property and cause such nuisance to be abated. The cost of such 
abatement will constitute a special assessment lien against the property on which the nuisance is 
located. Such special assessment lien shall be co-equal with the liens of all state, county, district, 
and municipal taxes and superior in dignity to mortgages and all other liens, irrespective of the date 
of the recording of the municipal lien, of the date of the recording of any mortgage, or any other lien 
on real property. A failure to pay said lien, even such lien upon homestead property, may result in a 
loss of title to your property." 
(b) ?A failure to publish this notice as provided for herein shall not invalidate any nuisance abatement 
proceedings brought pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1993, § 42-42; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Sec. 38-57. - Nuisance abatement enforcement procedure. 
(a) ?Preliminary finding of nuisance property. 
(1) ?If the nuisance inspector determines that a nuisance activity exists upon real property, the city 
shall notify the property owner in accordance with section 38-58. The preliminary finding of a 
nuisance property shall contain at least the following information: 
a. ?A reference to chapter 38, article II (the City of Apopka Nuisance Property Code); 
b. ?The address and parcel control number of the property; 
c. ?The date that the nuisance activities occurred at the property; 
d. ?A description of the conditions or activity which may constitute a public nuisance; 
e. ?A date by which the property owner shall bring the property into compliance to correct the 
nuisance; 
f. ?A statement that the cost of any services provided by the city to a property that has been 
declared to be a nuisance shall constitute a special assessment lien against the property 
as a non-ad valorem assessment superior to all other private rights, interests, liens, 
encumbrances, titles and claims upon the property and equal in rank and dignity with a lien 
for ad valorem taxes; and 
g. ?A statement that unpaid assessments may be certified to the tax collector for collection 
pursuant to the uniform method in F.S. § 197.3632. 
(2) ?Should the nuisance continue beyond the date specified for correction, the nuisance inspector 
shall schedule a hearing before the hearing officer. 
(b) ?Pattern of nuisance activity; police. 
(1) ?Pattern of nuisance activity. Real property shall be deemed to exhibit a pattern of nuisance 
activity if: 
a. ?The police department has responded to three or more nuisance activities at the property 
within six months; or 
b. ?The police department has responded to seven or more nuisance activities at the property 
within one year; or 
c. ?An alcoholic beverage establishment that employs private security is located on the 
property and the police department has responded to seven or more nuisance activities at 
the property within 30 days, or 25 or more nuisance activities at the property with six 
months. 
(2) ?Construction and application. A pattern of nuisance activity shall not be construed to include: 
a. ?A nuisance activity where the property owner, agent, tenant, or invitee of the property 
owner, agent or tenant is the victim of a crime; or 
b. ?A complaint or call for service to which the city responded and the city determined that no 
violation was committed. 
(3) ?Separate occurrences. For the purpose of this article, each day that the police department 
responds to a nuisance activity at the property shall be a separate occurrence. 
(Code 1993, § 42-43; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Sec. 38-58. - Preliminary finding of nuisance property; development, adequacy and implementation of 
action plan (written warning). 
(a) ?Preliminary finding of nuisance property. If a pattern of nuisance activity exists upon real property, 
the city shall notify the property owner in accordance with section 38-57. The preliminary finding of 
nuisance property shall contain at least the following information: 
(1) ?A reference to chapter 38, article II (the City of Apopka Nuisance Property Code); 
(2) ?The address and parcel control number of the property; 
(3) ?The dates that the nuisance activities occurred at the property; 
(4) ?A description of the nuisance activities; 
(5) ?A statement that the property owner is required to provide the city with a written action plan 
outlining the specific measures that the property owner will take to curtail or eliminate the re-
occurrence of nuisance activities on the property. A statement that the action plan must be 
provided to the city no later than 15 days from the date of the preliminary finding of nuisance 
property; 
(6) ?A statement that failure to provide the city with a written action plan will result in a declaration 
that the property is a nuisance; 
(7) ?A statement that the costs of any nuisance services provided by the city to a property that has 
been declared to be a chronic nuisance may be levied against the property as a non-ad valorem 
assessment superior to all other private rights, interests, liens, encumbrances, titles and claims 
upon the property and equal in rank and dignity with a lien for ad valorem taxes; and 
(8) ?A statement that unpaid assessments may be certified to the tax collector for collection 
pursuant to the uniform method provided in F.S. § 197.3632. 
(b) ?Development of action plan. The property owner shall provide the city with a written action plan 
outlining the specific measures that the owner will take to curtail or eliminate the re-occurrence of 
nuisance activities at the property. The property owner shall provide the action plan to the city no 
later than 15 days from the date of the preliminary finding of nuisance property. Failure to provide the 
city with a timely action plan shall be a violation of this section. 
(c) ?Adequacy and implementation of action plan. If the city determines that the action plan is adequate 
to curtail or eliminate the re-occurrence of nuisance activities on the property, the city shall notify the 
property owner. The city shall establish a reasonable time period not exceeding 45 days from the 
date that the action plan is determined to be adequate to implement the action plan. Failure to 
implement the action plan within the time period established by the city shall be a violation of this 
section. If the property owner implements the action plan within the time period established by the 
city, no further action shall be required, except that the city may require the property owner to revise 
the action plan in the event that a nuisance activity re-occurs. 
(d) ?Revision of inadequate action plan. If the city determines that the action plan is not adequate to 
curtail or eliminate the re-occurrence of nuisance activities on the property, the city may require the 
property owner to revise the action plan. The property owner shall provide the revised action plan to 
the city no later than ten days for the date that the action plan is determined to be inadequate. 
Failure to revise the action or to provide the city with the timely revised action plan shall be a 
violation of this section. The provision of an inadequate action plan on three consecutive occasions 
shall be a violation of this section. 
(e) ?Factors determining adequacy of action plan. Factors to be considered in determining the adequacy 
of an action plan shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1) ?Commencement of an eviction action pursuant to F.S. ch. 83, to remove those individuals 
engaged in the nuisance activity; 
(2) ?Implementation of crime prevention through environmental design (CPTED) measures; 
(3) ?Posting of "no trespassing" signs at the property and execution of a "no trespass" affidavit 
authorizing the police department to act as an agent of the property owner to enforce trespass 
statutes on the property; 
(4) ?Hiring of private security; 
(5) ?Hiring property management; 
(6) ?Frequency of site visits and inspections at various times of both day and night; 
(7) ?Installation of security cameras; 
(8) ?Criminal background checks for prospective tenants and lease renewals; 
(9) ?Written documentation of all efforts to curtail or eliminate the re-occurrence of nuisance 
activities on the property. 
(f) ?Notice of the hearing. Notice of the hearing before the hearing officer shall: 
(1) ?Identify the property at issue; 
(2) ?Identify the owner of the property as ascertained by a reasonable search of the property 
appraiser's records or search of the public records; 
(3) ?Describe the condition or activity which may constitute a public nuisance; 
(4) ?Set the date, time and place for the hearing before the hearing officer, at which the owner shall 
have the opportunity to present such evidence and/or argument to the hearing officer as to why 
said building, structure or condition should not be considered a nuisance and its abatement, 
removal or destruction required; 
(5) ?Include a statement providing that a failure to respond or appear at the hearing shall be 
deemed an admission of the existence of a public nuisance on the property at issue, which may 
result in abatement of the nuisance by the city and levy of an assessment against the property 
pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1993, § 42-44; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Sec. 38-59. - Declaration of nuisance property; entry of nuisance service order. 
    If the owner of a nuisance property fails to satisfy any requirement of this article, the city may declare 
the property to be a nuisance. The city shall notify the property owner, and the notice shall contain at 
least the following information: 
(1) ?The address and parcel control number of the property; 
(2) ?A description of the facts constituting a violation of this article; 
(3) ?A copy of the preliminary finding of nuisance property; 
(4) ?A statement that the property owner failed to appear at the scheduled public hearing to contest 
the declaration of nuisance property; 
(5) ?A statement that the costs of any unpaid nuisance services provided by the city may be levied 
against the property as a non-ad valorem assessment superior to all other private rights, 
interests, liens, encumbrances, titles and claims upon the property and equal in rank and dignity 
with liens for ad valorem taxes; and 
(6) ?A statement that unpaid assessments may be certified to the tax collector for collection 
pursuant to the uniform method provided in F.S. § 197.3632. 
(Code 1993, § 42-45; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Sec. 38-60. - Notice of code enforcement hearing. 
    Notice of such hearing shall be made by serving a certified copy of said notice of public hearing upon 
the owner, if the owner is able to be located within the city, by the chief of police or his designee or 
process server in the manner as near as practicable to the manner in which a summons is served as 
provided by the laws of the state. In the event that it is determined that the owner is not available for 
service within the city, service shall be perfected by at least one of the following: 
(1) ?Mailing, via registered or certified mail, a certified copy of the notice of public hearing at least 
ten days prior to the date of the hearing to the owner and mortgagee of record; 
(2) ?Publication of the notice of public hearing. Such notice shall be published once for four 
consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. The last date of 
publication shall be at least one day prior to the hearing. The newspaper shall meet such 
requirements as are prescribed under F.S. ch. 50 for legal and official advertisement; or 
(3) ?If the property is in foreclosure proceeding and has been abandoned by the owner as 
evidenced by the property being vacant, and the owner has not provided a forwarding address 
nor is participating in the foreclosure proceedings by filing an answer, or has otherwise been 
unable to be served; service by certified mail to the owner's last address of record and service 
upon the bank or mortgage company of record in the foreclosure proceedings by certified mail 
shall be deemed sufficient notice. 
(Code 1993, § 42-46; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Sec. 38-61. - Order of abatement. 
(a) ?The hearing before the hearing officer shall be an evidentiary hearing. After reviewing the record, 
and if no evidence is presented to the contrary, the hearing officer shall issue an nuisance order of 
abatement affirming the existence of the nuisance and requiring the owner of the property to abate 
the nuisance condition within a reasonable time, to be determined by the hearing officer in the order, 
and provide for abatement of the nuisance by the city forces and/or private contractors hired by the 
city if such conditions are not corrected as of the time determined by the hearing officer. The 
decision of the hearing officer shall be in writing and shall be deemed final. 
(b) ?The hearing officer may require any or all measures as are reasonably necessary to abate the 
nuisance. These measures may include, but are not necessarily limited to, the cutting of vegetation, 
removal of debris and/or abandoned materials, repair and/or maintenance of structures, and/or the 
demolition of unfit or unsafe structures. 
(c) ?If the hearing officer upholds the declaration of nuisance property, the hearing officer shall enter a 
nuisance order of abatement. The city shall provide a copy of the order to the property owner in 
accordance with section 38-60. At a minimum, the nuisance order of abatement shall: 
(1) ?Identify the property; 
(2) ?Identify the owner of the property and any interested parties upon whom notice was served; 
(3) ?Set forth the conditions supporting the finding of a public nuisance and/or specify the sections 
of this article upon which the finding of a public nuisance was based; 
(4) ?Require the abatement of the nuisance within such time as the hearing officer determines to be 
reasonable, considering the nature of the nuisance, the danger to the public, and the amount of 
work involved to abate the nuisance; 
(5) ?Include a statement advising that upon the owner's failure to comply with the order of 
abatement by removing the nuisance, the city may vacate, demolish, remove, or otherwise 
abate the nuisance in accordance with the order of abatement, and the expense of such 
performance by the city or its independent contractor shall be charged against the real property 
as a special assessment, and such assessment shall be co-equal with the liens of all state, 
county, district, and municipal taxes and superior in dignity to mortgages and all other liens, 
irrespective of the date of the recording of the municipal lien or the date of the recording of any 
mortgage or any other lien or real property. A failure to pay said lien, even such lien upon 
homestead property, may result in a loss of title to the property, and said lien may be collected 
pursuant to any manner specified by law; 
(6) ?Provide for the mailing of a copy of the nuisance order of abatement by first class mail to any 
mortgagee of record. Failure to provide a copy of the nuisance order of abatement to a 
mortgagee of record shall not operate to release or discharge any obligation under this article or 
otherwise affect the validity of a nuisance order of abatement; 
(7) ?Provide for the recording of a certified copy of the nuisance order of abatement in the public 
records; and 
(8) ?Provide for continuing jurisdiction over the nuisance property, and that any reoccurrence of the 
nuisance within a 12-month period may be abated by the city without the need for further 
proceedings, and the cost to abate the repeat nuisance shall constitute a special assessment 
against the property. 
(Code 1993, § 42-47; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Sec. 38-62. - Extension of time to comply. 
    In the event of extenuating circumstances such that the property owner is unable to complete 
abatement within the time provided within the order, the owner may file a written request before the 
hearing officer for an extension of the time to comply, stating the reason he has been unable to complete 
compliance. If reasonable grounds are shown, the hearing officer is authorized to extend the time in 
which to complete compliance with the original nuisance order of abatement. 
(Code 1993, § 42-48; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Sec. 38-63. - Failure to comply. 
    If the owner or other parties in interest fail to comply with a nuisance order of abatement made 
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter within the time therein fixed, the city is authorized to vacate, 
demolish, remove, or otherwise abate the nuisance in accordance with such order, either with city forces 
or by an independent contractor, and neither shall be held liable for trespass, conversion, or other 
damages while abating the nuisance in a reasonable manner. 
(Code 1993, § 42-49; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Sec. 38-64. - Emergency order. 
    Whenever, in the opinion of the city council, any nuisance in violation of this chapter is an immediate 
threat to life, limb, health, welfare, or property, the city council may issue an emergency order and 
immediately terminate or abate the nuisance. 
(Code 1993, § 42-50; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Sec. 38-65. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by any order entered under this article may file an appeal to the circuit court of 
the county. Such appeal shall not be a hearing de novo, but shall be limited to appellate review of the 
record created before the hearing officer. The appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the rendition of the 
final order to be appealed. 
(Code 1993, § 42-51; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Sec. 38-66. - Attorney fees. 
    The prevailing party in any legal action, appeal, or proceeding instituted to contest any city council or 
nuisance abatement board order or action pursuant to this chapter shall be entitled to reasonable attorney 
fees and costs, notwithstanding, in the event the city prevails, that the attorney handling the matter may 
be an employee of the city. 
(Code 1993, § 42-52; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Sec. 38-67. - Abatement of nuisance; provision of services. 
(a) ?Abatement by city. The city may abate a nuisance on real property by providing nuisance services 
which will reduce or abate the nuisance. The costs of such nuisance services may be charged to the 
property owner and such charges may be collected by the city by any legal name. 
(b) ?Apportionment. Nuisance service costs shall be apportioned as a special assessment, which 
assessment, when made constitute a lien upon such real property receiving the nuisance service. 
The lien of the city shall encompass, in addition to the abatement cost for the vacation or removal of 
the facility, all administrative, legal, postal and publication expenses, as well as all other direct or 
indirect costs associated therewith. The lien upon the property shall be superior to all others except 
taxes as previously set forth herein. 
(Code 1993, § 42-53; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Sec. 38-68. - Establishment of costs; billing of costs; notice of delinquency; unpaid costs to constitute 
non-ad valorem assessment; method of collection. 
(a) ?Nuisance service costs to be established by resolution. All nuisance service costs shall be 
established by resolution of the city council. No nuisance service costs shall be modified other than 
by resolution of the city council. Nuisance service costs shall only be in the amount established by 
resolution of the city council. 
(b) ?The city shall bill nuisance service costs to the owner of the nuisance property by first class mail to 
the address listed on the ad valorem tax roll. The bill shall contain at least the following information: 
(1) ?The address and parcel control number of the nuisance property; 
(2) ?The date of each nuisance service; 
(3) ?A description of each nuisance service; 
(4) ?The amount of the bill for each nuisance service; 
(5) ?A statement that the total amount of the bill shall be paid to the city within 30 days from the 
date of the bill and that any nuisance cost which has not been paid within 30 days from the date 
of the bill shall be delinquent; 
(6) ?A statement that any unpaid nuisance costs will be levied against the property as a non-ad 
valorem assessment superior to all other private rights, interests, liens, encumbrances, titles 
and claims upon the property and equal in rank and dignity with a lien for ad valorem taxes; and 
(7) ?A statement that unpaid assessments may be certified to the tax collector for collection 
pursuant to the uniform method provided in F.S. § 197.3632. 
(c) ?Notice of delinquency. The total amount of the bill shall be paid to the city within 30 days from the 
date of the bill. Any nuisance service costs which have not been paid within 30 days from the date of 
the bill shall be delinquent. If the property owner fails to pay the total amount of the bill within 30 days 
from the date of the bill, the city shall notify the property owner of the delinquency. The notice of 
delinquency shall be by first class mail to the address listed on the ad valorem tax roll and shall 
contain at least the following information: 
(1) ?The address and parcel control number of the property; 
(2) ?The amount of the delinquent billings, individual and total; 
(3) ?A statement that any unpaid nuisance service costs will be levied as a non-ad valorem 
assessment superior to all other private rights, interests, liens, encumbrances, titles and claims 
upon the property and equal in rank and dignity with a lien for ad valorem taxes; and 
(4) ?A statement that unpaid assessments may be certified to the tax collector for collection 
pursuant to the uniform method provided in F.S. § 197.3632. 
(d) ?Construction of nuisance service cost. Nuisance service cost shall not include any amount 
attributable to general law enforcement activities or the general enforcement of municipal codes 
upon a property that has not been declared by the city to be a nuisance and that has not received a 
nuisance order of abatement from the hearing officer. 
(e) ?Such municipal lien which shall remain unpaid after 30 days shall bear interest from such date at 
the rate of eight percent per annum. However, the assessment may be paid without interest at any 
time within 30 days after the improvement is completed. The city may enforce the lien upon the real 
property of the owner, as provided for in F.S. ch. 173, as amended from time to time. 
(f) ?In the alternative, the city may collect all such liens assessed pursuant to F.S. § 197.3632, as 
authorized pursuant to F.S. § 197.3632(9). 
(Code 1993, § 42-54; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Sec. 38-69. - Notice; computation of time. 
(a) ?Mailing of notice. Unless otherwise provided, notice required by this article shall be by certified mail, 
electronic return receipt required, and by first class mail to the address listed on the ad valorem tax 
roll. 
(b) ?Computation of time. If any time period prescribed by this article is ten days or less, intermediate 
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays shall be excluded from the computation of time. The date of the 
preliminary finding of nuisance property, declaration of nuisance property or nuisance order of 
abatement shall not be included in the computation of time. The date of the preliminary finding of 
nuisance property shall be the date printed on the notice sent to the property owner. 
(c) ?Construction of notice. A property owner shall be deemed to have notice of nuisance activity if the 
property owner: 
(1) ?Has actual knowledge of the nuisance activity; 
(2) ?Has received notice of the nuisance activity; 
(3) ?Has reason to know about the nuisance activity; 
(4) ?Knows about a fact related to the nuisance activity; or 
(5) ?Is able to ascertain the existence of a nuisance by checking an official filing or recording. 
The lack of knowledge of, acquiescence, or participation in, or responsibility for a nuisance activity on the 
part of the property owner shall not be a defense. 
(Code 1993, § 42-55; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Sec. 38-70. - Registration of distressed vacant property. 
(a) ?Registration by owner. Every owner of a nuisance property that is also distressed vacant property 
shall register with the city in accordance with division 5 of this chapter, registration, maintenance and 
security of abandoned real property. 
(b) ?Registration by foreclosing mortgagee. Every foreclosing mortgagee of a nuisance property that is 
also distressed vacant property shall register with the city in accordance with division 5 of this 
chapter, registration, maintenance and security of abandoned real property. 
(Code 1993, § 42-56; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Sec. 38-71. - Construction of article. 
(a) ?Levy of special assessment. This article shall not be construed to limit the city from levying special 
assessments in accordance with F.S. § 197.3632. 
(b) ?Imposition of administrative fines. This article shall not be construed to limit the city from imposing 
administrative fines in accordance with this Code. 
(c) ?Exemptions. This article shall not be construed to apply to property owned by the city and any other 
governmental entity. 
(d) ?Provision of this article supplemental. Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit the authority 
of the city to collect special assessments by any other method according to law. 
(Code 1993, § 42-57; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Secs. 38-72—38-100. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 3. - LEVY AND COLLECTION OF NON-AD VALOREM ASSESSMENTS 


Sec. 38-101. - Unpaid nuisance service costs; non-ad valorem assessment. 
    Any nuisance service costs that remain delinquent and unpaid as of June 1 of each year shall be a 
special assessment levied against the benefited real property as a non-ad valorem assessment superior 
to all other private rights, interests, liens, encumbrances, titles, and claims upon the benefited real 
property and equal in rank and dignity with a lien for ad valorem taxes. 
(Code 1993, § 42-58; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Sec. 38-102. - Initial assessment roll. 
(a) ?Contents of initial assessment roll. The code enforcement supervisor shall, annually, prepare or 
direct the preparation of an initial assessment roll, which shall contain the following: 
(1) ?A summary description of all benefited real property with delinquent nuisance service costs to 
be assessed, conforming to the description contained on the ad valorem tax roll; 
(2) ?The name of the owner of the benefited real property as listed on the ad valorem tax roll and 
maintained on the property appraiser's system; and 
(3) ?The amount of the nuisance service costs to be assessed against each parcel of benefited real 
property. 
(b) ?Public inspection of initial assessment roll. The initial assessment roll shall be retained by the city 
clerk and shall be open to public inspection. The foregoing shall not be construed to require that the 
assessment roll be in printed form in the amount of the nuisance service assessment for each parcel 
of benefited real property; however, the amount can be determined by use of a computer terminal 
available to the public. 
(c) ?Notice of property appraiser. A copy of the initial assessment roll shall be mailed to the property 
appraiser and included as a part of the notice of proposed property taxes under F.S. § 200.069, the 
truth-in-millage notification. 
(Code 1993, § 42-59; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Sec. 38-103. - Notice of public hearing. 
(a) ?Public hearing. The city council shall adopt a non-ad valorem assessment roll at a public hearing in 
accordance with F.S. § 197.3632. 
(b) ?Notice by mail. 
(1) ?The city shall notice the hearing related to the initial assessment roll by first class mail. The 
notice by mail shall be sent to each person owning property subject to the assessment, and 
shall include the following information: 
a. ?The purpose of the assessment; 
b. ?The total amount to be levied against each parcel of assessed real property; 
c. ?A statement that failure to pay the assessment will cause a tax certificate to be issued 
against the property, which may result in loss of title; 
d. ?A statement that all affected property owners have a right to appear at the hearing and to 
file written objections with the city council within 20 days of the notice; and 
e. ?The date, time and place of the hearing. 
(2) ?The mailed notice shall conform to the requirements set forth in F.S. § 197.3632. Notice shall 
be mailed at least 20 calendar days prior to the hearing to each property owner at the address 
listed on the ad valorem tax roll. Failure of the property owner to receive such notice due to 
mistake or inadvertence shall not affect the validity of the assessment roll nor release or 
discharge any obligation for payment of a nuisance service assessment. 
(c) ?Notice by publication. The city shall notice the hearing related to the initial assessment roll by 
publication in a newspaper generally circulated within the county. The publication notice shall 
conform to the requirements set forth in F.S. § 197.3632, and shall contain at least the following 
information: 
(1) ?Identifying the city; 
(2) ?A geographic depiction of the city boundaries subject to the assessment; 
(3) ?A brief and general description of the nuisance service provided; 
(4) ?The proposed schedule of assessment; 
(5) ?The fact that the assessment will be collected by the tax collector; 
(6) ?A statement that all affected property owners have the right to appear at the public hearing and 
the right to file a written objection within 20 days of the publication of the notice; and 
(7) ?A statement that the initial assessment roll is available for inspection at the office of the city 
clerk and that all interested persons may ascertain the amount to be assessed against a parcel 
of assessed real property at the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1993, § 42-60; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 
State Law reference— Collection of non-ad valorem assessments, F.S. § 197.3632. 


Sec. 38-104. - Public hearing; adoption of final assessment roll. 
(a) ?Public hearing. At the public hearing, the city council shall receive the written objections and shall 
hear testimony from all interested persons. The city council may adjourn the hearing from time to 
time. If the city council adopts the non-ad valorem assessment roll, the city council shall specify the 
amount of the assessment. Notwithstanding the notices provided for in this division, the city council 
may adjust the assessment or the application of the assessment to any assessed real property 
based on the benefit which the city will provide or has provided to the property. 
(b) ?Adoption of final assessment roll. The city council may, at the public hearing or at any subsequent 
meeting of the city council, adopt an assessment roll which shall confirm, modify, or repeal the initial 
assessment roll with such adjustments, if any, as the city council deems equitable. 
(c) ?Legislative determination of special benefit and fair apportionment. The adoption of the final 
assessment roll by the city council shall constitute a legislative determination that all assessed 
parcels of real property derive a special benefit from the nuisance abatement services provided by 
the city and a legislative determination that the assessments are fairly and reasonably apportioned to 
the properties. 
(Code 1993, § 42-61; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 
State Law reference— Collection of non-ad valorem assessments, F.S. § 197.3632. 


Sec. 38-105. - Lien of nuisance assessments. 
    Upon the adoption of the assessment roll, all nuisance abatement service assessments shall 
constitute a lien against the assessed real property, superior to all other private rights, interests, liens, 
encumbrances, titles and claims upon the property and equal in rank and dignity with a lien for ad 
valorem taxes. The lien for a nuisance abatement service assessment shall be deemed perfected upon 
the city council's adoption of the final assessment roll. The lien for a nuisance abatement service 
assessment collected pursuant to F.S. § 197.3632, and shall attach to the property included on the 
assessment roll of the prior January 1, the lien date for ad valorem taxes imposed under the tax roll. 
(Code 1993, § 42-62; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Sec. 38-106. - Correction of errors and omissions. 
(a) ?Validity of assessment. Any informality or irregularity in the proceedings in connection with the levy 
of the nuisance abatement service assessment shall not affect the validity of the assessment after 
approval by the city council. A nuisance abatement service assessment as finally approved by the 
city council shall be competent evidence that the assessment was duly levied, made and adopted, 
and that all other proceedings were duly taken. No act of error or omission on the part of the property 
appraiser, tax collector, finance director, or other employee of the city shall operate to release or 
discharge any obligation for payment of a nuisance abatement service assessment imposed by the 
city under this article. 
(b) ?Correction of errors by finance director. Prior to the delivery of the assessment roll to the tax 
collector in accordance with F.S. § 197.3632, the finance director shall have authority at any time to 
correct any error or omission in applying the assessment to any particular parcel of assessed real 
property not otherwise requiring the provision of notice pursuant to F.S. § 197.3632. Any such 
correction shall be considered valid ab initio, and shall not affect the enforcement of the nuisance 
abatement service assessment. Any such correction shall be processed by the finance director, and 
not the property appraiser or tax collector. 
(Code 1993, § 42-63; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Sec. 38-107. - Method of collection. 
    Unless otherwise directed by the city council, nuisance abatement service assessments shall be 
collected pursuant to the uniform method in F.S. § 197.3632. Any hearing or notice required by this 
division may be combined with any other hearing or notice required by F.S. § 197.3632, or other provision 
of law. 
(Code 1993, § 42-64; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Sec. 38-108. - Alternative method of collection. 
(a) ?In lieu of using F.S. § 197.3632, the city may elect to collect a nuisance abatement service 
assessment by any other method authorized by law or under the alternative collection method 
provided by this section. 
(b) ?The city shall have the right to foreclose and collect all delinquent nuisance abatement service 
assessments in the manner provided by law for the foreclosure of mortgages on real property. All 
costs, fees and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and title search expenses, related to 
any foreclosure action shall be included in any judgment or decree rendered. 
(c) ?Notwithstanding the city's use of an alternative method of collection, the finance director shall have 
the same power and authority to correct errors and omissions as provided in this division. 
(Code 1993, § 42-65; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Secs. 38-109—38-129. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 4. - JUNKED, WRECKED OR ABANDONED PROPERTY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Junked, abandoned property, F.S. § 705.101 et seq.; removal of abandoned or 
lost property on public property, F.S. § 705.103; requirements for abandoned appliances, F.S. § 823.07 et 
seq. 


Sec. 38-130. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings 
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned property means wrecked or derelict property which has been left abandoned and 
unprotected from the elements, and shall include, but not be limited to, wrecked, inoperative, unlicensed 
or partially dismantled motor vehicles which have remained in a state of disuse for 30 days or more, and 
shall include trailers, boats, recreational vehicles and similar vehicles, machinery, refrigerators, washing 
machines, plumbing fixtures, furniture and any other similar article. 
    Enforcement officer means the code enforcement officer. 
    Public property means lands and improvements owned by the federal government, the state, the 
county or the city, lying within the city, and includes buildings, grounds, parks, playgrounds, streets, 
sidewalks, parkways, rights-of-way and other similar property. 
(Code 1983, § 14-21; Code 1993, § 42-100; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 
State Law reference— Definitions, F.S. § 705.101. 


Sec. 38-131. - Immunity of enforcement officers from prosecution for trespass. 
    The code enforcement officer and any person authorized by him shall be immune from civil or 
criminal prosecution for reasonable good faith trespass upon real property while in the discharge of duties 
imposed by this division. 
(Code 1983, § 14-24; Code 1993, § 42-101; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 
State Law reference— Duty of code enforcement officer, F.S. § 705.1015. 


Sec. 38-132. - Removal from private property. 
(a) ?Whenever the code enforcement officer shall ascertain that an article of abandoned property is 
present on private property within the limits of the city and is so located upon private property that is 
not zoned so as to allow specifically the presence of abandoned property as defined in this article or 
the owner of the property is not licensed by the city to deal in abandoned or junk property, the code 
enforcement officer shall cause a notice to be placed upon such article in substantially the following 
form: 
    NOTICE TO THE OWNER AND ALL PERSONS INTERESTED IN THE ATTACHED 
PROPERTY: 
    This property, to wit: (setting forth brief description) located at (setting forth brief description of 
location) is improperly stored and is in violation of (setting forth ordinance or regulation violated) and 
must be removed within ten days from the date of this notice, otherwise it shall be presumed to be 
abandoned property and will be removed and destroyed by order of the City of Apopka, Florida. 
Dated this: (setting forth date of posting of notice). 
Signed: (setting forth name, title, address and telephone number of enforcement officer). 
Such notice shall not be less than eight inches by ten inches in size, and shall be sufficiently 
weatherproof to withstand normal exposure to the elements for the period of ten days. In addition to 
posting, the code enforcement officer shall mail a copy of the notice to the owner of the real property 
upon which the abandoned articles are located as shown by the real estate tax records used by the city, 
on or before the date of posting of such notice. 
(b) ?If, at the end of ten days after posting such notice, the owner or person interested in the abandoned 
articles described in such notice has not removed the articles and complied with this division or the 
regulation cited in the notice, the code enforcement officer may cause the articles of abandoned 
property to be removed and destroyed, and the salvage value, if any, of such articles shall be 
retained by the city and applied against the cost of removal and destruction thereof. 
(c) ?If, at the end of ten days after posting such notice, the owner or person interested in the abandoned 
articles described in such notice has not removed the articles, the nonremoval shall be an offense, 
and the person shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1983, § 14-23; Code 1993, § 42-103; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 
State Law reference— Procedure for abandoned or lost property on public property, F.S. § 
705.103. 


Secs. 38-133—38-162. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 5. - REGISTRATION, MAINTENANCE AND SECURITY OF ABANDONED REAL PROPERTY 


Sec. 38-163. - Abandoned real property; purpose and intent. 
    It is the purpose and intent of the city to establish a process to address the amount of deteriorating 
real property located within the city, which includes property, whether vacant or occupied, about which a 
public notice of default has been filed, is in foreclosure, or where ownership has been transferred to a 
lender or mortgagee by any legal method. It is the city's further intent to specifically establish an 
abandoned residential property program as a mechanism to protect residential neighborhoods from 
becoming blighted through the lack of adequate maintenance and security of abandoned properties. 
(Code 1993, § 42-115; Ord. No. 2185, § 3, 8-4-2010; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Sec. 38-164. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings 
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Enforcement officer means any building official, zoning inspector, code enforcement officer, fire 
inspector or building inspector employed by the city. 
    Evidence of vacancy means any condition that, on its own or combined with other conditions 
present, would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property is vacant. Such conditions may 
include, but not be limited to, overgrown or dead vegetation, accumulation of abandoned real property, as 
defined herein, statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents or government agents, among other 
evidence that the property is vacant. 
    Foreclosure means the process by which a property, placed as security for a real estate loan, is sold 
at public sale to satisfy the debt if the borrower defaults. 
    Property management company means a property manager, property maintenance company or 
similar entity or individual responsible for the maintenance of abandoned real property. 
    Vacant means any building/structure that is not legally occupied. 
(Code 1993, § 42-116; Ord. No. 2185, § 3, 8-4-2010; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Sec. 38-165. - Applicability. 
    This division shall be considered cumulative and not superseding or subject to any other law or 
provision for same, but shall rather be an additional remedy available to the city above and beyond any 
other state, county or local provisions for same. 
(Code 1993, § 42-117; Ord. No. 2185, § 3, 8-4-2010; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Sec. 38-166. - Penalties; schedule of civil penalties. 
(a) ?Any person who shall violate the provisions of this division shall, upon conviction, be punished as 
provided for in this section. 
(b) ?The following table shows violations of these sections, as may be amended from time to time, which 
may be enforced pursuant to the provisions of this regulation, and the dollar amount of civil penalty 
for the violation of these sections as it may be amended. The descriptions of violations below are for 
informational purposes only, and are not meant to limit or define the nature of the violations or the 
subject matter of the listed Code sections, except to the extent that different types of violations of the 
same Code section may carry different civil penalties. For each Code section listed in the schedule 
of civil penalties, the entirety of that section may be enforced by the mechanism provided in this 
section, regardless of whether all activities prescribed or required are described in the "Description of 
Violation" column. To determine whether a particular activity is prescribed or required by this Code, 
the relevant Code section shall be examined. 
Cod
e  
Sec
tion 
Des
crip
tion 
of 
Viol
atio
n 
Civi
lPe
nalt
y 
38-
168 
Fail
ure 
to 
regi
ster 
aba
ndo
ned 
real 
pro
per
ty 
$50
0.0
0 
38-
169 
Fail
ure 
to 
pro
perl
y 
mai
ntai
n 
aba
ndo
ned 
real 
pro
per
ty 
$50
0.0
0 
38-
170 
Fail
ure 
to 
pro
perl
y 
sec
ure 
aba
ndo
ned 
real 
pro
per
ty 
$50
0.0
0 
38-
171 
Inte
rfer
enc
e 
wit
h 
Cod
e 
Enf
orc
em
ent 
Offi
cer 
$50
0.0
0 

All 
sec
tion
s of 
this 
divi
sio
n 
not 
spe
cific
ally 
list
ed 
in 
this 
sch
edu
le 
$50
0.0
0 
 
(Code 1993, § 42-118; Ord. No. 2185, § 3, 8-4-2010; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Sec. 38-167. - Public nuisance. 
    All abandoned real property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, the abatement of which 
pursuant to the police power of the city is hereby declared to be necessary for the health, welfare and 
safety of the residents of the city. 
(Code 1993, § 42-119; Ord. No. 2185, § 3, 8-4-2010; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Sec. 38-168. - Registration of abandoned real property. 
(a) ?Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within the city shall, upon default by 
the mortgagor, and prior to the issuance of a notice of default, perform an inspection of the property 
that is the security for the mortgage. If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of 
vacancy, it shall be deemed abandoned real property and the mortgagee shall, within ten days of the 
inspection, register the property with the mayor, or his designee, on forms provided by the city. A 
registration is required for each property, whether vacant or occupied. 
(b) ?If the property is occupied but the mortgage on the property remains in default, the property shall be 
inspected by the mortgagee or his designee monthly until: 
(1) ?The mortgagor or other party remedies the default; or 
(2) ?It is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy at which time it is deemed abandoned, 
and the mortgagee shall, within ten days of that inspection, update the property registration to a 
vacancy status providing the date of last inspection with the mayor, or his designee, on forms 
provided by the city. 
(c) ?Registration pursuant to this section shall contain the name of the mortgagee and the servicer, the 
direct mailing address of both parties, a direct contact name and telephone number for both parties, 
a facsimile number and e-mail address for both parties, the folio or tax number, and the name and 
24-hour contact telephone number of the property management company responsible for the 
security and maintenance of the property. 
(d) ?This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the 
title was transferred to the beneficiary of a mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any properties 
transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. 
(e) ?A registration fee in the amount of $200.00 per property shall accompany the registration form. 
(f) ?Properties subject to this section shall remain under the registration requirement, security and 
maintenance standards of this section as long as they remain vacant. 
(g) ?Any person or corporation that has registered a property under this section must report any change 
of information contained in the registration, in writing, within ten days of the change, to the mayor or 
his designee. 
(Code 1993, § 42-120; Ord. No. 2185, § 3, 8-4-2010; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Sec. 38-169. - Maintenance requirements. 
(a) ?Properties subject to this section shall be kept free of weeds, overgrown brush, dead vegetation, 
trash, junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices 
(except those required by federal, state, or local law), abandoned vehicles, portable storage devices, 
discarded personal items, including, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, 
printed material, or any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned. 
(b) ?The property shall be maintained free of graffiti or similar markings by removal or painting over with 
an exterior-grade paint that matches the color of the exterior structure. 
(c) ?Front, side, and rear yards, including landscaping, shall be maintained in accordance with this 
Code. 
(d) ?Yard maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, grass, groundcovers, bushes, shrubs, hedges 
or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or artificial turf/sod designed specifically for residential 
installation. Acceptable maintenance of yards and/or landscaping shall not include weeds, gravel, 
broken concrete, asphalt or similar material. 
(e) ?Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, watering, irrigation, cutting, and mowing of required 
groundcover or landscape and removal of all trimmings. 
(f) ?Pools and spas shall be maintained so that the water remains free and clear of pollutants and debris. 
Pools and spas shall comply with all requirements of this Code and the Florida Building Code, as 
amended from time to time. 
(g) ?Failure of the mortgagee or property owner of record to properly maintain the property may result in 
a violation of this Code and issuance of a citation or notice of violation/notice of hearing by a city 
code enforcement officer. Pursuant to a finding and determination by the city's code enforcement 
hearing officer, the city may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with this section. 
(Code 1993, § 42-121; Ord. No. 2185, § 3, 8-4-2010; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Sec. 38-170. - Security requirements. 
(a) ?Properties subject to this division shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not to be accessible 
to unauthorized persons. 
(b) ?The term "secure manner" shall include, but not be limited to, the closure and locking of windows, 
doors, gates and other openings of such size that may allow a child to access the interior of the 
property or structure. Broken windows shall be secured by re-glazing of the window. 
(c) ?If the property is owned by a corporation or mortgagee that is unable or unwilling to perform 
maintenance and inspections itself, a property management company shall be contracted to perform 
bi-weekly inspections to verify compliance with the requirements of this section, and any other 
applicable laws. 
(d) ?The mortgagee shall inspect or have inspected the property on a bi-weekly basis to ensure that the 
property is in compliance with this section. Upon the request of the city, the mortgagee shall provide 
a copy of the inspection reports to the code enforcement division. 
(e) ?Failure of the mortgagee or property owner of record to properly maintain the property may result in 
a violation of this Code and issuance of a citation or notice of violation/notice of hearing by a city 
code enforcement officer. Pursuant to a finding and determination by the city's code enforcement 
hearing officer, the city may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with this section. 
(Code 1993, § 42-122; Ord. No. 2185, § 3, 8-4-2010; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Sec. 38-171. - Opposing, obstructing enforcement officer; penalty. 
    It shall be unlawful to oppose, obstruct or resist any enforcement officer or any person authorized by 
the enforcement office in the discharge of duties as provided in this division. 
(Code 1993, § 42-123; Ord. No. 2185, § 3, 8-4-2010; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Sec. 38-172. - Immunity of enforcement officer. 
    Any enforcement officer or any person authorized by the enforcement officer shall be immune from 
prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith trespass upon real property while in the discharge 
of duties imposed by this division. 
(Code 1993, § 42-124; Ord. No. 2185, § 3, 8-4-2010; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Sec. 38-173. - Additional authority. 
    The mayor, or his designee, shall have authority to require the mortgagee or owner of record of any 
property affected by this section to implement additional maintenance or security measures including, but 
not limited to, securing any and all doors, windows or other openings, employment of an on-site security 
guard, or other measures as may be reasonably required to prevent a decline of the property. 
(Code 1993, § 42-125; Ord. No. 2185, § 3, 8-4-2010; Ord. No. 2341, § 3, 12-18-2013) 


Secs. 38-174—38-199. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - NEIGHBORHOOD IMPROVEMENT SPECIAL ASSESSMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal improvements assessment procedure, F.S. § 170.01 et seq. 


Sec. 38-200. - Established; area; governing body. 
(a) ?There is hereby established pursuant to the authority of F.S. §§ 166.021 and 170.01 by the city 
council a neighborhood improvement special assessment, which shall encompass the same portion 
of the incorporated area of the city, which is as follows: 
(1) ?Cimarron Hills development. 
(2) ?Mainline Village development. 
(3) ?Maine Avenue Villas development. 
(4) ?Martin Place (Phase I) development. 
(5) ?Martin Place (Phase II) development. 
(b) ?Legal descriptions outlining the individual neighborhood improvement special assessment shall be 
found in the resolution as adopted by the city council and filed with the county property appraiser and 
tax collector establishing said assessment. Individual developments may be added and/or removed 
as deemed necessary by the city council. 
(Code 1993, § 42-200; Ord. No. 2377, § 2(42-100), 9-3-2014) 


Sec. 38-201. - Purpose of article. 
    The neighborhood improvement special assessment is hereby established for the purpose of 
providing neighborhood improvements, stormwater maintenance, street lighting, recreation facilities, 
common area property maintenance, landscape maintenance and other essential facilities and municipal 
services for the area described in section 38-200; provided, however, that any services, facilities, or 
programs provided through the neighborhood improvement special assessment must provide a special 
benefit to assessed property. 
(Code 1993, § 42-201; Ord. No. 2377, § 2(42-101), 9-3-2014) 


Sec. 38-202. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Development and/or subdivision means any and all properties and/or parcels of real property within 
the confines of the legal description as defined in section 38-200. 
(Code 1993, § 42-202; Ord. No. 2377, § 2(42-102), 9-3-2014) 


Sec. 38-203. - Powers of the governing body of neighborhood improvement special assessment. 
    The city council shall be the governing body of the neighborhood improvement special assessment 
areas, and is empowered to: 
(1) ?Acquire in the name of the development by purchase, gift, or the exercise of right of eminent 
domain, such lands and rights and interest therein, including lands under water and riparian 
rights, and acquire such personal property as it may deem necessary in connection with 
furnishing of services authorized by this article, and hold and dispose of all real and personal 
property under its control; provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall 
authorize the power of eminent domain to be exercised beyond the limits of said development 
as outlined in section 38-200. 
(2) ?Make and execute contracts and other instruments necessary or convenient to the exercise of 
its powers. 
(3) ?Employ and/or enter into contracts for services. 
(4) ?Authorize payment of per diem, travel and other reasonable expenses for meetings, hearings 
and other official business. 
(5) ?Contract for the services of engineers, attorneys, accountants, financial or other consultants 
and such other agents as the city council may require or deem necessary. 
(6) ?Borrow money and accept gifts; convey real or personal property; apply for and use grants or 
loans of money or other property from the United States, the state, a local unit of government or 
any other person for any authorized purpose of the development and enter into agreements 
required in connection therewith; and hold, use and dispose of such monies or property for any 
purpose in accordance with the terms of the gift or grant, loan or agreement relating thereto, 
subject to state law applicable to chartered city governments. 
(7) ?Acquire, construct, operate, maintain, equip, extend, enlarge or improve capital projects within 
the development as outlined in section 38-200 that perform the specialized public function 
provided in this article. 
(8) ?Make use of any public easement, dedications to public use or plat reservations for specific 
public purposes within the boundaries of the development for those purposes authorized in this 
article. 
(9) ?Issue revenue bonds, special assessment bonds or combinations thereof to finance the cost of 
capital improvement projects authorized by this article, as now in effect or hereafter amended. 
The procedure for issuing such revenue or assessment bonds or the levying of special 
assessments shall be in the manner as provided by law. 
(10) ?Levy and assess, per lot, tract or acre, special assessments and service charges authorized 
by law to pay the cost of such specialized public functions as are provided for in this article, as 
now and thereafter amended. 
(11) ?Contract with municipalities, cities, towns, counties, or other political subdivisions, public 
corporations or persons, and to provide or receive such specialized public functions or services. 
(Code 1993, § 42-203; Ord. No. 2377, § 2(42-103), 9-3-2014) 


Sec. 38-204. - Establishment of a neighborhood improvement special assessment trust fund. 
    There is hereby established an interest-bearing public trust fund for the deposit, maintenance, and 
distribution of special assessment funds collected or expended as a result of this article. Any funds in the 
trust fund may be used to provide neighborhood improvements, stormwater maintenance, street lighting, 
recreation facilities, common area property maintenance, landscape maintenance and other essential 
facilities and municipal services, as appropriate. 
(Code 1993, § 42-204; Ord. No. 2377, § 2(42-104), 9-3-2014) 


Sec. 38-205. - Authorizing special assessments. 
(a) ?The city council, by resolution in accordance with F.S. § 197.3632, may place a special assessment 
on all real property within the aforementioned developments and deposit funds into a trust fund 
specifically expended for providing neighborhood improvements, stormwater maintenance, street 
lighting, recreation facilities, common area property maintenance, landscape maintenance and other 
essential facilities and municipal services, as appropriate. 
(b) ?Assessments rendered upon those parcels within the development as outlined by resolution of the 
city council shall be a flat fee for the services based on the number of dwelling units on the parcel of 
real property (i.e., should the parcel contain a duplex or multifamily dwelling on the parcel, the parcel 
shall be assessed a proportionate share for each living unit on said real parcel). 
(Code 1993, § 42-205; Ord. No. 2377, § 2(42-105), 9-3-2014) 


Sec. 38-206. - Collection of special assessments. 
    The county property appraiser shall furnish the city council a roll covering all properties within the 
territorial limits of the neighborhood improvement special assessment upon which the council may place 
the levy for each specially assessed parcel. A property owner in such special district shall have the right 
to file a written protest of the proposed special assessment, the amount and rate thereof, and to appear 
before the council in support of such protest. The council shall hold a meeting to consider and act upon 
any such protest. The council shall fix the rate of assessments and shall return the roll to the county 
property appraiser, having first noted hereon the levy against each parcel of property described in this 
article for which a special assessment is made. The county property appraiser shall then include in the 
county tax roll on all required notices the special assessment thus made by the council, and the special 
assessment shall be collected in the manner and form as provided for the collection of ad valorem taxes, 
and paid over by the county tax collector to the city. 
(Code 1993, § 42-206; Ord. No. 2377, § 2(42-106), 9-3-2014) 


Sec. 38-207. - Liens on property. 
    Special assessments imposed pursuant to this article shall be a lien upon the parcel so assessed of 
equal rank and dignity to the lien of county and municipal property taxes until same have been paid, and if 
the same becomes delinquent, shall be considered a part of the county and municipal tax, subject to the 
same penalties, charges, fees and remedies for enforcement and collection, and shall be enforced and 
collected as provided by laws of the state for the collection of such taxes. 
(Code 1993, § 42-207; Ord. No. 2377, § 2(42-107), 9-3-2014) 


Sec. 38-208. - Expenditures of revenue. 
    No funds of the neighborhood improvement special assessment shall be used for any purpose other 
than the administration of the affairs of business of the development, as appropriate, for the providing of 
neighborhood improvements, stormwater maintenance, street lighting, recreation facilities, common area 
property maintenance, landscape maintenance and other essential facilities and municipal services, as 
appropriate. 
(Code 1993, § 42-208; Ord. No. 2377, § 2(42-108), 9-3-2014) 


Sec. 38-209. - Reimbursement of funds for administrative assistance by city officials. 
    All costs and expenses incurred by the city or any of its employees performing any of the provisions 
of this article shall be reimbursed by the neighborhood improvement special assessment funds to the city. 
(Code 1993, § 42-209; Ord. No. 2377, § 2(42-109), 9-3-2014) 


Sec. 38-210. - Right of termination. 
    The city council reserves the right to terminate this article upon notification and confirmation that the 
parcel owners of record as provided in section 38-200 have taken the provisions to re-establish a 
homeowners' association in accordance with state law and have filed same with the United States 
Internal Revenue Service, state department of economic opportunity, state department of state, division 
of corporations, and state department of business and professional regulations, division of Florida 
condominiums, timeshares and mobile homes. At such time that the parcel owners should elect to re-
establish a homeowners' association, any remaining monies owed to the city for the issuance of revenue 
bonds, loans or other financial instruments on behalf of the development shall remain in full force and 
effect until such time as the revenue bonds, loans or other financial instruments have been paid in full. 
The city, however, may adjust the assessments accordingly for those expenses not directly related to the 
issuance of revenue bonds, loans or other financial instruments. The cancellation of the special 
assessments shall be in accordance with the provision of F.S. ch. 197. 
(Code 1993, § 42-210; Ord. No. 2377, § 2(42-110), 9-3-2014) 


Chapter 42 - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 42-1. - Adoption of state misdemeanors. 
(a) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to commit, within the city, any act which is or shall be recognized 
by the laws of the state as a misdemeanor, and the commission of such act is hereby forbidden. 
(b) ?Whosoever shall violate the provisions of this section, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished 
pursuant to section 1-14. 
(Code 1983, § 13-1; Code 1993, § 54-1) 
Case Law reference— A municipality may enact an ordinance which creates an offense against 
municipal law for the same act that constitutes an offense against state law. Jaramillo v. City of 
Homestead, 322 So.2d 496 (1975). 
    A municipality, by ordinance, may adopt state misdemeanor statutes by specific reference or by 
general reference, such as that contained in ordinances making it unlawful to commit, within city limits, 
any act which is or shall be recognized by the laws of the state as a misdemeanor. Id. 
    Adoption of state law misdemeanors by reference includes laws both in existence at the time and 
those later adopted by the state legislature. State v. Smith, 189 So.2d 846. 
State Law reference— Penalty for misdemeanors, F.S. §§ 775.082, 775.083; weapons and 
firearms generally, F.S. ch. 790; discharging firearms in public, F.S. §§ 790.15, 790.22. See also 
Florida Statutes general index under heading "Fines and Civil Penalties" for listing of state law 
misdemeanors. 


Secs. 42-2—42-26. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - CODE ENFORCEMENT CITATION PROGRAM[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Code enforcement, F.S. § 162.01 et seq.; code enforcement citation system, F.S. 
§ 162.21. 


Sec. 42-27. - Authorization of code enforcement citation program. 
    The city hereby creates a supplemental and additional method of enforcing its codes and ordinances 
by the issuance of citations for violation of city codes and ordinances. Nothing contained herein shall 
prohibit the city's enforcement of its codes or ordinances by any other means. 
(Code 1993, § 54-21; Ord. No. 1227, § 1, 12-1-1999) 


Sec. 42-28. - Applicable codes and ordinances. 
    A schedule of Code provisions and ordinances which may be enforced pursuant to the supplemental 
code enforcement citation procedures attached to the ordinance from which this article is derived as 
Exhibit A, and incorporated herein by reference is on file at the city clerk's office. The schedule of Code 
provisions and ordinances shall include Code provisions and ordinances as they may be from time to time 
amended, renumbered, codified or recodified, including Code provisions and ordinances enacted 
subsequent to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Code 1993, § 54-22; Ord. No. 1227, § 2, 12-1-1999) 


Sec. 42-29. - Code enforcement officers. 
(a) ?The mayor is hereby authorized to designate certain employees as code enforcement officers. Code 
enforcement officers so designated shall have the powers and limitations as prescribed herein and 
by statute. 
(b) ?Pursuant to the requirements of F.S. ch. 162, part II (F.S. § 162.21 et seq.), and consistent with the 
procedures set forth in this article, a code enforcement officer may issue a citation alleging a 
violation of any of the Code provisions or ordinances enumerated in Exhibit A which is on file in the 
city clerk's office. A Code provision or ordinance violation for which a citation is issued pursuant to 
this article shall be deemed to be a civil infraction. 
(Code 1993, § 54-23; Ord. No. 1227, § 3, 12-1-1999) 


Sec. 42-30. - Procedures; investigation of violation; issuance of citations. 
(a) ?A code enforcement officer is hereby authorized to issue a citation to any person for violation of any 
Code provision or ordinance listed in Exhibit A which is on file in the city clerk's office when, based 
upon personal investigation, the code enforcement officer has reasonable cause to believe that the 
person has committed a civil infraction in violation of a duly enacted Code provision or ordinance and 
that the county court will hear the charge. 
(b) ?Except as provided by subsection (c) of this section, the code enforcement officer shall provide 
notice to the person that the person has committed a violation of a code or ordinance, and shall 
establish a reasonable time period within which the person must correct the violation. Such time 
period to correct the violation shall not exceed 30 days. 
(c) ?A code enforcement officer is not required to provide the person with a reasonable time period to 
correct the violation prior to issuing a citation and may immediately issue a citation if a repeat 
violation is found or if the code enforcement officer has reason to believe that the violation presents a 
serious threat to the public health, safety, or welfare, or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible. 
(d) ?Written warning notices, if applicable, and citations shall be provided to the alleged violator by hand-
delivery by the code enforcement officer. In the absence of the alleged violator, issuance of a written 
warning notice or citation may be accomplished by leaving a copy at the alleged violator's residence 
with any person residing therein who is 15 years of age or older and informing the person of the 
contents, or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(e) ?Issuance of a written warning notice or citation to a business may be accomplished by leaving a 
copy at the business during regular business hours with any employee and informing the employee 
of the contents, or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. Each employee of the 
business shall be deemed to be an agent of the business for service of warning notices and citations. 
(f) ?If, upon personal investigation, the code enforcement officer finds that the violation has not been 
corrected within the time period, a code enforcement officer may issue a citation for a civil infraction 
to the person accused of committing the violation. 
(g) ?The citation shall be consistent with the requirements of F.S. ch. 162, part II (F.S. § 162.21 et seq.). 
(h) ?Each violation of a code or ordinance is a separate civil infraction. Each day such violation 
continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate civil infraction. 
(i) ?The maximum civil penalty for each violation shall not exceed $500.00, plus any applicable court 
costs. 
(j) ?After issuing a citation to an alleged violator, the code enforcement officer shall: 
(1) ?Deposit the original citation and one copy of the citation with the county clerk of the court; 
(2) ?Provide the person cited with one copy; and 
(3) ?Retain one copy in the code enforcement officer's department or division file. 
(k) ?If the person cited refuses to sign the citation, the code enforcement officer shall write the words 
"Refused" or "Refused to Sign" in the space provided for the person's signature. The code 
enforcement officer shall then leave a copy of the citation with the person cited, if possible, and shall 
contact the city police department to file the necessary reports alleging a violation of F.S. § 
162.21(6), which provides that a person who willfully refuses to sign and accept a citation issued by 
a code enforcement officer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable as 
provided in F.S. § 775.082 or 775.083. 
(Code 1993, § 54-24; Ord. No. 1227, § 4, 12-1-1999) 


Sec. 42-31. - Payment of fines; court hearings. 
(a) ?If the person elects not to contest the citation, the person shall pay in full the applicable reduced civil 
penalty as set forth in Exhibit A, which is on file in the city clerk's office, to the clerk of the court within 
14 days after issuance of the citation. 
(b) ?If the person cited elects to pay the applicable reduced civil penalty set forth in said Exhibit A, the 
person shall be deemed to have admitted the infraction and waived the right to a hearing. If the 
person cited fails to pay the civil penalty by the 14th day after issuance of the citation or fails to 
request a court hearing within the time prescribed, the person shall have waived any right to contest 
the citation and a judgment shall be entered against the person cited in an amount up to the 
maximum civil penalty, which shall not exceed $500.00 per citation. 
(c) ?If the person elects to contest the citation, the person shall appear in court before a county court 
judge within 21 days of issuance of the citation to request a hearing date. 
(d) ?A county judge, after a hearing on the citation, shall make a determination whether or not a violation 
of this article has been committed. If a violation is found to have occurred, the county judge may 
impose a civil penalty up to the maximum civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $500.00 per 
citation, plus all applicable court costs. 
(e) ?The judge may provide for the civil penalty to be paid within such time as the judge determines to be 
appropriate. If the person found to be in violation fails to pay the fine within the time provided, a civil 
judgment shall be entered against that person in the amount up to the maximum civil penalty, not to 
exceed $500.00 per citation. 
(f) ?Should the person cited schedule a hearing as provided for herein, and thereafter fail to appear at 
such hearing, the person shall be deemed to have waived the right to contest the citation and a civil 
judgment shall be entered against the person in an amount up to the maximum civil penalty; 
provided, however, that the court shall have the discretion to continue or reschedule any hearing 
when it determines that doing so will further the interest of justice. In such an event, the clerk shall 
notify the code enforcement officer and the person cited of the date and time of the new hearing. 
(Code 1993, § 54-25; Ord. No. 1227, § 5, 12-1-1999) 


Sec. 42-32. - Procedures for payment of civil penalty. 
    Payment of any civil penalty imposed by this article shall be made to the county clerk of the court, 
who shall forward the monies collected to the city clerk's office for deposit into the city's general fund. If a 
judgment has been entered for the civil penalty, the county clerk of the court shall notify the city when the 
judgment has been paid and the necessary satisfaction of judgments shall be prepared and recorded in 
the official records of the county. Ten dollars of each penalty collected shall be retained by the county 
clerk of the court as an administrative fee. 
(Code 1993, § 54-26; Ord. No. 1227, § 6, 12-1-1999) 


Sec. 42-33. - Violation classifications and civil penalties. 
(a) ?Violations of city codes or ordinances and the applicable reduced civil penalty shall be classified as 
follows: 
Viol
atio
n 
Clas
sific
atio
n 
Red
uce
d 
Civi
l 
Pen
alty 
Clas
s I 
$50
.00 
Clas
s II 
$15
0.0
0 
Clas
s III 
$20
0.0
0 
 
(b) ?A second violation of the same offense shall be double the amount shown on the penalty for a first 
offense. Third and subsequent violations shall require a mandatory court appearance. 
(c) ?City codes or ordinances subsequently enacted or amended may set forth the applicable civil 
penalty for violations by designating the appropriate violation classification as provided in this 
section. 
(Code 1993, § 54-27; Ord. No. 1227, § 7, 12-1-1999) 


Secs. 42-34—42-54. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - SEXUAL OFFENDERS AND SEXUAL PREDATORS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Florida Sexual Predators Act, F.S. § 775.21; commission on offender review, F.S. 
§ 947.001 et seq.; conditional release program, F.S. § 947.1405. 


Sec. 42-55. - Findings and intent. 
(a) ?The findings set forth in the recitals ("whereas" clauses) to this article are hereby adopted as 
additional legislative findings. 
(b) ?The city council hereby adopts the provisions of F.S. § 775.21(3)(a) which state as follows: 
"Repeat sexual offenders, sexual offenders who use physical violence, and sexual offenders who 
prey on children are sexual predators who present an extreme threat to the public safety. Sexual 
offenders are extremely likely to use physical violence and to repeat their offenses, and most sexual 
offenders commit many offenses, have many more victims than are ever reported, and are 
prosecuted for only a fraction of their crimes. This makes the cost of sexual offender victimization to 
society at large, while incalculable, clearly exorbitant." 
(c) ?The city council hereby adopts the provisions of F.S. § 947.1405(8), which provides, in pertinent 
part, that: 
"It is the finding of the legislature that the population of offenders released from state prison into the 
community who meet the conditional release criteria poses the greatest threat to the public safety of 
the groups of offenders under community supervision. Therefore, the department of corrections is to 
provide intensive supervision by experienced correctional probation officers to conditional release 
offenders." 
(d) ?It is the intent of this article to serve the city's compelling interest to promote, protect and improve 
the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city by creating areas around locations where 
children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers wherein certain sexual offenders and sexual 
predators are prohibited from establishing temporary or permanent residence. 
(e) ?The city council hereby finds and determines that the provisions of this article advance a legitimate 
public purpose and promote and protect the health, safety, morals and welfare of the public. 
(Code 1993, § 54-41; Ord. No. 1765, § 3, 8-17-2005) 


Sec. 42-56. - Application of ordinance; existing contracts. 
    The provisions of this article shall not be applied to persons residing at a prohibited location on the 
effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived such that it is not the intent of this article 
to impair valid, existing and bona fide contract rights; provided, however, that the provisions of this article 
shall apply upon expiration or termination of any leasehold arising from a landlord-tenant relationship or 
the expiration of a lease. When a person who is a subject of this article changes residences or 
commences a new or renewed lease term, this article shall fully apply to such person. 
(Code 1993, § 54-42; Ord. No. 1765, § 3, 8-17-2005) 


Sec. 42-57. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Permanent residence means a place where the person abides, lodges, or resides for 14 or more 
consecutive days. 
    Temporary residence means a place where the person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of 14 
or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year, and which is not the person's permanent 
address, or a place where the person routinely abides, lodges, or resides for a period of four or more 
consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month, and which is not the person's permanent residence. 
(Code 1993, § 54-43; Ord. No. 1765, § 3, 8-17-2005) 


Sec. 42-58. - Sexual offender and sexual predator residence prohibition; penalties; requirements; 
measurement; violations; application. 
(a) ?Where prohibited. It is unlawful for any person who has been convicted of a violation of F.S. § 
794.011, 800.04, 827.071, or 847.0145, or who has otherwise been designated as a sexual 
offender/predator, as a violent sexual predator, or by another sexual offender designation in any 
state or jurisdiction, to include a conviction of a similar offense with similar elements of proof by a 
federal or military tribunal, and was, as a result of such designation, subjected to registration or 
community or public notification, or both, regardless of whether adjudication has been withheld, in 
which the victim of the offense for which the conviction resulted was less than 16 years of age at the 
time the offense was committed, to establish a permanent or temporary residence within 2,500 feet 
of any school, day care center, park, playground, or other place designed or intended for minors to 
regularly congregate. 
(b) ?Measurement. For purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the 2,500-foot 
requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the 
permanent residence or temporary residence to the nearest outer property line of a school, day care 
center, park, playground, or other place designed or intended for minors to regularly congregate. 
(c) ?Penalties. A person who violates this section shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or 
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; for a 
second or subsequent conviction of a violation of this section, said person shall be punished by a 
fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year, or by both such fine 
and imprisonment. 
(d) ?Exceptions. A person residing within 2,500 feet of any school, day care center, park, playground, or 
other place designed or intended for minors to regularly congregate does not commit a violation of 
this section if any of the following apply: 
(1) ?The person established the permanent residence or temporary residence and reported and 
registered the residence pursuant to F.S. § 775.21, 943.0435, or 944.607 prior to the effective 
date of the ordinance from which this article is derived; 
(2) ?The person was a minor when he committed the offense and was not convicted as an adult; 
(3) ?The person is a minor; 
(4) ?The school, day care center, park, playground, or other place designed or intended for minors 
to regularly congregate within 2,500 feet of the person's permanent residence was opened after 
the person established the permanent residence and reported and registered the residence 
pursuant to F.S. § 775.21, 943.0435, or 944.607. 
(Code 1993, § 54-44; Ord. No. 1765, § 3, 8-17-2005; Ord. No. 1908, § 2, 3-7-2007) 


Sec. 42-59. - Property owners prohibited from renting real property to certain sexual offenders and 
sexual predators; penalties. 
(a) ?It is unlawful to let or rent any place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other conveyance, with the 
knowledge that it will be used as a permanent residence or temporary residence by any person 
prohibited from establishing such permanent residence or temporary residence pursuant to section 
42-58, if such place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other conveyance, is located within 2,500 
feet of any school, day care center, park, playground, or other place designed or intended for minors 
to regularly congregate. 
(b) ?A property owner's failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall constitute a violation of 
this section and shall subject the property owner to the code enforcement provisions and procedures 
as provided in this Code, including action before the code enforcement hearing officer and the 
issuance of citation by a police officer as a Class III violation. In the alternative, the city may pursue 
any other enforcement action or legal remedy available under controlling state law, including, but not 
limited to, injunctive relief. If injunctive relief or other civil judicial relief is sought, the city shall be 
entitled to recover its reasonable attorney fees and costs from the defendant. The foregoing shall be 
supplemental to and not in derogation of any other remedy. 
(Code 1993, § 54-45; Ord. No. 1765, § 3, 8-17-2005; Ord. No. 1908, § 3, 3-7-2007) 


Secs. 42-60—42-76. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - GRAFFITI[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Criminal mischief, F.S. § 806.13. 


Sec. 42-77. - Purpose and intent. 
(a) ?The city council hereby finds and declares that: 
(1) ?Graffiti is detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the community in that it promotes a 
perception in the community that the laws protecting public and private property can be 
disregarded with impunity. This perception fosters a sense of disrespect of the law that results 
in an increase in crime; degrades the community and leads to urban blight; is detrimental to 
property values, business opportunities, and the enjoyment of life; is inconsistent with the city's 
community preservation goals and aesthetic standards; and results in additional graffiti and in 
other properties becoming targets of graffiti unless it is quickly removed from public and private 
property. 
(2) ?Graffiti results in visual pollution and is hereby deemed a public nuisance. Graffiti must be 
abated as quickly as possible to avoid detrimental impacts on the city and its residents, and to 
prevent the further spread of graffiti. 
(b) ?It is the purpose of this article to establish procedures and adopt regulations whereby all public and 
private property within the city may be maintained free of graffiti. 
(Code 1993, § 54-61; Ord. No. 1792, §§ 2, 3, 11-16-2005) 


Sec. 42-78. - Findings and determination. 
    The city council finds and determines that graffiti is a nuisance, and unless it and other inscribed 
material is removed from public and private properties, it tends to remain. Other properties are then the 
target of graffiti and the value of the entire neighborhood, and indeed the community, is depreciated and 
made a less desirable place to be. The city council therefore determines that it is appropriate that the city 
develop procedures to implement the provisions for the removal of graffiti and other inscribed material 
from both public and private property under the circumstances set forth hereinafter. The city council 
hereby finds: 
(1) ?The increasing incidents of the defacement of public and private property through the 
application of graffiti upon walls, rocks, bridges, buildings, fences, gates, other structures, trees, 
and other real and personal property within the city limits, constitute a blight on this community, 
and in the interests of the health, safety and general welfare of the residents and taxpayers of 
the city, immediate steps must be taken to remove this blight. 
(2) ?When appropriate, the courts should require those who deface public or private property with 
graffiti to restore the property so defaced, damaged or destroyed. 
(3) ?Obtaining convictions for the application of graffiti is difficult because the offense can be 
committed so quickly and secretively that witnesses to the act are frequently non-existent. 
(4) ?The public should be encouraged to cooperate in the elimination of graffiti by reporting it to the 
proper authorities. 
(Code 1993, § 54-62; Ord. No. 1792, §§ 2, 3, 11-16-2005) 


Sec. 42-79. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abate means the removal or covering over of graffiti by such means and in such manner and to such 
an extent as is necessary in the interest of the general health, safety, and welfare of the community, as 
determined by the enforcement officer. 
    City forces means city employees and equipment available to abate graffiti. 
    Graffiti means any unauthorized inscription of a word, symbol, or design visible to the public which is 
marked, etched, scratched, drawn, or painted on any structural component of any public or private 
building, structure, facility, property, vehicle, or other item. 
    Graffiti abatement procedure means an abatement procedure which notices a property owner of the 
existence of graffiti and allows the property owner to grant permission to the city to abate the graffiti at no 
expense to the owner, or to elect to abate the graffiti at the owner's expense, or the procedure upon the 
failure of the owner to abate the graffiti at the owner's expense within seven calendar days of notification, 
as described in sections 42-82 through 42-86. 
    Owner means any person so designated on the last equalized assessment roll, as well as any 
person having or claiming to have any legal or equitable interest in privately-owned real property. 
    Private contractor means any person with whom the city shall have duly contracted to remove graffiti. 
(Code 1993, § 54-63; Ord. No. 1792, §§ 2, 3, 11-16-2005) 


Sec. 42-80. - Application of graffiti prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in the application of graffiti as defined in this article. 
(Code 1993, § 54-64; Ord. No. 1792, §§ 2, 3, 11-16-2005) 


Sec. 42-81. - Application of graffiti; penalty; restoration of property. 
    Any person who is convicted of violating section 42-80 shall be punished in accordance with F.S. § 
806.13, Criminal mischief. In addition to such punishment, the court may, in imposing sentence, order the 
defendant to restore the property so defaced, damaged or destroyed. 
(Code 1993, § 54-65; Ord. No. 1792, §§ 2, 3, 11-16-2005) 


Sec. 42-82. - Notice to remove. 
(a) ?Whenever a property owner, citizen or city official determines that graffiti exists and is visible to any 
person utilizing any public right-of-way, he shall notify the city police chief and the city community 
development director. Further, the chief of police, or his designated representative, is authorized and 
directed to obtain a signed graffiti abatement notification and release form or cause a notice to be 
issued to abate such nuisance within seven days. City forces and/or private contractors are 
expressly authorized to enter upon such property to deliver notice to the property owner. The 
property owner shall have seven calendar days after the date of the notice to remove the graffiti, or 
the graffiti will be subject to abatement by the city at the owner's expense. 
(b) ?The notice to abate graffiti pursuant to this section shall cause a written notice to be served upon 
the owner of the affected premises, as such owner's name and address appear on the last equalized 
assessment rolls of the county. If there is no known address for the owner, the notice shall be sent in 
care of the property address. The notice required by this section may be served in any one of the 
following manners: 
(1) ?By personal service on the owner of the property. 
(2) ?By registered or certified mail addressed to the owner at the owner's last-known address. If this 
address is unknown, the notice will be sent to the property address. 
(Code 1993, § 54-66; Ord. No. 1792, §§ 2, 3, 11-16-2005) 


Sec. 42-83. - Private property owner notification; consent and release from liability forms. 
(a) ?When the chief of police, or his designated representative, becomes aware of the location of graffiti, 
immediate administrative steps shall be taken to identify the legal owner of record. A city 
representative will make every effort to contact the owner immediately, to include a visit to the 
structure or location where a notice may be personally served on the owner, in addition to other 
notification methods. For the purpose of graffiti abatement, notification or notice time lines will 
commence on the date the notice to abate is issued by either certified or registered mail, or the date 
the graffiti abatement notification and release form is personally served on the owner or person in 
charge or control of the property. A graffiti abatement notification and release form may be signed by 
the property owner and abatement can proceed immediately, or a notice is served pursuant to the 
notification provisions in section 42-82 whereby the owner shall have seven days before further 
action can be taken, upon receipt of the registered or certified mail return receipt by the issuing 
authority. 
(b) ?The graffiti abatement notification and release form shall identify the legal owner, the property 
address and the specific location of the graffiti proposed to be abated. The form shall specify the 
method of abatement (e.g., over-paint, sanding, sand-blasting, pressure-washing, or other, with a 
general description). The form shall offer the property owner the choice to consent to abatement by 
city forces or private contractor with a graffiti abatement notification and release form releasing 
liability for the city so that the city may take immediate steps to abate the graffiti (weather conditions 
permitting) at no cost to the owner, or decline the city offer, at which time the property owner shall 
have seven calendar days to abate the graffiti at the owner's expense. Failure to do so within seven 
calendar days after the date of service of the graffiti abatement and notification release form 
pursuant to section 42-82 means the city is expressly authorized to enter the property and abate the 
graffiti by the method proposed by the initial offer. 
(c) ?When the owner declines the city's offer to abate the graffiti at the city's expense and then 
subsequently fails to comply within seven days, or fails to acknowledge receipt of notification within 
seven days, the expense of the abatement shall be borne by the owner. Any and all costs incurred 
by the city in the abatement of the graffiti nuisance under this provision of this article may constitute 
a lien against the property upon which such nuisance existed. 
(Code 1993, § 54-67; Ord. No. 1792, §§ 2, 3, 11-16-2005) 


Sec. 42-84. - Appeals. 
    Within seven days of personal service of the graffiti abatement notification and release form as 
defined in this article, or within seven days of receipt of the certified or registered mailing of the graffiti 
abatement notification and release form, the owner or person controlling such premises or lot affected 
may appeal the removal of the graffiti to a certified hearing officer. A copy of such appeal shall be sent to 
the chief of police or his designated representative as shown on the graffiti abatement notification and 
release form. 
(Code 1993, § 54-68; Ord. No. 1792, §§ 2, 3, 11-16-2005) 


Sec. 42-85. - Abatement by city. 
(a) ?Once a graffiti abatement and notification release form is signed by the property owner or when the 
seven calendar days after owner notification have elapsed and the notice has not been acted upon, 
city forces or a private contractor may enter upon the premises. All reasonable efforts to minimize 
damage from such entry shall be taken by the city, and any paint used to obliterate graffiti shall be as 
close as practicable to the background color. 
(b) ?If the owner so elected not to participate with city forces or a contractor as approved by the city, and 
the city has to initiate abatement, the owner shall be responsible for all costs, including 
administrative expenses, of abating the nuisance, which shall be billed to the owner and shall 
become due and payable 30 days thereafter. The term "administrative expense" shall include, but 
not be limited to, the following: personnel costs, both direct and indirect; cost incurred in 
documenting the nuisance; the actual expenses and costs of the city in the preparation and 
dissemination of notices, specifications, and contracts, and in inspecting the work; and the costs of 
printing and mailing the notices required hereunder. 
(c) ?If city forces or a private contractor undertake the removal of the graffiti, they shall not be authorized 
nor undertake the painting or repair of any more extensive an area than that where the graffiti is 
located. 
(Code 1993, § 54-69; Ord. No. 1792, §§ 2, 3, 11-16-2005) 


Sec. 42-86. - Stay of proceedings during criminal prosecution. 
    In any case in which a criminal prosecution is pending or is about to be instituted for violation of F.S. 
§ 806.13, Criminal mischief, or of any other law that authorizes a court to sentence a criminal defendant 
to remove graffiti placed on property by that person, city forces or authorized contractors may suspend 
abatement actions under this article. In such a case, the abatement action shall be suspended only in 
connection with any property upon which the defendant is charged with placing graffiti, and only until such 
time as he is sentenced. This provision shall not prohibit a property owner from removing graffiti for his 
own property during such time as the criminal proceeding is pending. 
(Code 1993, § 54-70; Ord. No. 1792, §§ 2, 3, 11-16-2005) 


Secs. 42-87—42-115. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE V. - PANHANDLING, BEGGING AND RELATED ACTIVITIES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Assault, F.S. § 784.011. 


Sec. 42-116. - Findings, intent and purpose. 
(a) ?The city council hereby finds that any person who begs, panhandles, solicits, or demands money, 
gifts or donations under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate 
concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity by unwanted touching, detaining, 
impeding or intimidation which causes fear or apprehension in another person constitutes a threat to 
the public health, welfare and safety of the citizenry. The city council further finds that any person 
who intentionally blocks the passage of another person or a vehicle which requires another person to 
take evasive action to avoid physical contact constitutes a threat to the public health, welfare and 
safety of the citizenry. 
(b) ?The city council finds that any person who panhandles, solicits, or demands money, gifts or 
donations under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern 
for the safety of persons or property in public rooms or private buildings and on private developed 
properties by unwanted touching, detaining, impeding or intimidation which causes fear or 
apprehension in another person and which constitutes a threat to the public health, welfare and 
safety of the citizenry. 
(c) ?The city council finds that panhandling, soliciting or demanding money, gifts or donations may 
interfere with the safe ingress and egress of human and vehicular traffic into public buildings, public 
areas and public transportation areas, thereby constituting a threat to the public health, welfare and 
safety of the citizenry. In order to allow for the safe ingress and egress of human and vehicular traffic 
into public buildings, public areas and public transportation areas, the chief of police is authorized to 
prohibit panhandling, soliciting or the demand of money, gifts or donations within public buildings or 
designated areas of public buildings or public transportation areas upon the request of the owners, 
lessees, managing or authorizing agents of the public buildings or areas in accordance with the 
provisions of this section. 
(Code 1993, § 54-86; Ord. No. 2105, §§ 2, 3, 4-1-2009) 


Sec. 42-117. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aggressively beg means to beg, solicit, or demand money, gifts or donations by unwanted touching, 
detaining, impeding or intimidation. 
    Beg means to ask for money, gifts or donations, either by words, bodily gestures, signs or other 
means. 
    Obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic means to walk, stand, sit, lie, or place an object in such a 
manner as to block passage of another person or a vehicle, or to require another person or driver of a 
vehicle to take evasive action to avoid physical contact. Acts authorized as an exercise of one's 
constitutional right to picket or to legally protest and acts authorized by a lawfully issued permit pursuant 
to this Code are not included within this definition. 
    Panhandle means to ask for, demand or solicit money, gifts or donations, either by words, bodily 
gestures, signs or other means. 
    Private building shall be deemed to include, but is not limited to, a retail or service establishment, 
such as a restaurant, convenience food store, self-service laundry, service station, hotel, office and 
similar establishment open to the public. The term "private building" does not include any building owned, 
leased or operated by the federal or state government, political subdivisions thereof, municipalities, 
special districts, any public administration board or authority of the state. 
    Private developed property shall include, but not be limited to, a parking lot, driveway, walkway and 
landscaped areas. 
    Public building means any building or facility owned, leased or operated by or on behalf of the 
federal or state government or any political subdivision thereof, any municipality, or special district or any 
public administrative board or authority of the federal or state government. 
    Public place means an area generally visible to public view, and includes alleys, bridges, buildings, 
driveways, parking lots, parks, plazas, sidewalks and streets open to the general public, including, but not 
limited to, those that serve food or drink or provide entertainment, and the doorways and entrances to 
buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them. 
    Public room shall be deemed to include a basement, building entrance or doorway, lobby, hallway, 
stairway, mezzanine, elevator, foyer, public restroom or sitting room or any other place used in common 
by the public, tenants, occupants or guests situated in any private building. 
    Public transportation area means a building, facility or area designated for mass transit 
transportation, such as, but not limited to, bus terminals, bus stops and taxi stands. 
(Code 1993, § 54-87; Ord. No. 2105, §§ 2, 3, 4-1-2009) 


Sec. 42-118. - Unlawful acts. 
(a) ?It is unlawful for a person to interfere with pedestrians if he obstructs pedestrian or vehicular traffic 
or aggressively begs on a road or street, as defined at F.S. § 334.02 or its successor provisions. 
(b) ?It is unlawful for a person to panhandle in any public room, in any private building, or on private 
developed property, without the written permission or consent of the building's owner or managing 
agent, or other person in charge. For the purpose of enforcement of this subsection, it is presented 
that if the owner, lessee, managing agent or other person in charge of a building prominently 
displays a sign as provided in section 42-119, then the activities declared unlawful in this subsection 
are deemed to be without the permission or consent of the building's owner, lessee, managing agent 
or other person in charge. 
(c) ?When a public building or area of a public building or public transportation area has been 
designated and posted in accordance with section 42-120, it is unlawful for any person to panhandle 
within the public building or area of the public building or public transportation area. 
(d) ?It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, impede or harass pedestrians or vehicles for the purpose of 
panhandling within the public building or area of the public building or public transportation area. 
(e) ?It is unlawful for any person to panhandle, when the person solicited is located on private property, 
unless the panhandler has permission from the owner or occupant of the private property, or the 
person solicited is located in any public place within the city, which public places include, by way of 
example only and not by way of limitation, the following places: 
(1) ?At any bus or train stop; 
(2) ?In any public transportation vehicle or facility, including, but not limited to, airports; 
(3) ?In any vehicle on a street unless a permit has been issued to do so; 
(4) ?In a public park, fairground, or sporting facility, including, but not limited to, entryways or exits 
thereto; 
(5) ?Within 15 feet of the site of any automated teller machine (ATM) or any other machine 
dispensing cash; 
(6) ?In a parking lot or garage owned or operated by the city, including, but not limited to, entryways 
or exits and pay stations connected therewith. 
(f) ?It is unlawful for any person to panhandle in any of the following manners: 
(1) ?By blocking the path of the person solicited; 
(2) ?By using profane or abusive language, either during the solicitation or following a refusal; 
(3) ?By panhandling in a group of two or more persons; or 
(4) ?By any statement, gesture, or other communication which a reasonable person in the situation 
of the person solicited would perceive to be a threat. 
(g) ?It is unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false or misleading representation in the course 
of soliciting a donation by panhandling or any other means. False or misleading representations 
include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1) ?Stating that the donation is needed to meet a specific need, when the solicitor already has 
sufficient funds to meet that need and does not disclose that fact; 
(2) ?Stating that the donation is needed to meet a need which does not exist; 
(3) ?Stating that the solicitor is from out of town and stranded, when such is not true; 
(4) ?Wearing a military uniform or other indication of military service, when the solicitor is neither a 
present nor former member of the service indicated; 
(5) ?Wearing or displaying an indication of physical disability, when the solicitor does not suffer the 
disability indicated; 
(6) ?Use of any makeup or device to simulate any deformity; or 
(7) ?Stating that the solicitor is homeless, when he is not. 
(h) ?It is unlawful for any person to solicit a donation, by means of panhandling or other means, stating 
that the funds are needed for a specific purpose and then spend the funds received for a different 
purpose. 
(Code 1993, § 54-88; Ord. No. 2105, §§ 2, 3, 4-1-2009) 


Sec. 42-119. - Conspicuous notice. 
    Each owner, lessee, managing agent or person in charge of the operation of a private building or 
private developed area shall prominently display a sign on the premises, such as the lobby or entrance of 
the private building or private developed property, where it may be read by any person going in or out of 
the building or private developed property, displaying prominently, in letters of not less than two inches in 
height, the words "NO PANHANDLING PERMITTED - PROHIBITED BY APOPKA CITY CODE." 
(Code 1993, § 54-89; Ord. No. 2105, §§ 2, 3, 4-1-2009) 


Sec. 42-120. - Designation of building or transportation area. 
(a) ?The chief of police is authorized to designate a public building or area of a public building or public 
transportation area based upon the following criteria: 
(1) ?The purpose and characteristics of the building, facility or area; 
(2) ?The level of human and vehicular traffic in and around the building, facility or area; 
(3) ?The function of the building, facility or area; 
(4) ?Proximity of the building, facility or area to other buildings, transportation facilities, parking 
areas and sidewalks; 
(5) ?The necessity to alleviate obstructions and hazards to pedestrians and/or vehicular traffic to 
protect public health and safety; and 
(6) ?The desires and needs of the owners and occupants of the area and immediate surroundings. 
(b) ?Upon determining that the public health or area of the public building or public transportation area 
warrants the designation to prohibit panhandling, soliciting or the demanding of money, gifts or 
donations, the chief of police shall issue an order which specifically identifies the building or area or 
public transportation area. The order shall be conspicuously posted at the designated building or 
area. If no appeal is filed, the order shall become final 20 days after the date of entry of the order. 
(c) ?The chief of police's order may be appealed by any aggrieved person to the chief administrative 
officer for the city within 20 days from the date of entry of the order upon payment of a fee 
established by the city. 
(d) ?If an appeal is filed, the hearing shall be conducted to determine whether substantial competent 
evidence existed for the chief of police to prohibit panhandling, soliciting or the demand of money, 
gifts or donations in a public building or area of a public building or public transportation area based 
upon the criteria set forth in this section. The chief administrative officer's decision may be appealed 
to a court of competent jurisdiction by a petition for a writ of certiorari within 30 days after the 
rendition of the hearing officer's decision regarding the designation. 
(e) ?When the order becomes final, the chief of police shall cause the designation to be recorded upon 
an appropriate map and retained in the city police department. 
(f) ?Each public building, area of the public building or public transportation area designated by the chief 
of police in accordance with this section shall prominently display a sign on the premises, such as a 
lobby or entrance to a building or area, where it may be read by any person going in or out of the 
building or area, displaying prominently, in letters of not less than two inches in height, the words 
"NO PANHANDLING PERMITTED - PROHIBITED BY APOPKA CITY CODE." 
(Code 1993, § 54-90; Ord. No. 2105, §§ 2, 3, 4-1-2009) 


Sec. 42-121. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article may be punished to the maximum extent as 
provided in section 1-14; or the city may engage in any code enforcement activities and processes as it 
deems appropriate under the circumstances. 
(Code 1993, § 54-91; Ord. No. 2105, §§ 2, 3, 4-1-2009) 


Secs. 42-122—42-140. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE VI. - IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES USED TO FACILITATE CERTAIN CRIMES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Florida Contraband Forfeiture Act, F.S. §§ 932.701—932.7062. 


Sec. 42-141. - Findings and intent. 
(a) ?The city council hereby finds and declares that: 
(1) ?The propagation of prostitution, illicit drug transactions and possession, and possession and 
transport of stolen goods is detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the community in 
that it promotes a perception in the community that the laws protecting public and private 
property can be disregarded with impunity. 
(2) ?Such activity results in an increase in related crimes, including property crimes, such as 
burglaries, and crimes, such as assaults and batteries; degrades the feeling of community; 
decreases individual feelings of safety and security; and is inconsistent with the development of 
the community's quality of life. 
(b) ?It is the purpose of this article to establish procedures and adopt regulations to reduce the financial 
gain of such activities through the use of a vehicle in the propagation of such activities and to adopt a 
civil enforcement system for such criminal activities. This article will be supplemental in the criminal 
enforcement of those crimes identified within this article and shall not be deemed to prohibit law 
enforcement officers from taking any other actions as allowed by law or ordinance. 
(Code 1993, § 54-92; Ord. No. 2168, § 3, 6-2-2010) 


Sec. 42-142. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business days means days other than Saturdays, Sundays, or holidays recognized by the city. 
    Co-owner means any natural person owning a vehicle in common with another regardless of marital 
relationship or the conjunctive term used on registration or title documents. 
    Hearing officer means the city's code enforcement hearing officer. 
    Lienholder means any individual or entity which, as of the time of impoundment, has properly 
perfected a lien on the vehicle subject to impoundment. 
    Owner means the natural person who is a registered or titled owner of a vehicle, or a natural person 
having other indicia of ownership of a vehicle, including, but not limited to, a bill of sale or open title 
signed by a previous owner. 
    Use means the employment of any vehicle during or subsequent to the commission or attempted 
commission of any crime as defined in section 42-143 or the use in flight thereof. 
    Vehicle means any self-propelled vehicle not operated upon rails or guideways, and including any 
bicycle, motorcycle, motorized scooter, electric personal assisted mobility device, moped, or private 
transportation device for hire, but shall not include any publicly-owned transportation system or device. 
(Code 1993, § 54-101; Ord. No. 2168, § 3, 6-2-2010) 


Sec. 42-143. - Certain crimes identified. 
(a) ?As used in this article, a motor vehicle shall be subject to seizure and impoundment whenever a 
police officer has probable cause to believe that the vehicle: 
(1) ?Was used to facilitate the commission or attempted commission of an act of prostitution, 
assignation or lewdness as defined in F.S. § 796.07, entitled "Prohibiting prostitution, etc.; 
evidence; penalties; definitions." 
(2) ?Was used to facilitate the commission of an act of solicitation for prostitution, lewdness, or 
assignation in violation of F.S. § 796.07, entitled "Prohibiting prostitution, etc.; evidence; 
penalties; definitions." 
(3) ?Was used to facilitate the commission of an unnatural or lascivious act in violation of F.S. § 
800.02, entitled "Unnatural and lascivious act." 
(4) ?Was used to facilitate the commission of the exposure of sexual organs in violation of F.S. § 
800.03, entitled "Exposure of sexual organs." 
(5) ?Unlawfully contains any controlled substance as defined in F.S. § 893.02, entitled "Definitions," 
and F.S. § 893.03, entitled "Standards and schedules." 
(6) ?Was used to facilitate the commission of any violation of F.S. ch. 893, entitled "Drug abuse 
prevention and control." 
(7) ?Was used in flight of any of the above or in the commission of a violation of F.S. § 316.1935, 
entitled "Fleeing or attempting to elude a law enforcement officer; aggravated fleeing or 
eluding." 
(8) ?Was used in commission of a violation of F.S. § 316.193, entitled "Driving under the influence; 
penalties." 
(9) ?Was used in the commission of a violation of any portion of F.S. ch. 322, entitled "Drivers' 
licenses," which would constitute a criminal traffic infraction related to the operation of a motor 
vehicle, in accordance with state law. 
(b) ?This article shall not apply, and no vehicle shall be seized or impounded pursuant to this article, if: 
(1) ?The vehicle was stolen at the time that it was otherwise subject to seizure and impoundment; 
(2) ?A law enforcement agency seized the vehicle pursuant to the Florida Contraband Forfeiture 
Act; or 
(3) ?At the time the vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment under this article, it is: 
a. ?Under the control of a person other than an owner or co-owner without the owner or co-
owner's knowledge or permission; and 
b. ?The owner or co-owner was not present at the time the vehicle became subject to seizure 
and impoundment. 
(c) ?Nothing herein restricts or expands the ability of any law enforcement officer of the city, or any other 
bona fide law enforcement agency, to tow, impound, or otherwise seize a vehicle pursuant to state 
law. 
(d) ?All offenses as codified in Florida Statutes and as amended from time to time. 
(Code 1993, § 54-102; Ord. No. 2168, § 3, 6-2-2010; Ord. No. 2209, § 2, 2-16-2011) 


Sec. 42-144. - Directions to the officer for impoundment and notice. 
(a) ?Upon impounding a vehicle pursuant to this article, the police officer shall: 
(1) ?Arrange for the towing of the vehicle by a company having an agreement with the city to 
provide towing and motor vehicle storage services, to the impound lot maintained by the 
company for the storage of motor vehicles pursuant to the agreement; or, in the case of a 
vehicle that does not need towing, such vehicle may be placed into the impound and storage of 
the police department. Such towing or seizure shall be deemed lawful and necessary under the 
provisions outlined in state statutes. Such vehicle shall be inventoried in accordance with police 
department policy and accepted practice; and 
(2) ?Provide written notice of impoundment by hand-delivery to the operator, any owner, or co-
owner of the vehicle who is present at the time the vehicle is impounded (if said subject is 
arrested, notice may be provided at the time of arrest or as outlined in subsection (b) of this 
section). The notice shall include: 
a. ?A statement of the facts of the vehicle impoundment. 
b. ?A statement that the owner has the right to request a hearing pursuant to section 42-
146(a)(1). 
c. ?A statement of the procedure and deadline for requesting such hearing. 
d. ?A statement that the owner may elect to pay the administrative civil penalty as provided 
herein and waive the hearing. 
(b) ?The police department shall, within two business days of the impoundment, provide a notice of 
impoundment to any co-owner or lienholder whose name and address are known or can be 
ascertained after a search of the public records, provided the vehicle has not been already released 
in accordance with this article. 
(1) ?The notice shall include: 
a. ?A statement of the facts of the vehicle impoundment. 
b. ?A statement that the owner has the right to request a hearing pursuant to subsection 42-
146(a)(1). 
c. ?A statement of the procedure and deadline for requesting such hearing. 
d. ?A statement that the owner may elect to pay the administrative civil penalty as provided 
herein and waive the hearing. 
(2) ?A notice mailed within two business days of impoundment, certified through the United States 
Postal Service, shall constitute proper and timely notice under this section. 
(Code 1993, § 54-103; Ord. No. 2168, § 3, 6-2-2010; Ord. No. 2209, § 2, 2-16-2011) 


Sec. 42-145. - Owner, co-owner, or lienholder securing release of the vehicle. 
(a) ?Owner, co-owner, or lienholder requesting a hearing. 
(1) ?The owner, co-owner, or lienholder may secure release of the vehicle by posting a bond (cash, 
money order, or certified check payable to the city) in the amount of $500.00 submitted to the 
towing company. The owner, co-owner, or lienholder may then take possession of the vehicle 
from the towing company after payment of towing and storage charges payable to the towing 
company. 
(2) ?The owner, co-owner, or lienholder may leave the vehicle impounded and request a hearing 
directly from the police department records section. 
(b) ?Owner, co-owner, or lienholder waiving a hearing and submitting a civil penalty. 
(1) ?The owner, co-owner, or lienholder may secure release of the vehicle by submitting a civil 
penalty (cash, money order, or certified check payable to the city) in the amount of $250.00 and 
submitted to the towing company during business hours. 
(2) ?The owner, co-owner, or lienholder then may receive the vehicle from the towing company after 
payment of towing and storage charges, payable to the towing company. 
(3) ?An executed waiver shall bind both the owner and co-owner, except as otherwise provided 
herein. 
(Code 1993, § 54-104; Ord. No. 2168, § 3, 6-2-2010; Ord. No. 2209, § 2, 2-16-2011) 


Sec. 42-146. - Directions for code enforcement hearing, civil penalty, and appeal. 
(a) ?Directions for code enforcement hearing. 
(1) ?Notice and setting of hearing. 
a. ?Within five business days of receipt of the notice described in subsection 42-144(b), the 
owner, co-owner or lienholder may request a hearing by delivering to the police 
department, at the address provided in the notice, a written request for a hearing. 
b. ?Such request for a hearing shall set forth a telephone number and correct address where 
the owner, co-owner or lienholder may be contacted. 
c. ?The written notice must be received by the police department within the allotted time or the 
right to a hearing shall be deemed to be waived. 
d. ?Upon the timely receipt of a written request for a hearing: 
1. ?The city shall place the requesting party's name and case information on the agenda 
of the next available scheduled code enforcement hearing, given the scheduled 
hearing is not within ten days of the receipt of the request. 
2. ?Otherwise, the requesting party's name and case information shall be placed on the 
agenda of the next available scheduled hearing. 
e. ?In no case shall a hearing be more than 60 days of the date of the receipt of the request, or 
the case will be summarily dismissed by the city. 
f. ?Within two business days of receipt of the request for a hearing, the police department shall 
send notification by hand-delivery or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the party 
requesting the final hearing of the date, time and location of a hearing to be conducted 
pursuant to this article. Notification shall be complete upon mailing. 
(2) ?Rules of hearing. 
a. ?The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing, and hearsay evidence is 
admissible, including the police report, tow sheet, charging affidavit, and/or any other 
record developed by the police department. Cross-examination shall be permitted and all 
witnesses shall be sworn. The city shall have the burden to show by a preponderance of 
the evidence that the vehicle was used as set forth in section 42-143. 
b. ?Vehicle owner affidavit of non-responsibility. 
1. ?In order for the vehicle owner to establish that the motor vehicle was, at the time of the 
infraction of this article, in the care, custody, or control of another person without the 
consent of the registered owner, the vehicle owner is required to complete an affidavit 
setting forth the circumstances demonstrating that the motor vehicle was not in the 
vehicle owner's care, custody or control, or that of a person with the vehicle owner's 
consent. 
2. ?The affidavit must be executed in the presence of a notary, and include: 
i. ?If known to the vehicle owner, the name, address, and the driver's license number 
of the person who leased, rented or otherwise had care, custody, or control of the 
motor vehicle at the time of the alleged infraction. 
ii. ?If the vehicle was stolen, the police report indicating the vehicle was stolen at the 
time of the alleged infraction. 
iii. ?The following language immediately above the signature line: "Under penalties of 
perjury, I declare that I have read the foregoing affidavit and that the facts stated 
in it are true." 
c. ?The vehicle owner may present an affidavit, pursuant to this section, as a defense in any 
proceeding before the hearing officer. 
(3) ?Determination. 
a. ?Burden of proof and issue. 
1. ?At the outset of such hearing, the hearing officer shall determine that notice of the 
hearing was perfected. 
2. ?The failure of the attendance of the requester of the hearing will forfeit his challenge to 
the allegations by the city and the hearing officer may enter a judgment in favor of the 
city. 
i. ?The hearing officer may, at his discretion, continue the deliberation or hearing to 
the next hearing date. 
ii. ?Notice to the requester of the hearing shall be accomplished in the same manner 
as described elsewhere in this article. 
3. ?The issue to be considered by the hearing officer is whether the vehicle impounded 
was used in violation of section 42-143, Certain crimes identified. 
4. ?The level of proof is a preponderance of the evidence, and the burden is upon the city 
to demonstrate the charges. The plaintiff may use the vehicle owner affidavit of non-
responsibility as an affirmative defense. 
b. ?Hearing officer findings. 
1. ?If, after the hearing, a finding is made that the vehicle is found to be used in violation 
of this article as provided herein, and that none of the exceptions listed in section 42-
143(b) apply, unless the vehicle has previously been released to the owner, the 
hearing officer may enter an order requiring continued impoundment of the vehicle for 
a period not to exceed 30 days, pending payment of a $250.00 administrative civil 
penalty, plus actual hearing costs with the city, and payment of towing and storage 
charges to the wrecker company. 
2. ?If the hearing officer determines that the city did not meet its burden of proof or that 
one of the exceptions set forth in section 42-143(b) apply, the vehicle shall be 
released to the owner as soon as practical without the imposition of penalties or fees 
whatsoever. Towing fees and storage charges imposed by the tow company shall 
apply. Any bond posted shall be returned. 
3. ?If the hearing is not held as provided in subsection (a)(1) of this section, the vehicle 
shall be released to the owner as soon as practical without the imposition of penalties 
or fees whatsoever. Towing fees and storage charges imposed by the tow company 
shall apply. Any bond posted shall be returned. The owner shall not be entitled to 
release of the vehicle for delays in receiving notice of the hearing, absent a showing 
of resulting prejudice. 
4. ?If the vehicle: 
i. ?Has not been previously bonded and released, a failure by the owner to pay any 
fine assessed plus any accrued towing and storage charges within the time 
specified in the hearing officer's order shall constitute abandonment of the 
vehicle. In the case where the vehicle is subject to a perfected lien, the city may 
release the vehicle to the lienholder upon payment of the administrative civil 
penalty and cost of the hearing to the city, and accrued towing and storage fees 
to the wrecker company. 
ii. ?Has been previously bonded and released, the finding of facts in the affirmative 
for the city shall allow the forfeit of $250.00 of the bond as an administrative civil 
penalty, plus actual court costs, not to exceed $250.00. Any remaining bond 
monies will be returned to the person or entity posting such bond without interest 
and in a timely manner. 
5. ?If no hearing is timely requested, the cash bond has not been posted with the police 
department, and the vehicle is subject to a perfected lien, the city may release the 
vehicle to the lienholder upon payment of the administrative civil penalty and accrued 
towing and storage fees to the wrecker company. 
6. ?If no hearing is timely requested and the cash bond is not posted with the police 
department and the vehicle is not subject to a perfected lien, the vehicle shall be 
deemed abandoned by the owner and the vehicle shall be released to the wrecker 
company to satisfy the wrecker company's lien 30 days after the date of 
impoundment. 
c. ?The city attorney or his designee is hereby authorized to enter into settlement agreements 
as may be appropriate to accomplish the objectives of this section. 
d. ?Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the city from enforcing the provisions of this 
section against a vehicle initially impounded pursuant to the Florida Contraband Forfeiture 
Act. 
(4) ?Judgment notification and process. 
a. ?A certified copy of the order of the hearing officer imposing an administrative civil penalty 
and assessing towing, storage and hearing costs may be recorded in the public records of 
any county. 
b. ?Upon recording, the order shall constitute a lien against any personal property owned by 
the vehicle owner. Such lien shall be superior to all other liens, except a lien for taxes, and 
shall bear interest at the rate authorized by law from the date of its filing. 
c. ?Upon petition to the circuit court, such order may be enforced in the same manner as a 
court judgment by the sheriffs of this state, including levy against such personal property; 
however, such order shall not be deemed a court judgment except for enforcement 
purposes. 
d. ?In an action to enforce an order as provided in this section, the city shall be entitled to 
recover all costs, including reasonable attorney fees, that it incurs thereby. 
(b) ?Civil penalty. 
(1) ?No person shall be subject to a civil penalty of more than $500.00 for any single incident under 
this article. 
(2) ?Actual towing or wrecker fees, storage fees imposed by the towing or wrecker company, and 
actual hearing costs are not included in the civil penalty. 
(3) ?The city may establish procedures for the collection of a penalty imposed herein, and may 
enforce such penalty by civil action in the nature of debt. 
(4) ?Assignment. 
a. ?Fifty percent of the civil penalties collected under the provisions of this article shall be 
assigned to an account to be used to enhance the criminal investigations component of the 
city police department. 
b. ?Fifty percent of the civil penalties collected under the provisions of this article shall be 
assigned to an account to be used to enhance the forensic technical services component 
of the city police department. 
(c) ?Appeal. 
(1) ?The owner of the vehicle that was seized and impounded may appeal a ruling or order of the 
hearing officer by proceeding in circuit court in accordance with Rule 9.190, Florida Rules of 
Civil Procedure. 
(2) ?An appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the rendition of the order to be appealed. The nature 
of the appeal shall be from a final administrative order. 
(Code 1993, § 54-105; Ord. No. 2168, § 3, 6-2-2010) 


Sec. 42-147. - Hearing officer; code enforcement officers. 
(a) ?The mayor of the city is authorized to contract with an individual to perform the functions of a 
hearing officer pursuant to this Code. Such hearing officer may be one in the same as that presiding 
over and holding hearings for other code enforcement proceedings within the city. 
(b) ?For the purposes of this article, and not withstanding any other provision in this Code, all duly sworn 
city police officers are hereby designated code enforcement officers. 
(Code 1993, § 54-106; Ord. No. 2168, § 3, 6-2-2010) 


Chapter 46 - PARKS AND RECREATION 


Sec. 46-1. - Applicability of chapter. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall govern the use of city-owned parks and recreational areas and 
the facilities located therein. 
(Code 1983, § 15-1; Code 1993, § 58-1) 


Sec. 46-2. - Rates and charges. 
    The rates and charges for the use of recreation facilities and recreation programs shall be developed 
by city staff with final approval by the mayor or his designee. Rates and charges shall be reviewed 
annually, at a minimum, to ensure the rates and charges are reasonably related to the city's actual costs 
and are consistent with prevailing market rates. 
(Code 1983, § 15-8; Code 1993, § 58-2; Ord. No. 1374, § 1, 8-16-2000; Ord. No. 1854, § I, 8-2-
2006) 


Sec. 46-3. - Permit for group activities. 
(a) ?Whenever any group, association or organization desires to use park facilities for a particular 
purpose, such as picnics, parties or theatrical or entertainment performances, a representative of 
such group, association or organization shall first obtain a permit from the office of the recreation 
division for such purposes. The city council may adopt an application form to be used by the 
recreation division for such situations. 
(b) ?The recreation division shall grant the application if it appears that the group, association or 
organization will not interfere with the general use of the park by the individual members of the public 
and if the group, association or organization meets all conditions contained in the application. The 
application may contain a requirement for an indemnity bond to protect the city from any liability of 
any kind or character and to protect city property from damage. 
(Code 1983, § 15-5; Code 1993, § 58-3) 


Sec. 46-4. - Hours of operation. 
(a) ?Except as otherwise specifically provided, city parks shall be open for public use from sunrise to 
sunset, and closed from sunset to sunrise. Such closing hours shall not apply to activities being held 
pursuant to approval or permit granted by the city administrator, the city council, the recreation 
director or their designee when such approval or permit specifies longer hours. The city administrator 
or his designee is authorized, upon application of any citizen, to permit a reasonable expansion or 
contraction of city park hours for specific events if good cause is shown. 
(b) ?It shall be unlawful for any person, other than city personnel conducting city business therein, to 
occupy or be present in such park during any hour in which the park is not open to the public. Any 
section or part of the park, including, but not limited to, automobile parking areas, may be declared 
closed to the public by the parks manager at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily 
or at regular or stated intervals. 
(c) ?All persons engaged in authorized or scheduled activities shall vacate the city property upon 
completion of the event. 
(Code 1983, § 15-4; Code 1993, § 58-4) 


Sec. 46-5. - General requirements for use of grounds and facilities. 
    Each person shall clean up all debris, extinguish all fires when such fires are permitted, and leave 
the premises in good order, and the facilities in a neat and sanitary condition. 
(Code 1983, § 15-2; Code 1993, § 58-5) 


Sec. 46-6. - General standards for personal conduct. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to either perform or permit to be performed any of the acts 
prohibited in this section: 
(1) ?Defacing or damaging property. No person shall willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper 
with or displace or remove any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, paving or 
paving material, landscaping, water lines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances 
thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts 
or other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or 
appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(2) ?Polluting bodies of water. No person shall throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be 
placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in or 
adjacent to any park, or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into such waters, 
any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of such 
waters. 
(3) ?Dumping garbage or refuse. No person shall bring in or dump, deposit or leave any bottles, 
paper, broken glass, ashes, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse or other trash. No 
such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park, or left anywhere 
on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided. 
Where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the 
park by the person responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(4) ?Endangering personal safety. No person shall endanger the safety of any person by any 
conduct or act. 
(5) ?Fighting. No person shall commit any assault or battery or engage in fighting. 
(6) ?Alcoholic beverages. No person shall carry, possess or drink any alcoholic beverage in any 
park unless a permit is issued by the city for a particular event occurring in a city park. 
(7) ?Violation of rules. No person shall violate any rule for the use of the park. 
(8) ?Interference with use. No person shall prevent any person from using any park, or any of its 
facilities, or interfere with such use in compliance with this chapter and the rules applicable to 
such use. 
(9) ?Swimming, bathing or walking in waters or waterways. No person shall swim, bathe or walk in 
any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any park, except in such waters and at such places 
as are provided therefor, and in compliance with such regulations as are set forth in this chapter 
or may be hereafter adopted. 
(10) ?Use of tobacco products. No person shall be permitted to smoke cigarettes, cigars, or pipes or 
consume any other types of tobacco products within 100 feet of any city-owned playground 
apparatus or equipment. It is unlawful for a person to possess or consume any tobacco product, 
including e-cigarettes, in or upon city parks, facilities, or properties, as set forth in either the city 
Code or the rules promulgated by the city. All recreation and parks facilities shall be tobacco-
free and drug-free zones. 
(Code 1983, § 15-3; Code 1993, § 58-6; Ord. No. 1679, § I, 8-4-2004) 


Sec. 46-7. - Use of picnic areas. 
    Employees of the city parks division or recreation division shall have authority to regulate the 
activities in picnic areas when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for the 
comfort and convenience of all. No person in a park shall use any portion of the picnic areas or any of the 
buildings or structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics to the exclusion of other persons, nor 
shall any person use such areas and facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded, 
unless prior reservations and permits have been obtained through the parks division or recreation division 
offices. 
(Code 1983, § 15-6; Code 1993, § 58-7) 


Sec. 46-8. - Miscellaneous regulations. 
(a) ?Special activities. It shall be unlawful to engage in special activities, including, but not limited to, 
flying model airplanes, golf practice and games, except at locations specifically designated for such 
activities by the recreation director and the city council. Areas for such activities may be reserved by 
groups for use at specified times. 
(b) ?Driving or parking motor vehicles. It shall be unlawful to drive or park any motor vehicle except on a 
street, driveway or parking lot in any park, or to park or leave any vehicle in any place other than one 
established for public parking, unless otherwise authorized. 
(c) ?Animals. It shall be unlawful to bring any dangerous animal into any municipal park or recreation 
area. It shall be unlawful to permit any domesticated or nondomesticated animal to be in any 
municipal park. Any circus or animal show may be granted an exception to this section upon 
receiving approval of the city council. 
(d) ?Peddling, vending, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than employees and officials of the 
city acting on its behalf, to vend, sell, peddle or offer for sale any commodity, article or service within 
any park without prior authorization and consent by the city council. 
(e) ?Alcoholic beverages. It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession, custody or 
control any alcoholic beverage of any kind whatsoever, except as provided in section 6-3. The term 
"alcoholic beverage," for purposes of this subsection, shall be as defined by Florida Statutes. 
(f) ?Controlled substances. It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession, custody or 
control any controlled substance or illegal drug, as defined by Florida Statutes. 
(g) ?Posting signs or advertisements. It shall be unlawful for anyone to paste, glue, tack or otherwise 
post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatsoever, nor shall any person erect or cause 
to be erected any sign whatsoever on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a city park 
without a permit issued by the city. 
(h) ?Exemption for government officials. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any properly 
authorized government official in pursuance of any official duty. 
(i) ?Live and mechanical amusements. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a mechanized 
amusement ride or game in any portion of the city parks or recreation areas, including, but not limited 
to, the following: 
(1) ?Carnival riding devices such as merry-go-rounds, Ferris wheels, mechanical swings, etc. 
(2) ?Mechanized kiddie rides used exclusively for the entertainment of children. 
(3) ?Amusement arcade games. 
(4) ?Live pony rides. 
(j) ?Exemption for city-sponsored events. City-sponsored events are exempt from the provisions of 
subsection (i) of this section. 
(Code 1983, § 15-7; Code 1993, § 58-8) 


Sec. 46-9. - Use of tobacco products prohibited; penalty. 
(a) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to use any type of tobacco product within 100 feet of any city-
owned playground apparatus or equipment. The term "playground apparatus or equipment" is 
hereby defined to include, but is not limited to, swings, rock structures, slides, sand boxes, and 
modular play structures, etc. 
(b) ?A law enforcement officer may issue a citation to any person in violation of the provisions of this 
section. 
(c) ?Penalty. Any person issued a citation pursuant to this section shall be deemed to be charged with a 
civil infraction. A fine of $25.00 shall be assessed for each violation of this section. 
(Code 1993, § 58-9; Ord. No. 1679, § II, 8-4-2004) 


Chapter 50 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 50-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings 
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Duly licensed permanent place of business means a regularly established store or business having a 
permanent address within the corporate limits of the city. 
    Peddlers, canvassers, salespersons, hawkers, itinerant merchants or vendors mean all persons not 
having a permanent duly licensed place of business within the corporate limits of the city, and seeking to 
sell, give or in any way dispose of goods, services, wares or merchandise of every kind and nature. 
    Solicitor means all persons seeking or soliciting funds or services of any kind or nature and for any 
purpose whatsoever. 
(Code 1983, § 17-1; Code 1993, § 62-1) 


Sec. 50-2. - Exemptions from chapter. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
(1) ?Representatives of established and recognized newspapers making regular house-to-house 
deliveries. 
(2) ?Employees of established and recognized dairies making regular house-to-house deliveries of 
milk or dairy products. 
(3) ?All persons or business representatives specifically invited by the owner or tenant to come to 
the house, or invited by the owner or manager of a local business establishment to come to the 
business establishment, to engage in selling, soliciting or displaying merchandise, goods or 
wares. 
(Code 1983, § 17-5; Code 1993, § 62-2) 


Sec. 50-3. - Enforcement of chapter. 
    The police department shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1983, § 17-2(2); Code 1993, § 62-3) 


Sec. 50-4. - Record of violations. 
    The chief of police shall report to the city clerk all convictions for violations of this chapter, and the 
city clerk shall maintain a record for each permit issued and record the reports of violations therein. 
(Code 1983, § 17-6; Code 1993, § 62-4) 


Sec. 50-5. - Entry on private property. 
    Entering upon a private residence in the city by a peddler, solicitor, person, canvasser, salesperson, 
hawker, itinerant merchant, vendor or junk and second-hand dealer under false pretenses for the purpose 
of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise or personal services, and for disposing of or 
peddling or hawking goods, wares, merchandise or personal services, or remaining in a private residence 
or on the premises thereof after the owner or occupant thereof shall request any itinerant merchant or 
transient vendor to leave, or going in or upon the premises of a private residence by a peddler, solicitor, 
person, canvasser, salesperson, hawker, itinerant merchant and vendor for any such purposes when the 
owner or occupant thereof has displayed a "No Soliciting" sign on such premises, is declared to be 
unlawful and a nuisance. 
(Code 1983, § 17-4; Code 1993, § 62-5) 


Secs. 50-6—50-28. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - PERMIT 


Sec. 50-29. - Required. 
    No person shall engage in house-to-house and business soliciting, peddling, canvassing, selling, 
hawking, vending, or junk or second-hand dealing without first having a permit and identification badge 
issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 17-21; Code 1993, § 62-36) 


Sec. 50-30. - Application. 
(a) ?Applicants for identification badges and permits under this article must file with the city clerk a sworn 
to and notarized written application in duplicate on forms to be furnished by the city clerk, which shall 
give the following information: 
(1) ?The name and description of the applicant; 
(2) ?The permanent home address and full local address of the applicant; 
(3) ?A brief description of the nature of the solicitation business and the goods to be sold. Where 
goods to be sold are products of a farm or orchard, peddlers must state whether such goods are 
self-produced or self-grown, and, if so, how many acres are in production and where the 
acreage is located; 
(4) ?If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the 
exact relationship; 
(5) ?The length of time for which the right to do business is desired; 
(6) ?If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the vehicle, together with the license number or other 
means of identification; 
(7) ?The place any goods or property proposed to be sold by order for future delivery are 
manufactured or produced, the place where such goods or products are located at the time the 
application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery; 
(8) ?Two photographs of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of filing of 
the application, which picture shall be no larger than two inches by two inches and not smaller 
than one inch by one inch in size, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear 
and distinguishing manner; 
(9) ?The name of at least two reliable references, preferably in the county, who will attest as to the 
applicant's good character and business respectability, or, in lieu of the names of references, 
such other available evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of the 
applicant as will enable an investigator to evaluate properly such character and business 
responsibility; and 
(10) ?A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of any felony, 
misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance involving moral turpitude, the nature of the 
offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. 
(b) ?It shall be the duty of all persons applying for a permit to furnish proper credentials to the city. Such 
credentials may be in the form of a letter, card or memorandum, signed by the person or official 
directly in charge of such solicitation, certifying that the bearer thereof is authorized to represent the 
person or organization conducting the solicitation. 
(c) ?At the time of filing the application, a fee of $10.00 shall be paid to the city clerk to cover the cost of 
investigation of the facts stated therein. 
(Code 1983, § 17-22; Code 1993, § 62-37) 


Sec. 50-31. - Issuance. 
(a) ?Issuance generally. The city administrator or designee is hereby empowered to interview and to 
investigate all persons seeking to engage in house-to-house and business canvassing, soliciting, 
selling, peddling or vending merchandise within the corporate limits of the city, and to issue or reject 
permits and identification badges to persons so applying. 
(b) ?Authority to require additional information. The city administrator or his designee may, in order to 
facilitate his investigation, require from any person desiring to secure a permit and identification 
badge for house-to-house and business canvassing the submission of credit reports, references, 
fingerprints and such other information as may facilitate the due and proper investigation of the 
person so applying. 
(c) ?Criteria for issuance. The city administrator or his designee shall issue a permit and identification 
badge whenever he finds the following facts to exist: 
(1) ?All of the statements made in the application are true. 
(2) ?The applicant has not engaged in any fraudulent transaction or enterprise. 
(d) ?Application for occupational license. All persons who may be granted an annual permit and 
identification badge under the terms of this section shall, prior to engaging in house-to-house or 
business activities, make application for any required occupational license, and such licenses shall 
be issued upon payment of the fees therefor as prescribed by ordinance. 
(e) ?Time limit for action. The city administrator or his designee shall in every case make his decision to 
issue or reject permits and badges within a maximum period of four weeks from his receipt of the 
original application by the person seeking to engage in house-to-house and business activities within 
the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 17-23; Code 1993, § 62-38; Ord. No. 2509 , 9-21-2016) 


Sec. 50-32. - Fees. 
    Upon the issuance of a permit under this article, other than for charitable causes, the permittee shall 
pay to the city a fee of $50.00. In addition, the permittee shall pay to the city the sum of $4.00 for each 
identification badge required. 
(Code 1983, § 17-24; Code 1993, § 62-39) 


Sec. 50-33. - Format and disclaimer. 
    Each permit issued by the city pursuant to the provisions of this article shall have the following words 
clearly imprinted thereon: "The City of Apopka does not endorse the validity, reliability or merchantability 
of the product, cause or solicitation which this permit allows. Any misrepresentation or irregularity should 
be reported to the city clerk." Each identification badge shall be signed by the chief of police and shall be 
in such form as he shall require. 
(Code 1983, § 17-27; Code 1993, § 62-40) 


Sec. 50-34. - Display. 
(a) ?A person required to obtain a permit under this article seen soliciting or peddling who is not known 
by a police officer to have been issued a permit shall produce his identification badge and permit. 
(b) ?Solicitors and peddlers shall exhibit their permits and identification badges at the request of any 
citizen. 
(Code 1983, §§ 17-2(1), 17-26; Code 1993, § 62-41) 


Sec. 50-35. - Expiration and renewal. 
    Annual permits and identification badges issued under the provisions of this article shall expire on 
September 30 of the year in which issued. Permits and identification badges issued for shorter periods 
shall expire on the date specified in the permit. Permits and badges shall be renewable upon compliance 
with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1983, § 17-25; Code 1993, § 62-42) 


Sec. 50-36. - Revocation. 
(a) ?Identification badges and permits issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by the 
city administrator or his designee or the chief of police, after notice and hearing, for any of the 
following causes: 
(1) ?Fraud, misrepresentation or a false statement contained in the application for the permit. 
(2) ?Fraud, misrepresentation or a false statement made in the course of carrying on his business 
as a solicitor or peddler. 
(3) ?Any violation of this chapter. 
(4) ?Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(5) ?Conducting the business of soliciting or peddling in an unlawful manner, or in such manner as 
to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general 
welfare of the public. 
(b) ?Notice of the hearing for revocation of a permit or identification badge shall be given in writing, 
setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice 
shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the permittee, at his last-known address, at least five days prior 
to the date for the hearing. 
(Code 1983, § 17-28(a), (b); Code 1993, § 62-43; Ord. No. 2509 , 9-21-2016) 


Sec. 50-37. - Appeals. 
(a) ?Any person aggrieved by the action of the city administrator or his designee and/or chief of police in 
the denial of an application for a permit, or in the decision with reference to the revocation of the 
permit as provided in this article, shall have the right of appeal to the mayor. Such appeal shall be 
taken by filing with the mayor, within 14 days after notice of the action complained of has been 
mailed to such person's last-known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for 
appeal. 
(b) ?The mayor shall set a time and place for hearing such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be 
given to the appellant in the same manner as provided in section 50-36(b) for notice of hearing on 
revocation. The decision and order of the mayor on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1983, § 17-28(c), (d); Code 1993, § 62-44; Ord. No. 2509 , 9-21-2016) 


Chapter 54 - RETIREMENT SYSTEMS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Public officers and employees, F.S. ch. 112; actuarial soundness of retirement 
systems, F.S. § 112.60 et seq. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 54-1—54-18. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - GENERAL EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM 


Sec. 54-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accumulated contributions means a member's own contributions, if any, without interest, except any 
interest which may have been credited to the accumulated contributions prior to the effective date. For 
those members who purchase credited service with interest or at no cost to the system, any payment 
representing the amount attributable to member contributions based on the applicable member 
contribution rate and any payment representing interest and any required actuarially calculated payments 
for the purchase of such credited service, shall be included in accumulated contributions. 
    Actuarial equivalent means a benefit or amount of equal value, based upon the 1983 Group Annuity 
Mortality Table and an interest rate of eight percent per annum, using appropriate actuarial methods. 
    Average final compensation means 1/12 of the average salary of the five best years of the last ten 
years of credited service prior to retirement, termination, or death, or the career average as a full-time 
general employee, whichever is greater. A year shall be 12 consecutive months. 
    Beneficiary means the person entitled to receive benefits hereunder at the death of a member who 
has been designated in writing by the member and filed with the board. If no such designation is in effect, 
or if no person so designated is living, at the time of death of the member, the beneficiary shall be the 
estate of the member. 
    Board means the board of trustees, which shall administer and manage the system herein provided 
and serve as trustees of the fund. 
    Credited service means the total number of years and fractional parts of years of service as a 
general employee with member contributions, when required, omitting intervening years or fractional parts 
of years when such member was not employed by the city as a general employee. A member may 
voluntarily leave his accumulated contributions in the fund for a period of five years after leaving the 
employ of the city, pending the possibility of being re-employed as a general employee, and remaining 
employed for a period of not less than three years, without losing credit for the time that he was a 
member of the system. If a member who is not vested is not re-employed within five years or does not 
remain employed for a period of three years upon re-employment within five years, his accumulated 
contributions, if less than $1,000.00, will be returned. If a member who is not vested is not re-employed 
within five years, his accumulated contributions, if $1,000.00 or more, will be returned only upon the 
written request of the member and upon completion of a written election to receive a cash lump sum or to 
rollover the lump sum amount on forms designated by the board. For terminated vested members, 
accumulated contributions will be returned only upon written request. Upon return of a member's 
accumulated contributions, all of his rights and benefits under the system are forfeited and terminated. 
Any period of 160 hours or less during any calendar year that a member is on leave without pay from the 
city pursuant to the Family and Medical Leave Act shall be included as credited service. Periods in 
excess of 160 hours shall be included as credited service only in accordance with section 54-40. 
    Effective date means the date on which the ordinance from which this article is derived (Ordinance 
Number 710, as amended) becomes effective. 
    Fund means the trust fund established herein as part of the system. 
    General employee means all actively employed full-time general employees of the city, including 
those in their initial probationary employment period, as defined on the effective date. The term "general 
employee" does not include full-time credited firefighters or credited police officers. 
    Internal Revenue Code means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time to time. 
    Member means an actively employed general employee who fulfills the prescribed membership 
requirements. Benefit improvements which, in the past, have been provided for by amendments to the 
system adopted by city ordinance, and any benefit improvements which might be made in the future, shall 
apply prospectively and shall not apply to members who terminate employment or who retire prior to the 
effective date of any ordinance adopting such benefit improvements, unless such ordinance specifically 
provides to the contrary. 
    Plan year means the 12-month period beginning October 1 and ending September 30 of the 
following year. 
    Retiree means a member who has entered retirement status. 
    Retirement means a member's separation from city employment with eligibility for immediate receipt 
of benefits under the system or entry into the deferred retirement option plan. 
    Salary means the total compensation for services rendered to the city as a general employee 
reportable on the member's W-2 form, plus all tax-deferred, tax-sheltered or tax-exempt items of income 
derived from elective employee payroll deductions or salary reductions. Compensation in excess of the 
limitations on compensation for an eligible employee shall not be less than the amount which was allowed 
to be taken into account hereunder as in effect on July 1, 1993. An eligible employee is an individual who 
was a member before the first plan year beginning after December 31, 1995. 
    Spouse means the lawful wife or husband of a member at the time of pre-retirement death or 
retirement. 
    System means the City of Apopka Municipal General Employees' Retirement Trust Fund as 
contained herein, and all amendments thereto. 
(Code 1993, § 63-21; Ord. No. 1721, § 1, 12-1-2004; Ord. No. 1808, § 1, 2-15-2006) 


Sec. 54-20. - Membership. 
(a) ?Conditions of eligibility. All general employees as of the effective date, and all future new general 
employees, shall become members of this system as a condition of employment. 
(b) ?Designation of beneficiary. Each general employee shall complete a form prescribed by the board 
designating a beneficiary or beneficiaries. 
(Code 1993, § 63-22; Ord. No. 1721, § 1, 12-1-2004) 


Sec. 54-21. - Board of trustees. 
(a) ?Sole and exclusive administration of and responsibilities for the proper operation of the system and 
for making effective the provisions of this article is hereby vested in a board of trustees. The board is 
hereby designated as the plan administrator. The board shall consist of five trustees, two of whom 
shall be the mayor and the city clerk, and two of whom shall be members of the system, who shall be 
elected by a majority of the general employees who are members of the system and who vote in said 
election. The fifth trustee shall be chosen by a majority of the previous four trustees as provided for 
herein, and such person's name shall be submitted to the city council. Upon receipt of the fifth 
person's name, the city council shall, as a ministerial duty, appoint such person to the board as its 
fifth trustee. The fifth trustee shall have the same rights as each of the other four trustees appointed 
or elected as herein provided and shall serve a two-year term unless he sooner vacates the office. 
Each member trustee shall serve as trustee for a period of two years, unless he sooner leaves the 
employment of the city as a general employee or otherwise vacates his office as trustee, whereupon 
a successor shall be chosen in the same manner as the departing trustee. Each trustee may 
succeed himself in office. Deferred retirement option plan (DROP) participants can be elected as and 
vote for elected trustees. The board shall establish and administer the nominating and election 
procedures for each election. The board shall meet at least quarterly each year. The board shall be a 
legal entity with, in addition to other powers and responsibilities contained herein, the power to bring 
and defend lawsuits of every kind, nature, and description. 
(b) ?The trustees shall, by a majority vote, elect a chairperson, vice-chairperson and a secretary. The 
secretary of the board shall keep a complete minute book of the actions, proceedings, or hearings of 
the board. The trustees shall not receive any compensation as such, but may receive expenses and 
per diem as provided by law. 
(c) ?Each trustee shall be entitled to one vote on the board. Three affirmative votes shall be necessary 
for any decision by the trustees at any meeting of the board. A trustee shall abstain from voting as 
the result of a conflict of interest and shall comply with the provisions of F.S. § 112.3143. 
(d) ?The board shall engage such actuarial, accounting, legal, and other services as shall be required to 
transact the business of the system. The compensation of all persons engaged by the board and all 
other expenses of the board necessary for the operation of the system shall be paid from the fund at 
such rates and in such amounts as the board shall agree. In the event the board chooses to use the 
city's legal counsel, actuary or other professional, technical or other advisors, it shall do so only 
under terms and conditions acceptable to the board. 
(e) ?The duties and responsibilities of the board shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the 
following: 
(1) ?To construe the provisions of the system and determine all questions arising thereunder. 
(2) ?To determine all questions relating to eligibility and membership. 
(3) ?To determine and certify the amount of all retirement allowances or other benefits hereunder. 
(4) ?To establish uniform rules and procedures to be followed for administrative purposes, benefit 
applications and all matters required to administer the system. 
(5) ?To distribute to members, at regular intervals, information concerning the system. 
(6) ?To receive and process all applications for benefits. 
(7) ?To authorize all payments whatsoever from the fund and to notify the disbursing agent, in 
writing, of approved benefit payments and other expenditures arising through operation of the 
system and fund. 
(8) ?To have performed actuarial studies and valuations, at least as often as required by law, and 
make recommendations regarding any and all changes in the provisions of the system. 
(9) ?To perform such other duties as are required to prudently administer the system. 
(10) ?To appoint an administrator of the system if deemed appropriate by the board. 
(Code 1993, § 63-23; Ord. No. 1721, § 1, 12-1-2004; Ord. No. 1775, § 1, 11-2-2005) 


Sec. 54-22. - Finances and fund management; establishment and operation of fund. 
(a) ?As part of the system, there exists the fund into which shall be deposited all of the contributions and 
assets whatsoever attributable to the system. 
(b) ?The actual custody and supervision of the fund (and assets thereof) shall be vested in the board. 
Payment of benefits and disbursements from the fund shall be made by the disbursing agent, but 
only upon written authorization from the board. 
(c) ?All funds of the Municipal General Employees' Retirement Trust Fund may be deposited by the 
board with the finance director of the city, acting in a ministerial capacity only, who shall be liable in 
the same manner and to the same extent as he is liable for the safekeeping of funds for the city. 
However, any funds so deposited with the finance director of the city shall be kept in a separate fund 
by the finance director or clearly identified as such funds of the Municipal General Employees' 
Retirement Trust Fund. In lieu thereof, the board shall deposit the funds of the Municipal General 
Employees' Retirement Trust Fund in a qualified public depository as defined in F.S. § 280.02, which 
depository, with regard to such funds, shall conform to and be bound by all of the provisions of F.S. 
ch. 280. In order to fulfill its investment responsibilities as set forth herein, the board may retain the 
services of a custodian bank, an investment advisor registered under the Investment Advisors Act of 
1940 or otherwise exempt from such required registration, an insurance company, or a combination 
of these, for the purposes of investment decisions and management. Such investment manager shall 
have discretion, subject to any guidelines as prescribed by the board, in the investment of all fund 
assets. 
(d) ?All funds and securities of the system may be commingled in the fund, provided, that accurate 
records are maintained at all times reflecting the financial composition of the fund, including accurate 
current accounts and entries as regards the following: 
(1) ?Current amounts of accumulated contributions of members on both an individual and 
aggregate account basis; 
(2) ?Receipts and disbursements; 
(3) ?Benefit payments; 
(4) ?Current amounts clearly reflecting all monies, funds and assets whatsoever attributable to 
contributions and deposits from the city; 
(5) ?All interest, dividends and gains (or losses) whatsoever; and 
(6) ?Such other entries as may be properly required so as to reflect a clear and complete financial 
report of the fund. 
(e) ?An audit shall be performed annually by a certified public accountant for the most recent fiscal year 
of the system, showing a detailed listing of assets and a statement of all income and disbursements 
during the year. Such income and disbursements must be reconciled with the assets at the 
beginning and end of the year. Such report shall reflect a complete evaluation of assets on both a 
cost and market basis, as well as other items normally included in a certified audit. 
(f) ?The board shall have the following investment powers and authority: 
(1) ?The board shall be vested with full legal title to said fund, subject, however, and in any event to 
the authority and power of the city council to amend or terminate this fund, provided, that no 
amendment or fund termination shall ever result in the use of any assets of this fund except for 
the payment of regular expenses and benefits under this system, unless otherwise provided 
herein. All contributions from time to time paid into the fund, and the income thereof, without 
distinction between principal and income, shall be held and administered by the board or its 
agent in the fund, and the board shall not be required to segregate or invest separately any 
portion of the fund. 
(2) ?All monies paid into or held in the fund shall be invested and re-invested by the board, and the 
investment of all or any part of such funds shall be limited to: 
a. ?Annuity and life insurance contracts with life insurance companies in amounts sufficient to 
provide, in whole or in part, the benefits to which all of the members in the fund shall be 
entitled under the provisions of this system, and pay the initial and subsequent premium 
thereon. 
b. ?Time or savings accounts of a national bank, a state bank insured by the Bank Insurance 
Fund or a savings/building and loan association insured by the Savings Association 
Insurance Fund which is administered by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or its 
successor or a state or federal chartered credit union whose share accounts are insured by 
the National Credit Union Share Insurance Fund. 
c. ?Obligations of the United States or obligations guaranteed as to principal and interest by 
the government of the United States or by an agency of the government of the United 
States. 
d. ?Stocks, commingled funds administered by national or state banks, mutual funds and 
bonds or other evidences of indebtedness, provided that: 
1. ?Except as provided in subsection (f)(2)d.2. of this section, all individually held 
securities and all securities in a commingled or mutual fund must be issued or 
guaranteed by a corporation organized under the laws of the United States, any state 
or organized territory of the United States, or the District of Columbia. 
2. ?Up to ten percent of the assets of the fund may be invested in foreign securities. 
3. ?The board shall not invest more than five percent of its assets in the common stock, 
capital stock or convertible securities of any one issuing company, nor shall the 
aggregate investment in any one issuing company exceed five percent of the 
outstanding capital stock of that company, nor shall the aggregate of its investments 
in common stock, capital stock and convertible securities at cost exceed 65 percent of 
the assets of the fund. 
(3) ?At least once every three years, and more often as determined by the board, the board shall 
retain a professionally qualified independent consultant to evaluate the performance of all 
current investment managers and make recommendations regarding the retention of all such 
investment managers. These recommendations shall be considered by the board at its next 
regularly scheduled meeting. 
(4) ?The board may retain in cash and keep unproductive of income such amount of the fund as it 
may deem advisable, having regard for the cash requirements of the system. 
(5) ?Neither the board nor any trustee shall be liable for the making, retention or sale of any 
investment or re-investment made as herein provided, nor for any loss or diminishment of the 
fund, except that due to his or its own negligence, willful misconduct or lack of good faith. 
(6) ?The board may cause any investment in securities held by it to be registered in or transferred 
into its name as trustee or into the name of such nominee as it may direct, or it may retain them 
unregistered and in a form permitting transferability, but the books and records shall at all times 
show that all investments are part of the trust fund. 
(7) ?The board is empowered, but is not required, to vote upon any stocks, bonds, or securities of 
any corporation, association, or trust and to give general or specific proxies or powers of 
attorney with or without power of substitution; to participate in mergers, reorganizations, 
recapitalizations, consolidations, and similar transactions with respect to such securities; to 
deposit such stock or other securities in any voting trust or any protective or like committee with 
the trustees or with depositories designated thereby; to amortize or fail to amortize any part or 
all of the premium or discount resulting from the acquisition or disposition of assets; and 
generally to exercise any of the power of an owner with respect to stocks, bonds, or other 
investments comprising the fund which it may deem to be to the best interest of the fund to 
exercise. 
(8) ?The board shall not be required to make any inventory or appraisal or report to any court, nor to 
secure any order of court for the exercise of any power contained herein. 
(9) ?Where any action which the board is required to take or any duty or function which it is required 
to perform, either under the terms herein or under the general law applicable to it as trustee 
under this article, can reasonably be taken or performed only after receipt by it from a member, 
the city, or any other entity, of specific information, certification, direction or instructions, the 
board shall be free of liability in failing to take such action or perform such duty or function until 
such information, certification, direction or instruction has been received by it. 
(10) ?Any overpayments or underpayments from the fund to a member, retiree or beneficiary 
caused by errors of computation shall be adjusted with interest at a rate per annum approved by 
the board in such a manner that the actuarial equivalent of the benefit to which the member, 
retiree or beneficiary was correctly entitled, shall be paid. Overpayments shall be charged 
against payments next succeeding the correction or collected in another manner, if prudent. 
Underpayments shall be made up from the fund in a prudent manner. 
(11) ?The board shall sustain no liability whatsoever for the sufficiency of the fund to meet the 
payments and benefits herein provided for. 
(12) ?In any application to or proceeding or action in the courts, only the board shall be a necessary 
party, and no member or other person having an interest in the fund shall be entitled to any 
notice or service of process. Any judgment entered in such a proceeding or action shall be 
conclusive upon all persons. 
(13) ?Any of the foregoing powers and functions reposed in the board may be performed or carried 
out by the board through duly authorized agents, provided that the board at all times maintains 
continuous supervision over the acts of any such agent; provided, further, that legal title to said 
fund shall always remain in the board. 
(Code 1993, § 63-24; Ord. No. 1721, § 1, 12-1-2004) 


Sec. 54-23. - Contributions. 
(a) ?Member contributions. 
(1) ?Amount. Members of the system shall be required to make regular contributions to the fund in 
the amount of 4.9 percent of their salary. Member contributions withheld by the city on behalf of 
the member shall be deposited with the board at least monthly. The contributions made by each 
member to the fund shall be designated as employer contributions pursuant to section 414(h) of 
the Internal Revenue Code. Such designation is contingent upon the contributions being 
excluded from the member's gross income for federal income tax purposes. For all other 
purposes of the system, such contributions shall be considered to be member contributions. 
(2) ?Method. Such contributions shall be made by payroll deduction. 
(b) ?City contributions. So long as this system is in effect, the city shall make quarterly contributions to 
the trust fund in an amount equal to the total cost for the year, as shown by the most recent actuarial 
valuation of the system, but in no event shall the city's annual contribution be less than 3½ percent of 
the total salary of plan members. The total cost for any year shall be defined as the total normal cost 
plus the additional amount sufficient to amortize the unfunded past service liability as provided in part 
VII, F.S. ch. 112. 
(c) ?Other. Private donations, gifts and contributions may be deposited to the fund, but such deposits 
must be accounted for separately and kept on a segregated bookkeeping basis. Funds arising from 
these sources may be used only for additional benefits for members, as determined by the board, 
and may not be used to reduce what would have otherwise been required city contributions. 
(Code 1993, § 63-25; Ord. No. 1721, § 1, 12-1-2004) 


Sec. 54-24. - Benefit amounts and eligibility. 
(a) ?Normal retirement date. A member's normal retirement date shall be the first day of the month 
coincident with or the next following the attainment of age 57 years and the completion of five years 
of credited service. A member may retire on his normal retirement date or on the first day of any 
month thereafter, and each member shall become 100 percent vested in his accrued benefit on the 
member's normal retirement date. Normal retirement under the system is retirement from 
employment with the city on or after the normal retirement date. 
(b) ?Normal retirement benefit. A member retiring hereunder on or after his normal retirement date shall 
receive a monthly benefit which shall commence on the first day of the month coincident with or next 
following his retirement and be continued thereafter during the member's lifetime, ceasing upon 
death. The monthly retirement benefit shall equal 2.75 percent of the average final compensation for 
each year of credited service. 
(c) ?Early retirement date. A member may retire on his early retirement date, which shall be the first day 
of any month coincident with or next following the attainment of age 47 years and the completion of 
ten years of credited service. Early retirement under the system is retirement from employment with 
the city on or after the early retirement date and prior to the normal retirement date. 
(d) ?Early retirement benefit. A member retiring hereunder on his early retirement date may receive 
either a deferred or an immediate monthly retirement benefit payable in the same form as for normal 
retirement, as follows: 
(1) ?A deferred monthly retirement benefit which shall commence on what would have been his 
normal retirement date had he remained a general employee and shall be continued on the first 
day of each month thereafter. The amount of each such deferred monthly retirement benefit 
shall be determined in the same manner as for retirement on his normal retirement date, except 
that credited service and average final compensation shall be determined as of his early 
retirement date; or 
(2) ?An immediate monthly retirement benefit which shall commence on his early retirement date 
and shall be continued on the first day of each month thereafter. The benefit payable shall be as 
determined in subsection (d)(1) of this section, which is reduced by 1/15 for each of the first five 
years, and 1/30 for each of the next five years by which the commencement of benefits 
precedes the normal retirement date. 
(e) ?Coordination of benefits. 
(1) ?Notwithstanding any other provision of this plan, a member who is employed by the city on or 
after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and who, prior to such 
appointment, was employed in a position covered by another city retirement plan, shall become 
a member of this plan upon the effective date of such employment. Thereafter, the employee 
shall be entitled to the benefits specified in this plan and all of employee's prior credited service 
under any other city retirement plan may be applied under this plan for purposes of vesting and 
eligibility for retirement or participation in the DROP only. 
(2) ?If credited service under this plan is used to determine a member's vesting or eligibility for 
retirement or participation in the DROP under any other city plan, the member's average final 
compensation shall be calculated as provided under this plan at the time of termination from this 
plan. This plan shall provide the member his average final compensation independent from any 
other plan upon retirement and separation from service with the city. 
(3) ?Any employee who has elected the deferred retirement option plan option as identified under 
section 54-44 may continue this option regardless of any transfer into another position within the 
city covered by another retirement plan, so long as the employee is employed by the city. 
(4) ?An eligible member who elects to coordinate benefits under the provisions outlined within this 
plan shall contribute to the plan an amount equal to the full actuarial cost of the election such 
that there is no actuarial impact on any city plan. 
(Code 1993, § 63-26; Ord. No. 1721, § 1, 12-1-2004; Ord. No. 2331, § I, 10-16-2013) 


Sec. 54-25. - Pre-retirement death. 
(a) ?Prior to vesting or eligibility for retirement. The beneficiary of a deceased member who was not 
receiving monthly benefits, or who was not yet vested or eligible for early or normal retirement, shall 
receive a refund of 100 percent of the member's accumulated contributions, if any. 
(b) ?Deceased members vested or eligible for retirement. The beneficiary of any member who dies and 
who, at the date of his death, was vested or eligible for early or normal retirement shall be entitled to 
a benefit as follows: 
(1) ?If the member was vested, but not eligible for normal or early retirement, the beneficiary shall 
receive a benefit payable for ten years, beginning on the date that the deceased member would 
have been eligible for early or normal retirement, at the option of the beneficiary. The benefit 
shall be calculated as for normal retirement based on the deceased member's credited service 
and average final compensation as of the date of his death and reduced as for early retirement, 
if applicable. The beneficiary may also elect to receive an immediate benefit, payable for ten 
years, which is actuarially reduced to reflect the commencement of benefits prior to the early 
retirement date. 
(2) ?If the deceased member was eligible for normal or early retirement, the beneficiary shall 
receive a benefit payable for ten years, beginning on the first day of the month following the 
member's death or at the deceased member's otherwise normal or early retirement date, at the 
option of the beneficiary. The benefit shall be calculated as for normal retirement based on the 
deceased member's credited service and average final compensation as of the date of his 
death, and reduced as for early retirement, if applicable. 
(3) ?A beneficiary may not elect an optional form of benefit; however, the board may elect to make 
a lump sum payment pursuant to subsection 54-27(g). 
(4) ?A beneficiary may, in lieu of any benefit provided for in subsections (b)(1) or (2) of this section, 
elect to receive a refund of the deceased member's accumulated contributions. 
(Code 1993, § 63-27; Ord. No. 1721, § 1, 12-1-2004) 


Sec. 54-26. - Vesting. 
    If a member terminates his employment as a general employee, either voluntarily or by discharge, 
and is not eligible for any other benefits under this system, the member shall be entitled to the following: 
(1) ?If the member has less than ten years of credited service in total under all pension plans 
sponsored by the city upon termination, the member shall only be entitled to a refund of his 
accumulated contribution. Such member may elect to receive a refund of accumulated 
contributions, without interest, upon separation from the city, or leave his contributions 
deposited with the fund for up to five years, after which the member will receive the refund of 
accumulated contributions, without interest. 
(2) ?If the member has ten or more years of credited service in total under all pension plans 
sponsored by the city upon termination, the member shall be entitled to a monthly retirement 
benefit, determined in the same manner as identified under section 54-24, pertaining to benefit 
amounts and eligibility, and based upon the member's credited service, average final 
compensation and the benefit accrual rate as of the date of termination, payable to him 
commencing at the member's otherwise normal or early retirement date, provided he does not 
elect to withdraw his accumulated contributions, and provided the member survives to his 
otherwise normal or early retirement date. If the member does not withdraw his accumulated 
contributions and does not survive to his otherwise normal or early retirement date, his 
designated beneficiary shall be entitled to a benefit as provided herein for a deceased member, 
vested or eligible for retirement under section 54-25. 
(Code 1993, § 63-28; Ord. No. 1721, § 1, 12-1-2004; Ord. No. 2331, § II, 10-16-2013) 


Sec. 54-27. - Optional forms of benefits. 
(a) ?In lieu of the amount and form of retirement income payable in the event of normal or early 
retirement as specified herein, a member, upon written request to the board, may elect to receive a 
retirement income or benefit of equivalent actuarial value payable in accordance with one of the 
following options: 
(1) ?A retirement income of a monthly amount payable to the retiree for his lifetime, but with 120 
monthly payments guaranteed in any event. 
(2) ?A retirement income of a modified monthly amount, payable to the retiree during the lifetime of 
the retiree and following the death of the retiree, 100 percent, 75 percent, 66 2/3 percent or 50 
percent of such monthly amount payable to a joint pensioner for his lifetime. Except where the 
retiree's joint pensioner is his spouse, the payments to the joint pensioner as a percentage of 
the payments to the retiree shall not exceed the applicable percentage provided for in the 
applicable table in the treasury regulations. 
(3) ?If a member retires prior to the time at which Social Security benefits are payable, he may elect 
to receive an increased retirement benefit until such time as Social Security benefits shall be 
assumed to commence and a reduced benefit thereafter in order to provide, to as great an 
extent as possible, a more level retirement allowance during the entire period of retirement. The 
amounts payable shall be as recommended by the actuaries for the system, based upon the 
Social Security law in effect at the time of the member's retirement. 
(4) ?For any member who does not participate in the DROP, a member may elect a percentage of 
benefit in a lump sum as follows: 
a. ?Ten percent lump sum benefit with 90 percent paid under the normal form or as per 
subsection (a)(1), (2) or (3) of this section. 
b. ?Fifteen percent lump sum benefit with 85 percent paid under the normal form or as per 
subsection (a)(1), (2) or (3)of this section. 
c. ?Twenty percent lump sum benefit with 80 percent paid under the normal form or as per 
subsection (a)(1), (2) or (3)of this section. 
d. ?Twenty-five percent lump sum benefit with 75 percent paid under the normal form or as per 
subsection (a)(1), (2) or (3)of this section. 
(b) ?The member, upon electing any option of this section, will designate the joint pensioner or 
beneficiary (or beneficiaries) to receive the benefit, if any, payable under the system in the event of 
the member's death and will have the power to change such designation from time to time. Such 
designation will name a joint pensioner or one or more primary beneficiaries where applicable. If a 
member has elected an option with a joint pensioner or beneficiary and the member's retirement 
income benefits have commenced, the member may thereafter change his designated beneficiary at 
any time, but may only change his joint pensioner if the designated joint pensioner and the member 
were married at the time of member's retirement and are divorced subsequent thereto, and the joint 
pensioner is alive at the time of the change. 
(c) ?The consent of a member's or retiree's joint pensioner or beneficiary to any such change shall not 
be required. The rights of all previously designated beneficiaries to receive benefits under the system 
shall thereupon cease. 
(d) ?Upon change of a retiree's joint pensioner in accordance with this section, the amount of the 
retirement income payable to the retiree shall be actuarially determined to take into account the age 
and sex of the former joint pensioner, the new joint pensioner and the retiree. Any such retiree shall 
pay the actuarial recalculation expenses. Each request for a change will be made in writing on a form 
prepared by the board, and on completion, will be filed with the board. In the event that no 
designated beneficiary survives the retiree, such benefits as are payable in the event of the death of 
the retiree subsequent to his retirement shall be paid as provided in section 54-28. 
(e) ?Retirement income payments shall be made under the option elected in accordance with the 
provisions of this section and shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1) ?If a member dies prior to his normal retirement date or early retirement date, whichever first 
occurs, no retirement benefit will be payable under the option to any person, but the benefits, if 
any, will be determined under section 54-25. 
(2) ?If the designated beneficiary (or beneficiaries) or joint pensioner dies before the member's 
retirement under the system, the option elected will be canceled automatically and a retirement 
income of the normal form and amount will be payable to the member upon his retirement as if 
the election had not been made, unless a new election is made in accordance with the 
provisions of this section or a new beneficiary is designated by the member prior to his 
retirement. 
(3) ?If both the retiree and the beneficiary (or beneficiaries) designated by the member die before 
the full payment has been effected under any option providing for payments for a period certain 
and life thereafter made pursuant to the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the board 
may, in its discretion, direct that the commuted value of the remaining payments be paid in a 
lump sum and in accordance with section 54-28. 
(4) ?If a member continues beyond his normal retirement date pursuant to the provisions of 
subsection 54-24(a), and dies prior to his actual retirement, and while an option made pursuant 
to the provisions of this section is in effect, monthly retirement income payments will be made, 
or a retirement benefit will be paid, under the option to a beneficiary (or beneficiaries) 
designated by the member in the amount or amounts computed as if the member had retired 
under the option on the date on which his death occurred. 
(f) ?A retiree may not change his retirement option after the date of cashing or depositing his first 
retirement check. 
(g) ?Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the board, in its discretion, may elect to make a 
lump sum payment to a member or a member's beneficiary in the event that the monthly benefit 
amount is less than $100.00 or the total commuted value of the remaining monthly income payments 
to be paid do not exceed $5,000.00. Any such payment made to any person pursuant to the power 
and discretion conferred upon the board by the preceding sentence shall operate as a complete 
discharge of all obligations under the system with regard to such member and shall not be subject to 
review by anyone, but shall be final, binding and conclusive on all persons. 
(Code 1993, § 63-29; Ord. No. 1721, § 1, 12-1-2004; Ord. No. 1808, § 2, 2-15-2006; Ord. No. 
2021, § 1, 4-16-2008) 


Sec. 54-28. - Beneficiaries. 
(a) ?Each member or retiree may, on a form provided for that purpose, signed and filed with the board, 
designate a beneficiary (or beneficiaries) to receive the benefit, if any, which may be payable in the 
event of his death, and each designation may be revoked or changed by such member or retiree by 
signing and filing with the board a new designation-of-beneficiary form. Upon such change, the rights 
of all previously designated beneficiaries to receive any benefits under the system shall cease. 
(b) ?If a deceased member or retiree failed to name a beneficiary in the manner prescribed in subsection 
(a) of this section, or if the beneficiary (or beneficiaries) named by a deceased member or retiree 
predeceases the member or retiree, the death benefit, if any, which may be payable under the 
system with respect to such deceased member or retiree shall be paid to the estate of the member 
or retiree, and the board, in its discretion, may direct that the commuted value of the remaining 
monthly income benefits be paid in a lump sum. 
(c) ?Any payment made to any person pursuant to this section shall operate as a complete discharge of 
all obligations under the system with regard to the deceased member and any other persons with 
rights under the system and shall not be subject to review by anyone but shall be final, binding and 
conclusive on all persons ever interested hereunder. 
(Code 1993, § 63-30; Ord. No. 1721, § 1, 12-1-2004) 


Sec. 54-29. - Claims procedures. 
(a) ?The board shall establish administrative claims procedures to be utilized in processing written 
requests (claims) on matters which affect the substantial rights of any person (claimant), including 
members, retirees, beneficiaries, or any person affected by a decision of the board. 
(b) ?The board shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the 
production of documents for discovery prior to and at any proceedings provided for in the board's 
claims procedures. The claimant may request in writing the issuance of subpoenas by the board. A 
reasonable fee may be charged for the issuance of any subpoenas, not to exceed the fees set forth 
in state statutes. 
(Code 1993, § 63-31; Ord. No. 1721, § 1, 12-1-2004) 


Sec. 54-30. - Roster of retirees. 
    The secretary of the board shall keep a record of all persons enjoying a pension under the provisions 
of this article in which it shall be noted the time when the pension is allowed and when the same shall 
cease to be paid. Additionally, the secretary shall keep a record of all members in such a manner as to 
show the name, address, date of employment and date such employment is terminated. 
(Code 1993, § 63-32; Ord. No. 1721, § 1, 12-1-2004) 


Sec. 54-31. - State and federal limitations on pension benefits. 
(a) ?Basic limitation. 
(1) ?Subject to the adjustments hereinafter set forth, the maximum amount of annual retirement 
income payable with respect to a member under this system shall not exceed $160,000.00. 
(2) ?For purposes of applying the above limitation, benefits payable in any form other than a straight 
life annuity with no ancillary benefits shall be adjusted, as provided by treasury regulations, so 
that such benefits are the actuarial equivalent of a straight life annuity. For purposes of this 
section, the following benefits shall not be taken into account: 
a. ?Any ancillary benefit which is not directly related to retirement income benefits; 
b. ?Any other benefit not required under section 415(b)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code and 
regulations thereunder to be taken into account for purposes of the limitation of section 
415(b)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(b) ?Participation in other defined benefit plans. The limitation of this section with respect to any member 
who at any time has been a member in any other defined benefit plan (as defined in section 414(j) of 
the Internal Revenue Code) maintained by the city shall apply as if the total benefits payable under 
all defined benefit plans in which the member has been a member were payable from one plan. 
(c) ?Adjustments in limitations. 
(1) ?In the event the member's retirement benefits become payable before age 62 years, the 
$160,000.00 limitation prescribed by this section shall be reduced in accordance with 
regulations issued by the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to the provisions of section 415(b) 
of the Internal Revenue Code so that such limitation (as so reduced) equals an annual benefit 
(beginning when such retirement income benefit begins) which is equivalent to a $160,000.00 
annual benefit beginning at age 62 years. 
(2) ?The reductions provided for in subsection (c)(1) of this section shall not be applicable to pre-
retirement death benefits paid pursuant to section 54-25. 
(3) ?In the event the member's retirement benefit becomes payable after age 65 years, for 
purposes of determining whether this benefit meets the limitation set forth in subsection (a) of 
this section herein, such benefit shall be adjusted so that it is actuarially equivalent to the 
benefit beginning at age 65 years. This adjustment shall be made in accordance with 
regulations promulgated by the Secretary of the Treasury or his delegate. 
(d) ?Less than ten years of service. The maximum retirement benefits payable under this section to any 
member who has completed less than ten years of credited service with the city shall be the amount 
determined under subsection (a) of this section multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the 
number of the member's years of credited service and the denominator of which is ten. The 
reduction provided for in this subsection shall not be applicable to pre-retirement death benefits paid 
pursuant to section 54-25. 
(e) ?$10,000.00 limit. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the retirement benefit payable with respect to a 
member shall be deemed not to exceed the limitations set forth in this section if the benefits payable, 
with respect to such member under this system and under all other qualified defined benefit pension 
plans to which the city contributes, do not exceed $10,000.00 for the applicable plan year and for 
any prior plan year, and the city has not at any time maintained a qualified defined contribution plan 
in which the member participated. 
(f) ?Reduction of benefits. Reduction of benefits and/or contributions to all plans, where required, shall 
be accomplished by first reducing the member's benefit under any defined benefit plans in which the 
member participated, such reduction to be made first with respect to the plan in which the member 
most recently accrued benefits, and thereafter in such priority as shall be determined by the board 
and the plan administrator of such other plans, and next, by reducing or allocating excess forfeitures 
for defined contribution plans in which the member participated, such reduction to be made first with 
respect to the plan in which the member most recently accrued benefits, and thereafter in such 
priority as shall be established by the board and the plan administrator for such other plans; 
provided, however, that necessary reductions may be made in a different manner and priority 
pursuant to the agreement of the board and the plan administrator of all other plans covering such 
member. 
(g) ?Cost of living adjustment. The limitations as stated in subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section shall 
be adjusted to the time payment of a benefit begins in accordance with any cost of living adjustments 
prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to section 415(d) of the Internal Revenue 
Code. 
(h) ?Additional limitation on pension benefits. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary: 
(1) ?The normal retirement benefit or pension payable to a retiree who becomes a member of the 
system and who has not previously participated in such system, on or after January 1, 1980, 
shall not exceed 100 percent of his average final compensation. However, nothing contained in 
this section shall apply to supplemental retirement benefits or to pension increases attributable 
to cost-of-living increases or adjustments. 
(2) ?No member of the system shall be allowed to receive a retirement benefit or pension which is 
in part or in whole based upon any service with respect to which the member is already 
receiving, or will receive in the future, a retirement benefit or pension from a different employer's 
retirement system or plan. This restriction does not apply to Social Security benefits or federal 
benefits under ch. 67, tit. 10, U.S. Code. 
(Code 1993, § 63-33; Ord. No. 1721, § 1, 12-1-2004) 


Sec. 54-32. - Minimum distribution of benefits. 
(a) ?General rules. 
(1) ?Effective date. The provisions of this section will apply, for purposes of determining required 
minimum distributions, for calendar years beginning with the 2003 calendar year. 
(2) ?Precedence. The requirements of this section will take precedence over any inconsistent 
provisions of the plan. 
(3) ?Requirements of treasury regulations. All distributions required under this section will be 
determined and made in accordance with the treasury regulations under section 401(a)(9) of the 
Internal Revenue Code. 
(4) ?Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act ( TEFRA) section 242(b)(2) elections. Notwithstanding 
the other provisions of this section other than this subsection (a)(4), distributions may be made 
under a designation made before January 1, 1984, in accordance with section 242(b)(2) of the 
Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act (TEFRA) and the provisions of the plan that related to 
section 242(b)(2) of TEFRA. 
(b) ?Time and manner of distribution. 
(1) ?Required beginning date. The member's entire interest will be distributed, or begin to be 
distributed, to the member no later than the member's required beginning date, which shall not 
be later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the calendar year in which the 
member attains age 70½ years or the calendar year in which the member retires, unless 
otherwise provided for in the plan or required by law. 
(2) ?Death of member before distributions begin. If the member dies before distributions begin, the 
member's entire interest will be distributed, or begin to be distributed, no later than as follows: 
a. ?If the member's surviving spouse is the member's sole designated beneficiary, then 
distributions to the surviving spouse will begin by December 31 of the calendar year 
immediately following the calendar year in which the member died, or by December 31 of 
the calendar year in which the member would have attained age 70½ years, if later. 
b. ?If the member's surviving spouse is not the member's sole designated beneficiary, then, 
distributions to the designated beneficiaries will begin by December 31 of the calendar year 
immediately following the calendar year in which the member died. 
c. ?If there is no designated beneficiary as of September 30 of the year following the year of 
the member's death, the member's entire interest will be distributed by December 31 of the 
calendar year containing the fifth anniversary of the member's death. 
d. ?If the member's surviving spouse is the member's sole designated beneficiary and the 
surviving spouse dies after the member but before distributions to the surviving spouse 
begin, this subsection (b)(2), other than subsection (b)(2)a, will apply as if the surviving 
spouse were the member. 
For purposes of this subsection (b)(2) and subsection (e) of this section, distributions are 
considered to begin on the member's required beginning date or, if subsection (b)(2)d applies, 
the date of distributions are required to begin to the surviving spouse under subsection (b)(2)a 
of this section. If annuity payments irrevocably commence to the member before the member's 
required beginning date (or to the member's surviving spouse before the date distributions are 
required to begin to the surviving spouse under subsection (b)(2)a of this section, the date 
distributions are considered to begin is the date distributions actually commence. 
(3) ?Form of distribution. Unless the member's interest is distributed in the form of an annuity 
purchased from an insurance company or in a single sum on or before the required beginning 
date, as of the first distribution calendar year, distributions will be made in accordance of 
subsections (c), (d) and (e) of this section. If the member's interest is distributed in the form of 
an annuity purchased from an insurance company, distributions thereunder will be made in 
accordance with the requirements of section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code and 
treasury regulations. Any part of the member's interest which is in the form of an individual 
account described in section 414(k) of the Internal Revenue Code will be distributed in a 
manner satisfying the requirements of section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code and 
treasury regulations that apply to individual accounts. 
(c) ?Determination of amount to be distributed each year. 
(1) ?General annuity requirements. If the member's interest is paid in the form of annuity 
distributions under the plan, payments under the annuity will satisfy the following requirements: 
a. ?The annuity distributions will be paid in periodic payments made at intervals not longer than 
one year. 
b. ?The distribution period will be over a life (or lives) or over a period certain not longer than 
the period described in subsection (d) or (e) of this section. 
c. ?Once payments have begun over a period certain, the period certain will not be changed 
even if the period certain is shorter than the maximum permitted. 
d. ?Payments will either be non-increasing or increase only as follows: 
1. ?By an annual percentage increase that does not exceed the cumulative annual 
percentage increase in a cost-of-living index that is based on prices of all items and 
issued by the Bureau of Labor Statistics or by a fixed annual increase of five percent 
or less. 
2. ?To the extent of the reduction in the amount of the member's payments to provide for 
a survivor benefit upon death, but only if the beneficiary whose life was being used to 
determine the distribution period described in subsection (d) of this section dies or is 
no longer the member's beneficiary pursuant to a qualified domestic relations order 
within the meaning of section 414(p) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
3. ?To provide cash refunds of accumulated contributions upon the member's death. 
4. ?To pay increased benefits that result from a plan amendment. 
(2) ?Amount required to be distributed by required beginning date. The amount that must be 
distributed on or before the member's required beginning date (or, if the member dies before 
distributions begin, the date distributions are required to begin under subsection (b)(2)a or 
(b)(2)b of this section is the payment that is required for one payment interval. The second 
payment need not be made until the end of the next payment interval even if that payment 
interval ends in the next calendar year. Payment intervals are the periods for which payments 
are received, e.g., bi-monthly, monthly, semi-annually, or annually. All of the member's benefit 
accruals as of the last day of the first distribution calendar year will be included in the calculation 
of the amount of the annuity payments for payment intervals ending on or after the member's 
required beginning date. 
(3) ?Additional accruals after first distribution calendar year. Any additional benefits accruing to the 
member in a calendar year after the first distribution calendar year will be distributed beginning 
with the first payment interval ending in the calendar year immediately following the calendar 
year in which such amount accrues. 
(d) ?Requirements for annuity distributions that commence during a member's lifetime. 
(1) ?Joint life annuities where the beneficiary is not the member's spouse. If the member's interest 
is being distributed in the form of a joint and survivor annuity for the joint lives of the member 
and a non-spouse beneficiary, annuity payments to be made on or after the member's required 
beginning date to the designated beneficiary after the member's death must not at any time 
exceed the applicable percentage of the annuity payment for such period that would have been 
payable to the member using the table set forth in O&A-2 of section 1.401(a)(9)-6T of the 
treasury regulations. If the form of distribution combines a joint and survivor annuity for the joint 
lives of the member and a non-spouse beneficiary and a period certain annuity, the 
requirements in the preceding sentence will apply to annuity payments to be made to the 
designated beneficiary after the expiration of the period certain. 
(2) ?Period certain annuities. Unless the member's spouse is the sole designated beneficiary and 
the form of distribution is a period certain and no life annuity, the period certain for an annuity 
distribution commencing during the member's lifetime may not exceed the applicable 
distribution period for the member under the Uniform Lifetime Table set forth in section 
1.401(a)(9)-9 of the treasury regulations for the calendar year that contains the annuity starting 
date. If the annuity starting date precedes the year in which the member reaches age 70 years, 
the applicable distribution period for the member is the distribution period for age 70 years 
under the Uniform Lifetime Table set forth in section 1.401(a)(9)-9 of the treasury regulations, 
plus the excess of 70 over the age of the member as of the member's birthday in the year that 
contains the annuity starting date. If the member's spouse is the member's sole designated 
beneficiary and the form of distribution is a period certain and no life annuity, the period certain 
may not exceed the longer of the member's applicable distribution period, as determined under 
this subsection (d)(2), or the joint life and last survivor expectancy of the member and the 
member's spouse as determined under the Joint and Last Survivor Table set forth in section 
1.401(a)(9)-9 of the treasury regulations, using the member's and spouse's attained ages as of 
the member's and spouse's birthdays in the calendar year that contains the annuity starting 
date. 
(e) ?Requirements for minimum distributions where member dies before date distributions begin. 
(1) ?Member survived by designated beneficiary. If the member dies before the date distribution of 
his interest begins and there is a designated beneficiary, the member's entire interest will be 
distributed, beginning no later than the time described in subsection (b)(2)a or (b)(2)b of this 
section, over the life of the designated beneficiary or over a period certain not exceeding: 
a. ?Unless the annuity starting date is before the first distribution calendar year, the life 
expectancy of the designated beneficiary, determined using the beneficiary's age as of the 
beneficiary's birthday in the calendar year immediately following the calendar year of the 
member's death. 
b. ?If the annuity starting date is before the first distribution calendar year, the life expectancy 
of the designated beneficiary, determined using the beneficiary's age as of the 
beneficiary's birthday in the calendar year that contains the annuity starting date. 
(2) ?No designated beneficiary. If the member dies before the date distributions begin and there is 
no designated beneficiary as of September 30 of the year following the year of the member's 
death, distribution of the member's entire interest will be completed by December 31 of the 
calendar year containing the fifth anniversary of the member's death. 
(3) ?Death of surviving spouse before distributions to surviving spouse begin. If the member dies 
before the date distribution of his interest begins, the member's surviving spouse is the 
member's sole designated beneficiary, and the surviving spouse dies before distributions to the 
surviving spouse begin, this subsection (e) will apply as if the surviving spouse were the 
member, except that the time by which distributions must begin will be determined without 
regard to subsection (b)(2)a of this section. 
(f) ?Definitions. 
    Designated beneficiary means the individual who is designated as the beneficiary under the plan and 
is the designated beneficiary under section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code and section 
1.401(a)(9)-1, Q&A-4, of the treasury regulations. 
    Distribution calendar year means a calendar year for which a minimum distribution is required. For 
distributions beginning before the member's death, the first distribution calendar year is the calendar year 
immediately preceding the calendar year which contains the member's required beginning date. For 
distributions beginning after the member's death, the first distribution calendar year is the calendar year in 
which distributions are required to begin pursuant to subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
    Life expectancy means life expectancy as computed by use of the Single Life Table in section 
1.401(a)(9)-9 of the treasury regulations. 
    Required beginning date means the date specified in subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(Code 1993, § 63-34; Ord. No. 1721, § 1, 12-1-2004; Ord. No. 1808, § 3, 2-15-2006) 


Sec. 54-33. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a) ?Interest of members in system. At no time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities under the system 
with respect to retirees and members and their spouses or beneficiaries shall any part of the corpus 
or income of the fund be used for or diverted to any purpose other than for their exclusive benefit. 
(b) ?No reduction of accrued benefit. No amendment or ordinance shall be adopted by the city council 
which shall have the effect of reducing the then-vested accrued benefits of members or members' 
beneficiaries. 
(c) ?Qualification of system. It is intended that the system will constitute a qualified public pension plan 
under the applicable provisions of the Internal Revenue Code, as now in effect or hereafter 
amended. Any modification or amendment of the system may be made retroactively, if necessary or 
appropriate, to qualify or maintain the system as a plan meeting the requirements of the applicable 
provisions of the Internal Revenue Code as now in effect or hereafter amended, or any other 
applicable provisions of the U.S. federal tax laws, as now in effect or hereafter amended or adopted, 
and the regulations issued thereunder. 
(d) ?Use of forfeitures. Forfeitures arising from terminations of service of members shall serve only to 
reduce future city contributions. 
(Code 1993, § 63-35; Ord. No. 1721, § 1, 12-1-2004) 


Sec. 54-34. - Repeal or termination of system. 
(a) ?This article establishing the system and fund, and subsequent ordinances pertaining to said system 
and fund, may be modified, terminated, or amended, in whole or in part, provided, that if this or any 
subsequent ordinance shall be amended or repealed in its application to any person benefiting 
hereunder, the amount of benefits which at the time of any such alteration, amendment, or repeal 
shall have accrued to the member or beneficiary shall not be affected thereby, except to the extent 
that the assets of the fund may be determined to be inadequate. 
(b) ?If this article shall be repealed, or if contributions to the system are discontinued, or if there is a 
transfer, merger or consolidation of government units, services or functions as provided in F.S. ch. 
121, the board shall continue to administer the system in accordance with the provisions of this 
article, for the sole benefit of the then-members, any beneficiaries then receiving retirement 
allowances, and any future persons entitled to receive benefits under one of the options provided for 
in this article who are designated by any of said members. In the event of repeal, discontinuance of 
contributions, or transfer, merger or consolidation of government units, services or functions, there 
shall be full vesting (100 percent) of benefits accrued to date of repeal, and the assets of the system 
shall be allocated in an equitable manner to provide benefits on a proportionate basis to the persons 
so entitled in accordance with the provisions thereof. 
(c) ?The following shall be the order of priority for purposes of allocating the assets of the system as of 
the date of repeal of this article, or if contributions to the system are discontinued, with the date of 
such discontinuation being determined by the board: 
(1) ?Apportionment shall first be made in respect of each retiree receiving a retirement or disability 
benefit hereunder on such date, each person receiving a benefit on such date on account of a 
retired or disabled (but since deceased) member, and each member who has, by such date, 
become eligible for normal retirement but has not yet retired, an amount which is the actuarial 
equivalent of such benefit, provided, that if such asset value is less than the aggregate of such 
amounts, such amounts shall be proportionately reduced so that the aggregate of such reduced 
amounts will be equal to such asset value. 
(2) ?If there is any asset value remaining after the apportionment under subsection (c)(1) of this 
section, apportionment shall next be made in respect of each member in the service of the city 
on such date who is vested and who is not entitled to an apportionment under subsection (c)(1) 
of this section, in the amount required to provide the actuarial equivalent of the vested portion of 
the accrued normal retirement benefit (but not less than accumulated contributions), based on 
the credited service and average final compensation as of such date, and each vested former 
member then entitled to a deferred benefit who has not, by such date, begun receiving benefit 
payments, in the amount required to provide said actuarial equivalent of the vested portion of 
the accrued normal retirement benefit (but not less than accumulated contributions), provided, 
that if such remaining asset value is less than the aggregate of the amounts apportioned 
hereunder, such latter amounts shall be proportionately reduced so that the aggregate of such 
reduced amounts will be equal to such remaining asset value. 
(3) ?If there is any asset value after the apportionments under subsections (c)(1) and (2) of this 
section, apportionment shall be made in respect of each member in the service of the city on 
such date who is not entitled to an apportionment under subsections (c)(1) and (2) of this 
section in the amount equal to the member's accumulated contributions, provided that, if such 
remaining asset value is less than the aggregate of the amounts apportioned hereunder, such 
latter amount shall be proportionately reduced so that the aggregate of such reduced amounts 
will be equal to such remaining asset value. 
(4) ?If there is any asset value remaining after the apportionments under subsections (c)(1), (2) and 
(3) of this section, apportionment shall lastly be made in respect of each member included in 
subsection (c)(3) of this section to the extent of the actuarial equivalent of the non-vested 
accrued normal retirement benefit, less the amount apportioned in subsection (c)(3) of this 
section, based on the credited service and average final compensation as of such date, 
provided that, if such remaining asset value is less than the aggregate of the amounts 
apportioned hereunder, such amounts shall be reduced so that the aggregate of such reduced 
amounts will be equal to such remaining asset value. 
(5) ?In the event that there is asset value remaining after the full apportionment specified in 
subsections (c)(1) through (4) of this section, such excess shall be returned to the city, less 
return of the state's contributions to the state, provided that, if the excess is less than the total 
contributions made by the city and the state to the date of termination, such excess shall be 
divided proportionately to the total contributions made by the city and the state. 
a. ?The allocation of the fund provided for in this subsection may, as decided by the board, be 
carried out through the purchase of insurance company contracts to provide the benefits 
determined in accordance with this subsection. The fund may be distributed in one sum to 
the persons entitled to said benefits or the distribution may be carried out in such other 
equitable manner as the board may direct. The fund may be continued in existence for 
purposes of subsequent distributions. 
b. ?If, at any time during the first ten years after the effective date of the ordinance originally 
establishing this system, the system shall be terminated or the full current costs of the 
system shall not have been met, anything in the system to the contrary notwithstanding, 
city contributions which may be used for the benefit of any one of the 25 highest-paid 
members on the effective date whose anticipated annual retirement allowance provided by 
the city's contributions at the member's normal retirement date would exceed $1,500.00 
shall not exceed greater of either $20,000.00 or an amount computed by multiplying the 
smaller of $10,000.00 or 20 percent of such member's average annual earnings during his 
last five years of service by the number of years of service since the effective date. In the 
event that it shall hereafter be determined by statute, court decision, ruling by the 
Commissioner of Internal Revenue, or otherwise, that the provisions of this subsection are 
not then necessary to qualify the system under the Internal Revenue Code, this subsection 
shall be ineffective without the necessity of further amendment of this article. 
(d) ?After all the vested and accrued benefits provided hereunder have been paid and after all other 
liabilities have been satisfied, then, and only then, shall any remaining funds revert to the general 
fund of the city. 
(Code 1993, § 63-36; Ord. No. 1721, § 1, 12-1-2004) 


Sec. 54-35. - Domestic relations orders; retiree-directed payments; exemption from execution, non-
assignability. 
(a) ?Domestic relations orders. 
(1) ?Prior to the entry of any domestic relations order which affects or purports to affect the 
system's responsibility in connection with the payment of benefits of a retiree, the member or 
retiree shall submit the proposed order to the board for review to determine whether the system 
may legally honor the order. 
(2) ?If a domestic relations order is not submitted to the board for review prior to entry of the order, 
and the system is ordered to take action that it may not legally take, and the system expends 
administrative or legal fees in resolving the matter, the member or retiree who submits such an 
order will be required to reimburse the system for its expenses in connection with the order. 
(b) ?Retiree-directed payments. The board may, upon written request by a retiree or by a dependent, 
when authorized by a retiree or the retiree's beneficiary, authorize the system to withhold from the 
monthly retirement payment those funds that are necessary to pay for the benefits being received 
through the city, to pay the certified bargaining agent of the city, and to make any payments for child 
support or alimony. 
(c) ?Exemption from execution, non-assignability. Except as otherwise provided by law, the pensions, 
annuities, or any other benefits accrued or accruing to any person under the provisions of this article 
and the accumulated contributions and the cash securities in the fund created under this article are 
hereby exempted from any state, county or municipal tax and shall not be subject to execution, 
attachment, garnishment or any legal process whatsoever and shall be unassignable. 
(Code 1993, § 63-37; Ord. No. 1721, § 1, 12-1-2004) 


Sec. 54-36. - Pension validity. 
    The board shall have the power to examine into the facts upon which any pension shall heretofore 
have been granted under any prior or existing law or shall hereafter be granted or obtained erroneously, 
fraudulently or illegally for any reason. The board is empowered to purge the pension rolls or correct the 
pension amount of any person heretofore granted a pension under prior or existing law, or any person 
hereafter granted a pension under this article, if the same is found to be erroneous, fraudulent or illegal 
for any reason, and to reclassify any person who has heretofore under any prior or existing law been or 
who shall hereafter under this article be erroneously, improperly or illegally classified. Any overpayments 
or underpayments shall be corrected and paid or repaid in a reasonable manner determined by the board. 
(Code 1993, § 63-38; Ord. No. 1721, § 1, 12-1-2004) 


Sec. 54-37. - Forfeiture of pension. 
    Any member who is convicted of the following offenses committed prior to retirement, or whose 
employment is terminated by reason of his admitted commission, aid or abetment of the following 
specified offenses, shall forfeit all rights and benefits under this system, except for the return of his 
accumulated contributions as of the date of termination: 
(1) ?Specified offenses are as follows: 
a. ?The committing, aiding or abetting of an embezzlement of public funds. 
b. ?The committing, aiding or abetting of any theft by a public officer or employee from an 
employer. 
c. ?Bribery in connection with the employment of a public officer or employee. 
d. ?Any felony specified in F.S. ch. 838. 
e. ?The committing of an impeachable offense. 
f. ?The committing of any felony by a public officer or employee who willfully and with intent to 
defraud the public or the public agency for which he acts or in which he is employed of the 
right to receive the faithful performance of his duty as a public officer or employee, realizes 
or obtains or attempts to obtain a profit, gain, or advantage for himself or for some other 
person through the use or attempted use of the power, rights, privileges, duties or position 
of his public office or employment position. 
(2) ?The term "conviction" shall be defined as an adjudication of guilt by a court of competent 
jurisdiction; a plea of guilty or a nolo contendere; a jury verdict of guilty when adjudication of 
guilt is withheld and the accused is placed on probation; or a conviction by the Senate of an 
impeachable offense. 
(3) ?The term "court" shall be defined as any state or federal court of competent jurisdiction which is 
exercising its jurisdiction to consider a proceeding involving the alleged commission of a 
specified offense. Prior to forfeiture, the board shall hold a hearing on which notice shall be 
given to the member whose benefits are being considered for forfeiture. Said member shall be 
afforded the right to have an attorney present. No formal rules of evidence shall apply, but the 
member shall be afforded a full opportunity to present his case against forfeiture. 
(4) ?Any member who has received benefits from the system in excess of his accumulated 
contributions, if any, after the member's rights were forfeited, shall be required to pay back to 
the fund the amount of the benefits received in excess of his accumulated contributions, if any. 
The board may implement all legal action necessary to recover such funds. 
(Code 1993, § 63-39; Ord. No. 1721, § 1, 12-1-2004) 


Sec. 54-38. - Indemnification. 
(a) ?To the extent not covered by insurance contracts in force from time to time, the city shall indemnify, 
defend and hold harmless members of the board from all personal liability for damages and costs, 
including court costs and attorney fees, arising out of claims, suits, litigation, or threats of same, 
herein referred to as claims, against these individuals because of acts or circumstances connected 
with or arising out of their official duties as members of the board. The city reserves the right, in its 
sole discretion, to settle or not settle the claim at any time, and to appeal or to not appeal from any 
adverse judgment or ruling, and in either event will indemnify, defend and hold harmless any 
members of the board from the judgment, execution, or levy thereon. 
(b) ?This section shall not be construed so as to relieve any insurance company or other entity liable to 
defend the claim or liable for payment of the judgment or claim from any liability, nor does this 
section waive any provision of law affording the city immunity from any suit in whole or part, or waive 
any other substantive or procedural rights the city may have. 
(c) ?This section shall not apply to nor shall the city be responsible in any manner to defend or pay for 
claims arising out of acts or omissions of members of the board which constitute felonies or gross 
malfeasance or gross misfeasance in office. 
(Code 1993, § 63-40; Ord. No. 1721, § 1, 12-1-2004) 


Sec. 54-39. - Direct transfers of eligible rollover distributions; elimination of mandatory distributions. 
(a) ?Rollover distributions. 
(1) ?Generally. This section applies to distributions made on or after January 1, 2002. 
Notwithstanding any provision of the system to the contrary that would otherwise limit a 
distributee's election under this section, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner 
prescribed by the board, to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an 
eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover. 
(2) ?Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the 
meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a 
different meaning: 
    Direct rollover means a payment by the plan to the eligible retirement plan specified by the 
distributee. 
    Distributee means an employee or former employee. In addition, the employee's or former 
employee's surviving spouse is a distributee with regard to the interest of the spouse. 
    Eligible retirement plan means an individual retirement account described in section 408(a) 
of the Internal Revenue Code, an individual retirement annuity described in section 408(b) of 
the Internal Revenue Code, an annuity plan described in section 403(a) of the Internal Revenue 
Code, an eligible deferred compensation plan described in section 457(b) of the Internal 
Revenue Code which is maintained by an eligible employer described in section 457(e)(1)(A) of 
the Internal Revenue Code and which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into 
such plan from this plan, an annuity contract described in section 403(b) of the Internal 
Revenue Code, or a qualified trust described in section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code 
that accepts the distributee's eligible rollover distribution. This definition shall also apply in the 
case of an eligible rollover distribution to the surviving spouse. 
    Eligible rollover distribution means any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the 
credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include: any 
distribution that is one of the series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently 
than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint 
life expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a 
specified period of ten years or more; any distribution to the extent such distribution is required 
under section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code; and the portion of any distribution that is 
not includible in gross income. Any portion of any distribution which would be includible in gross 
income will be an eligible rollover distribution if the distribution is made to an individual 
retirement account described in section 408(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, to an individual 
retirement annuity described in section 408(b) of the Internal Revenue Code or to a qualified 
defined contribution plan described in section 401(a) or 403(a) of the Internal Revenue Code 
that agrees to separately account for amounts so transferred, including separately accounting 
for the portion of such distribution which is includible in gross income and the portion of such 
distribution which is not so includible. 
(b) ?Rollovers or transfers into the fund. On or after January 1, 2002, the system will accept, solely for 
the purpose of purchasing credited service as provided herein, permissible member requested 
transfers of funds from other retirement or pension plans, member rollover cash contributions and/or 
direct cash rollovers of distributions made on or after January 1, 2002, as follows: 
(1) ?Transfers and direct rollovers or member rollover contributions from other plans. The system 
will accept either a direct rollover of an eligible rollover distribution or a member contribution of 
an eligible rollover distribution from a qualified plan described in section 401(a) or 403(a) of the 
Internal Revenue Code, from an annuity contract described in section 403(b) of the Internal 
Revenue Code or from an eligible plan under section 457(b) of the Internal Revenue Code 
which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality 
of a state or political subdivision of a state. The system will also accept legally permissible 
member-requested transfers of funds from other retirement or pension plans. 
(2) ?Member rollover contributions from IRAs. The system will accept a member rollover 
contribution of the portion of a distribution from an individual retirement account or annuity 
described in section 408(a) or 408(b) of the Internal Revenue Code that is eligible to be rolled 
over and would otherwise be includible in gross income. 
(c) ?Elimination of mandatory distributions. Notwithstanding any other provision herein to the contrary, in 
the event this plan provides for a mandatory (involuntary) cash distribution from the plan not 
otherwise required by law, for an amount in excess of $1,000.00, such distribution shall be made 
from the plan only upon written request of the member and completion by the member of a written 
election on forms designated by the board, to either receive a cash lump sum or to rollover the lump 
sum amount. 
(Code 1993, § 63-41; Ord. No. 1721, § 1, 12-1-2004; Ord. No. 1808, § 4, 2-15-2006) 


Sec. 54-40. - Family and Medical Leave Act. 
    The periods of time in excess of 160 hours during the 12-month period ending each December 31 
that a member is on leave without pay from the city pursuant to the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) 
shall be added to his credited service, provided that: 
(1) ?The member contributes to the fund the sum that he would have contributed, based on his 
salary and the member contribution rate in effect at the time that the credited service is 
requested, had he been a member of the system for the years or fractional parts of years for 
which he is requesting credit plus amounts actuarially determined such that the crediting of 
service does not result in any cost to the fund plus payment of costs for all professional services 
rendered to the board in connection with the purchase of periods of credited service. 
(2) ?The request for credited service for FMLA leave time for the 12-month period prior to each 
December 31 and payment of professional fees shall be made on or before March 31. 
(3) ?Payment by the member of the required amount shall be made on or before April 30 for the 
preceding 12-month period ending December 31 and shall be made in one lump sum payment 
upon receipt of which credit service shall be issued. 
(4) ?Credited service purchased pursuant to this section shall count toward vesting. 
(5) ?No payment shall be required for the first 160 hours of FMLA leave time in any calendar year; 
no request for credit shall be required and such time shall count toward vesting. 
(6) ?Purchase of credited service for leave without pay pursuant to FMLA in excess of 160 hours 
during the 12-month period ending each December 31 is an option that a member may or may 
not elect to exercise. 
(Code 1993, § 63-42; Ord. No. 1721, § 1, 12-1-2004) 


Sec. 54-41. - Separation from employment for military service. 
    The years or fractional parts of a year that a general employee serves in the military service of the 
armed forces of the United States, the United States Merchant Marine or the United States Coast Guard, 
voluntarily or involuntarily, after separation from employment as a general employee with the city to 
perform training or service, shall be added to his years of credited service for all purposes, including 
vesting, provided that: 
(1) ?The member must return to his employment as a general employee within one year from the 
earlier of the date of his military discharge or his release from service. 
(2) ?The member deposits into the fund the same sum that the member would have contributed if 
he had remained a general employee during his absence. The general employee must deposit 
all missed contributions within a period equal to three times the period of military service, but 
not more than five years or he will forfeit the right to receive credited service for his military 
service pursuant to this section. 
(3) ?The maximum credit for military service pursuant to this section shall be five years. 
(4) ?In order to qualify for the purchase of credited service pursuant to this section, the member 
must have been discharged or released from service under honorable conditions. This section 
is intended to meet or exceed the minimum requirements of the Uniformed Services 
Employment and Re-employment Rights Act (USERRA), (P.L. 103-353). To the extent that this 
section does not meet the minimum standards of USERRA, as it may be amended from time to 
time, the minimum standards shall apply. 
(Code 1993, § 63-43; Ord. No. 1721, § 1, 12-1-2004) 


Sec. 54-42. - Military service prior to employment. 
    The years or fractional parts of years that a general employee serves or has served on active duty in 
the military service of the armed forces of the United States, the United States Merchant Marine or the 
United States Coast Guard, voluntarily or involuntarily, and honorably or under honorable conditions, prior 
to first and initial employment with the city shall be added to his years of credited service, provided that: 
(1) ?The member contributes to the fund the sum that he would have contributed, based on his 
salary and the member contribution rate in effect at the time that the credited service is 
requested, had he been a member of the system for the years or fractional parts of years for 
which he is requesting credit, plus amounts actuarially determined such that the crediting of 
service does not result in any cost to the fund plus payment of costs for all professional services 
rendered to the board in connection with the purchase of years of credited service. 
(2) ?Multiple requests to purchase credited service pursuant to this section may be made at any 
time prior to retirement. 
(3) ?Payment by the member of the required amount shall be made within three months of his 
request for credit, but not later than the retirement date, and shall be made in one lump sum 
payment upon receipt of which credited service shall be given. 
(4) ?There is no maximum purchase of credited service under this section. 
(5) ?Credited service purchased pursuant to this section shall count for all purposes, except vesting. 
(Code 1993, § 63-44; Ord. No. 1721, § 1, 12-1-2004) 


Sec. 54-43. - Prior government service. 
    Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the years or fractional parts of years that a general employee 
who was previously a member, but who terminated employment and received a refund of his 
contributions or who terminated employment and is not otherwise entitled to credited service for such 
previous period of employment as a general employee, or the years or fractional parts of years that a 
member previously served as an employee for any governmental agency in the United States, including, 
but not limited to, federal, state or local government service, and for which he does not otherwise qualify 
for and receive credit under this system, shall be added to his years of credited service, provided that: 
(1) ?The member contributes to the fund the sum that he would have contributed, based on his 
salary and the member contribution rate in effect at the time that the credited service is 
requested, had he been a member of the system for the years or fractional parts of years for 
which he is requesting credit plus amounts actuarially determined such that the crediting of 
service does not result in any cost to the fund plus payment of costs for all professional services 
rendered to the board in connection with the purchase of years of credited service. 
(2) ?Multiple requests to purchase credited service pursuant to this section may be made at any 
time prior to retirement, and shall be made in one lump sum payment upon receipt of which 
credited service shall be given. 
(3) ?There shall be no maximum purchase of credited service pursuant to this section. Credited 
service purchased for prior service with the city shall count for all purposes, including vesting. 
Credited service purchased for any other government service shall count for all purposes except 
vesting. 
(4) ?In no event, however, may credited service be purchased pursuant to this section for prior 
service with any other governmental agency, if such prior service forms or will form the basis of 
a retirement benefit or pension from a different employer's retirement system or plan as set forth 
in section 54-31(h)(2). 
(Code 1993, § 63-45; Ord. No. 1721, § 1, 12-1-2004) 


Sec. 54-44. - Deferred retirement option plan. 
(a) ?Definitions. As used in this section, the following definitions apply: 
    DROP means the City of Apopka General Employees' Deferred Retirement Option Plan. 
    DROP account means the account established for each DROP participant under subsection (c) of 
this section. 
(b) ?Participation. 
(1) ?Eligibility to participate. In lieu of terminating his employment as a general employee, any 
member who is eligible for normal retirement under the system or is eligible for early retirement 
and has attained age 47 years and has completed 25 years of credited service may elect to 
defer receipt of such service retirement pension and to participate in the DROP. 
(2) ?Election to participate. A member's election to participate in the DROP must be made in writing 
in a time and manner determined by the board and shall be effective on the first day of the first 
calendar month which is at least 15 business days after it is received by the board. 
(3) ?Period of participation. A member who elects to participate in the DROP under subsection 
(b)(2) of this section, shall participate in the DROP for a period not to exceed 96 months 
beginning at the time his election to participate in the DROP first becomes effective. A member 
may participate only once. Any person who is currently in the DROP on January 21, 2004, may 
extend his DROP participation as provided herein. Any retiree who has retired under normal 
retirement and who has not previously participated in the DROP and who is re-employed by the 
city as a general employee may elect to enter the DROP as provided herein. 
(4) ?Termination of participation. 
a. ?A member's participation in the DROP shall cease at the earlier of: 
1. ?The end of his period of participation in the DROP as determined under subsection 
(b)(3) of this section; 
2. ?Termination of his employment as a general employee; or 
3. ?Notification of the board of the member's election to cease DROP participation, which 
participation shall cease on the first day of the month following such notification. 
b. ?Upon the member's termination of participation in the DROP, pursuant to subsection 
(b)(4)a.1. of this section, all amounts provided for in subsection (c)(2) of this section, 
including monthly benefits and investment earnings or losses, shall cease to be transferred 
from the system to his DROP account. Any amounts remaining in his DROP account shall 
be paid to him in accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of this section. 
c. ?A member who terminates his participation in the DROP under this subsection (b)(4) shall 
not be permitted to again become a participant in the DROP. 
(5) ?Effect of DROP participation on the system. 
a. ?A member's credited service and his accrued benefit under the system shall be determined 
on the date his election to participate in the DROP first becomes effective. The member 
shall not accrue any additional credited service or any additional benefits under the system 
(except for any additional benefits provided under any cost-of-living adjustment for retirees 
in the system) while he is a participant in the DROP. A member shall not be eligible for 
disability or pre-retirement death benefits while he is a participant in the DROP. After a 
member commences participation, he shall be permitted to again contribute to the system 
and be eligible for disability or pre-retirement death benefits only as provided for in section 
54-45, pertaining to re-employment after retirement. 
b. ?No amounts shall be paid to a member from the system while the member is a participant 
in the DROP. 
(c) ?Funding. 
(1) ?Establishment of DROP account. A DROP account shall be established for each member 
participating in the DROP. A member's DROP account shall consist of amounts transferred to 
the DROP under subsection (c)(2) of this section, and earnings or losses on those amounts. 
(2) ?Transfers from retirement system. 
a. ?As of the first day of each month of a member's period of participation in the DROP, the 
monthly retirement benefit he would have received under the system had he terminated his 
employment as a general employee and elected to receive monthly benefit payments 
thereunder shall be transferred to his DROP account, except as otherwise provided for in 
subsection (b)(4)b. of this section. A member's period of participation in the DROP shall be 
determined in accordance with the provisions of subsections (b)(3) and (b)(4) of this 
section, but in no event shall it continue past the date he terminates his employment as a 
general employee. 
b. ?Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b)(4)b. of this section, a member's DROP 
account under this subsection (c)(2) shall be debited or credited with earnings or losses 
after each fiscal year quarter. The average daily balance in a member's DROP account 
shall be credited or debited at a rate equal to the net investment return realized by the 
system for that quarter. The term "net investment return," for the purpose of this 
subsection, is the total return of the assets in which the member's DROP account is 
invested by the board, net of brokerage commissions, management fees and transaction 
costs. 
c. ?A member's DROP account shall only be credited or debited with earnings or losses and 
monthly benefits while the member is a participant in the DROP. A member's final DROP 
account value for distribution to the member upon termination of participation in the DROP 
shall be the value of the account at the end of the quarter immediately preceding 
termination of participation, plus any monthly periodic additions made to the DROP 
account subsequent to the end of the previous quarter and prior to distribution. If a member 
fails to terminate employment after participating in the DROP for the permissible period of 
DROP participation, then beginning with the member's first month of employment following 
the last month of the permissible period of DROP participation, the member's DROP 
account will no longer be credited or debited with earnings or losses, and monthly benefits 
will then be paid directly to the member, subject to the limitations on re-employment or 
continuation of employment in section 54-45. 
(d) ?Distribution of DROP accounts on termination of employment. 
(1) ?Eligibility for benefits. A member shall receive the balance in his DROP account in accordance 
with the provisions of this subsection (d) upon his cessation of DROP participation. 
(2) ?Form of distribution. 
a. ?Unless the member elects otherwise, distribution of his DROP account shall be made in a 
lump sum, subject to the direct rollover provisions set forth in subsection (d)(6) of this 
section. A member may elect, however, in such time and manner as the board shall 
prescribe, to receive an optional form of benefit described below. 
1. ?Until the value of the member's DROP account is completely depleted, payments in 
approximately equal quarterly or annual installments over a period, designated by the 
member, not to exceed the life expectancy of the last survivor of the member and his 
beneficiary. In the event that the member dies before all installments have been paid, 
the remaining balance in his DROP account shall be paid in an immediate lump sum 
to his beneficiary, or if none is designated, then to the member's estate. 
2. ?The purchase of a non-forfeitable fixed annuity payable in such form as the member 
may elect. Elections under this subsection shall be in writing and shall be made in 
such time or manner as the board shall determine. 
b. ?If a member dies before his benefit is paid, his DROP account shall be paid to his 
beneficiary in such optional form as his beneficiary may select. If no beneficiary 
designation is made, the DROP account shall be distributed to the member's estate. 
(3) ?Date of payment of distribution. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (d), distribution 
of a member's DROP account shall be made as soon as administratively practicable following 
the member's cessation of DROP participation. Distribution of the amount in a member's DROP 
account will not be made unless the member completes a written request for distribution and a 
written election on forms designated by the board to either receive a cash lump sum or a 
rollover of the lump sum amount. 
(4) ?Proof of death and right of beneficiary or other person. The board may require and rely upon 
such proof of death and such evidence of the right of any beneficiary or other person to receive 
the value of a deceased member's DROP account as the board may deem proper, and its 
determination of the right of that beneficiary or other person to receive payment shall be 
conclusive. 
(5) ?Distribution limitation. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection (d), all 
distributions from the DROP shall conform to the minimum distribution of benefits provisions as 
provided for herein. 
(6) ?Direct rollover of certain distributions. This subsection applies to distributions made on or after 
January 1, 2002. Notwithstanding any provision of the DROP to the contrary, a distributee may 
elect to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid in a direct rollover as otherwise 
provided under the system in section 54-39. 
(e) ?Administration of the DROP. 
(1) ?Board administers the DROP. The general administration of the DROP, the responsibility for 
carrying out the provisions of the DROP, and the responsibility of overseeing the investment of 
the DROP's assets shall be placed in the board. The members of the board may appoint from 
their number such subcommittees with such powers as they shall determine; may adopt such 
administrative procedures and regulations as they deem desirable for the conduct of their 
affairs; may authorize one or more of their number or any agent to execute or deliver any 
instrument or make any payment on their behalf; may retain counsel, employ agents and 
provide for such clerical, accounting, actuarial and consulting services as they may require in 
carrying out the provisions of the DROP; and may allocate among themselves or delegate to 
other persons all or such portion of their duties under the DROP, other than those granted to 
them as trustee under any trust agreement adopted for use in implementing the DROP, as they, 
in their sole discretion, shall decide. A trustee shall not vote on any question relating exclusively 
to himself. 
(2) ?Individual accounts, records and reports. The board shall maintain records showing the 
operation and condition of the DROP, including records showing the individual balances in each 
member's DROP account, and the board shall keep in convenient form such data as may be 
necessary for the valuation of the assets and liabilities of the DROP. The board shall prepare 
and distribute to members participating in the DROP and other individuals on file with the 
appropriate governmental agencies, as the case may be, all necessary descriptions, reports, 
information returns, and data required to be distributed or filed for the DROP pursuant to the 
Internal Revenue Code and any other applicable laws. 
(3) ?Establishment of rules. Subject to the limitations of the DROP, the board from time to time shall 
establish rules for the administration of the DROP and the transaction of its business. The board 
shall have discretionary authority to construe and interpret the DROP (including, but not limited 
to, determination of an individual's eligibility for DROP participation, the right and amount of any 
benefit payable under the DROP and the date on which any individual ceases to be a 
participant in the DROP). The determination of the board as to the interpretation of the DROP or 
its determination of any disputed questions shall be conclusive and final to the extent permitted 
by applicable law. 
(4) ?Limitation of liability. 
a. ?The trustees shall not incur any liability individually or on behalf of any other individuals for 
any act or failure to act, made in good faith in relation to the DROP or the funds of the 
DROP. 
b. ?Neither the board nor any trustee of the board shall be responsible for any reports 
furnished by any expert retained or employed by the board, but they shall be entitled to rely 
thereon as well as on certificates furnished by an accountant or an actuary, and on all 
opinions of counsel. The board shall be fully protected with respect to any action taken or 
suffered by it in good faith in reliance upon such expert, accountant, actuary or counsel, 
and all actions taken or suffered in such reliance shall be conclusive upon any person with 
any interest in the DROP. 
(f) ?General provisions. 
(1) ?Amendment of DROP. The DROP may be amended by an ordinance of the city at any time 
and from time to time, and retroactively if deemed necessary or appropriate, to amend in whole 
or in part any or all of the provisions of the DROP. However, except as otherwise provided by 
law, no amendment shall make it possible for any part of the DROP's funds to be used for, or 
diverted to, purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of persons entitled to benefits under 
the DROP. No amendment shall be made which has the effect of decreasing the balance of the 
DROP account of any member. 
(2) ?Facility of payment. If a member or other person entitled to a benefit under the DROP is unable 
to care for his affairs because of illness or accident, or is a minor, the board shall direct that any 
benefit due him shall be made only to a duly appointed legal representative. Any payment so 
made shall be a complete discharge of the liabilities of the DROP for that benefit. 
(3) ?Information. Each member, beneficiary or other person entitled to a benefit, before any benefit 
shall be payable to him or on his account under the DROP, shall file with the board the 
information that it shall require to establish his rights and benefits under the DROP. 
(4) ?Prevention of escheat. If the board cannot ascertain the whereabouts of any person to whom a 
payment is due under the DROP, the board may, no earlier than three years from the date such 
payment is due, mail a notice of such due and owing payment to the last-known address of 
such person, as shown on the records of the board or the city. If such person has not made 
written claim therefor within three months of the date of the mailing, the board may, if it so elects 
and upon receiving advice from counsel to the DROP, direct that such payment and all 
remaining payments otherwise due such person be canceled on the records of the DROP. Upon 
such cancellation, the DROP shall have no further liability therefor except that, in the event such 
person or his beneficiary later notifies the board of his whereabouts and requests the payment 
or payments due to him under the DROP, the amount so applied shall be paid to him in 
accordance with the provisions of the DROP. 
(5) ?Written elections; notification. 
a. ?Any elections, notifications or designations made by a member pursuant to the provisions 
of the DROP shall be made in writing and filed with the board in a time and manner 
determined by the board under rules uniformly applicable to all employees similarly 
situated. The board reserves the right to change from time to time the manner for making 
notifications, elections or designations by members under the DROP if it determines after 
due deliberation that such action is justified in that it improves the administration of the 
DROP. In the event of a conflict between the provisions for making an election, notification 
or designation set forth in the DROP and such new administrative procedures, those new 
administrative procedures shall prevail. 
b. ?Each member or retiree who has a DROP account shall be responsible for furnishing the 
board with his current address and any subsequent changes in his address. Any notice 
required to be given to a member or retiree hereunder shall be deemed given if directed to 
him at the last such address given to the board and mailed by registered or certified United 
States mail. If any check mailed by registered or certified United States mail to such 
address is returned, mailing of checks will be suspended until such time as the member or 
retiree notifies the board of his address. 
(6) ?Benefits not guaranteed. All benefits payable to a member from the DROP shall be paid only 
from the assets of the member's DROP account and neither the city nor the board shall have 
any duty or liability to furnish the DROP with any funds, securities or other assets except to the 
extent required by any applicable law. 
(7) ?Construction. 
a. ?The DROP shall be construed, regulated and administered under the laws of Florida, 
except where other applicable law controls. 
b. ?The titles and headings of the subsections in this section are for convenience only. In the 
case of ambiguity or inconsistency, the text rather than the titles or headings shall control. 
(8) ?Forfeiture of retirement benefits. Nothing in this section shall be construed to remove DROP 
participants from the application of any forfeiture provisions applicable to the system. DROP 
participants shall be subject to forfeiture of all retirement benefits, including DROP benefits. 
(9) ?Effect of DROP participation on employment. Participation in the DROP is not a guarantee of 
employment and DROP participants shall be subject to the same employment standards and 
policies that are applicable to employees who are not DROP participants. 
(Code 1993, § 63-46; Ord. No. 1721, § 1, 12-1-2004; Ord. No. 1808, § 5, 2-15-2006) 


Sec. 54-45. - Re-employment after retirement. 
(a) ?Any retiree who is retired under this system, except for disability retirement as previously provided 
for, may be re-employed by any public or private employer, except the city, and may receive 
compensation from that employment without limiting or restricting in any way the retirement benefits 
payable under this system. Re-employment by the city shall be subject to the limitations set forth in 
this section. 
(b) ?After normal retirement. Any retiree who is retired under normal retirement pursuant to this system 
and who is re-employed as a general employee after that retirement and, by virtue of that re-
employment, is eligible to participate in this system, shall, upon being re-employed, select one of the 
following options: 
(1) ?The retiree may elect to discontinue receipt of benefits. Upon re-employment, the retiree shall 
be deemed to be fully vested and the additional credited service accrued during the subsequent 
employment period shall be used in computing a second benefit amount attributable to the 
subsequent employment period, which benefit amount shall be added to the benefit determined 
upon the initial retirement, to determine the total benefit payable upon final retirement. 
Calculations of benefits upon initial retirement shall be based upon the benefit accrual rate, 
average final compensation, and credited service as of that date and the retirement benefit 
amount for any subsequent employment period shall be based upon the benefit accrual rate, 
average final compensation (based only on the subsequent employment period and not 
including any period of DROP participation), and credited service as of the date of the 
subsequent retirement. The amount of any death or disability benefit received as a result of a 
subsequent period of employment shall be reduced by the amount of accrued benefit eligible to 
be paid for a prior period of employment. The optional form of benefit and any joint pensioner 
selected upon initial retirement shall not be subject to change upon subsequent retirement 
except as otherwise provided herein, but the member may select a different optional form and 
joint pensioner applicable to the subsequent retirement benefit; or 
(2) ?The retiree may continue to receive retirement benefits previously earned and not be an active 
member of the system. If this option is selected, the subsequent employment period shall have 
no effect upon average final compensation, years of credited service or retirement benefits. 
Regardless of any other provision of this system, any retired and re-employed retiree electing to 
continue to receive retirement benefits shall not be required to be an active member of the 
system. 
(c) ?Any retiree who is retired under normal retirement pursuant to this system and who is re-employed 
by the city after that retirement and, by virtue of that re-employment, is ineligible to participate in this 
system, shall, during the period of such re-employment, continue to receive retirement benefits 
previously earned. Former DROP participants shall begin receipt of benefits under these 
circumstances. 
(d) ?After early retirement. Any retiree who is retired under early retirement pursuant to this system and 
who subsequently becomes an employee of the city in any capacity shall discontinue receipt of 
benefits from the system. If by virtue of that re-employment, the retiree is eligible to participate in this 
system, the retiree shall be deemed to be fully vested and the additional credited service accrued 
during the subsequent employment period shall be used in computing a second benefit amount 
attributable to the subsequent employment period, which benefit amount shall be added to the 
benefit determined upon the initial retirement to determine the total benefit payable upon final 
retirement. Calculations of benefits upon retirement shall be based upon the benefit accrual rate, 
average final compensation, credited service and early retirement reduction factor as of that date 
and the retirement benefit amount for any subsequent employment period shall be based upon the 
benefit accrual rate, average final compensation (based only on the subsequent employment period), 
and credited service as of the date of subsequent retirement. The amount of any death or disability 
benefit received as a result of a subsequent period of employment shall be reduced by the amount of 
accrued benefit eligible to be paid for a prior period of employment. The optional form of benefit and 
any joint pensioner selected upon initial retirement shall not be subject to change upon subsequent 
retirement except as otherwise provided herein, but the member may select a different optional form 
and joint pensioner applicable to the subsequent retirement benefit. Retirement pursuant to an early 
retirement incentive program shall be deemed early retirement for purposes of this section if the 
member was permitted to retire prior to the customary retirement date provided for in the system at 
the time of retirement. 
(e) ?Re-employment of terminated vested persons. Re-employed terminated vested persons shall not be 
subject to the provisions of this section until such time as they begin to actually receive benefits. 
Upon receipt of benefits, terminated vested persons shall be treated as normal or early retirees for 
purposes of applying the provisions of this section and their status as an early or normal retiree shall 
be determined by the date they elect to begin to receive their benefits. 
(f) ?DROP participants. Members or retirees who are or were in the deferred retirement option plan shall 
have the options provided for in this section for re-employment or, if the DROP retiree has not 
terminated DROP participation, continued employment, as if the retiree was a retiree under normal 
retirement. Upon re-employment or continued employment following DROP participation, a DROP 
participant shall receive a distribution of his DROP account in accordance with the DROP. 
(Code 1993, § 63-47; Ord. No. 1721, § 1, 12-1-2004) 


Sec. 54-46. - Purchase of permissive credited service. 
    A member may, within six months of retirement from the plan, elect to purchase up to five years, or 
fractional parts of years, of additional credited service under the following conditions: 
(1) ?The member contributes to the fund the sum that he would have contributed, based on his 
salary and the member contribution rate in effect at the time that the credited service is 
requested, had he been a member of the system for the years or fractional parts of years for 
which he is requesting credit, plus amounts actuarially determined such that the crediting of 
service does not result in any cost to the plan, plus payment of costs for all professional 
services rendered to the board in connection with the purchase of years of credited service. 
(2) ?Requests may be made by the member within six months of retirement from the plan. Payment 
by the member of the required contribution shall be made no later than the retirement date and 
shall be made in one lump sum payment upon receipt of which permissive service credit shall 
be recognized and credited. The term "retirement," for the purposes of this section only, is the 
date of commencement of the employee's monthly retirement benefit under this plan, or any 
other city plan or DROP, at the member's normal or early retirement date, and not the 
employee's separation date. 
(3) ?To the extent permitted by law, including relevant Internal Revenue Code provisions, as 
amended from time to time, in lieu or in addition to employee contributions, the plan will accept 
inter-plan transfers (rollovers) as provided in section 54-39 to fund the purchase of the 
permissive service credit as provided herein. 
(4) ?Permissive service credit purchased pursuant to this section shall not count toward vesting. 
(Code 1993, § 63-48; Ord. No. 2331, § III, 10-16-2013) 


Secs. 54-47—54-65. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - FIREFIGHTERS' RETIREMENT SYSTEM[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Firefighter pensions, F.S. § 175.021 et seq. 


Sec. 54-66. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accumulated contributions means a member's own contributions without interest. For those 
members who purchase credited service with interest or at no cost to the system, any payment 
representing the amount attributable to member contributions based on the applicable member 
contribution rate, and any payment representing interest and any required actuarially calculated payments 
for the purchase of such credited service, shall be included in accumulated contributions. 
    Actuarial equivalent means a benefit or amount of equal value, based upon the 1983 Group Annuity 
Mortality Table and an interest rate of eight percent per annum, using appropriate actuarial methods. 
    Average final compensation means 1/12 of the average salary of the five best years of the last ten 
years of credited service prior to retirement, termination, or death, or the career average as a full-time 
firefighter, whichever is greater. A year shall be 12 consecutive months. 
    Beneficiary means the person entitled to receive benefits hereunder at the death of a member who 
has been designated in writing by the member and filed with the board. If no such designation is in effect, 
or if no person so designated is living at the time of death of the member, the beneficiary shall be the 
estate of the member. 
    Board means the board of trustees which shall administer and manage the system herein provided 
and serve as trustees of the fund. 
    Credited service means the total number of years and fractional parts of years of service as a 
firefighter with member contributions, when required, omitting intervening years or fractional parts of years 
when such member was not employed by the city as a firefighter. A member may voluntarily leave his 
accumulated contributions in the fund for a period of five years after leaving the employ of the city 
pending the possibility of being re-employed as a firefighter without losing credit for the time that he was a 
member of the system. If a vested member leaves the employ of the fire department, his accumulated 
contributions will be returned only upon his written request. Any period of 160 hours or less during any 
calendar year that a member is on leave without pay from the city pursuant to the Family and Medical 
Leave Act shall be included as credited service. Periods in excess of 160 hours shall be included as 
credited service only in accordance with section 54-90. If a member who is not vested is not re-employed 
as a firefighter with the fire department within five years, his accumulated contributions, if less than 
$1,000.00, shall be returned. If a member who is not vested is not re-employed within five years, his 
accumulated contributions, if $1,000.00 or more, will be returned only upon the written request of the 
member and upon completion of a written election to receive a cash lump sum or to rollover the lump sum 
amount on forms designated by the board. Upon return of a member's accumulated contributions, all of 
his rights and benefits under the system are forfeited and terminated. Upon any re-employment, a 
firefighter shall not receive credit for the years and fractional parts of years of service for which he has 
withdrawn his accumulated contributions from the fund, unless the firefighter repays into the fund the 
contributions he has withdrawn, with interest, as determined by the board, within 90 days after his re-
employment. The years or fractional parts of a year that a member serves in the military service of the 
armed forces of the United States, the United States Merchant Marine or the United States Coast Guard, 
voluntarily or involuntarily, after separation from employment as a firefighter with the city, to perform 
training or service, shall be added to his years of credited service for all purposes, including vesting, 
provided that: 
(1) ?The member must return to his employment as a firefighter within one year from the earlier of 
the date of his military discharge or his release from active service. 
(2) ?The member is entitled to re-employment under the provisions of the Uniformed Services 
Employment and Re-employment Rights Act (USERRA), (P.L. 103-353). 
(3) ?The maximum credit for military service pursuant to this subsection shall be five years. 
    Effective date means February 19, 1992. 
    Firefighter means an actively employed full-time person employed by the city, including his initial 
probationary employment period, who is certified as a firefighter as a condition of employment in 
accordance with the provisions of F.S. § 633.35, and whose duty it is to extinguish fires, to protect life and 
to protect property. 
    Fund means the trust fund established herein as part of the system. 
    Internal Revenue Code means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time to time. 
    Masculine gender means that the masculine gender, where used herein, unless the context 
specifically requires otherwise, shall include both the feminine and masculine genders. 
    Member means an actively employed firefighter who fulfills the prescribed membership 
requirements. Benefit improvements which, in the past, have been provided for by amendments to the 
system adopted by city ordinance, and any benefit improvements which might be made in the future shall 
apply prospectively and shall not apply to members who terminate employment or who retire prior to the 
effective date of any ordinance adopting such benefit improvements, unless such ordinance specifically 
provides to the contrary. 
    Plan year means the 12-month period beginning October 1 and ending September 30 of the 
following year. 
    Retiree means a member who has entered retirement status. 
    Retirement means a member's separation from city employment with eligibility for immediate receipt 
of benefits under the system or entry into the deferred retirement option plan (DROP). 
    Salary means the total compensation for services rendered to the city as a firefighter reportable on 
the member's W-2 form, plus all tax-deferred, tax-sheltered or tax-exempt items of income derived from 
elective employee payroll deductions or salary reductions. Compensation in excess of the limitations set 
forth in section 401(a)(17) of the Internal Revenue Code shall be disregarded. The limitation on 
compensation for an eligible employee shall not be less than the amount which was allowed to be taken 
into account hereunder as in effect on July 1, 1993. The term "eligible employee" means an individual 
who was a member before the first plan year beginning after December 31, 1995. 
    Spouse means the lawful wife or husband of a member or retiree at the time benefits become 
payable. 
    System means the City of Apopka Municipal Firefighters' Retirement Trust Fund as contained herein 
and all amendments thereto. 
(Code 1993, § 63-61; Ord. No. 1646, § 1, 6-2-2004; Ord. No. 1809, § 1, 2-15-2006) 


Sec. 54-67. - Membership. 
(a) ?Conditions of eligibility. 
(1) ?All firefighters as of February 19, 1992, and all future new firefighters shall become members of 
this system as a condition of employment. Beginning February 19, 1992, any person who enters 
employment with the city as a volunteer firefighter, as defined in F.S. § 175.032, shall not be a 
member of this plan. 
(2) ?All future firefighters after February 19, 1992, shall be required to complete a medical 
examination as prescribed by the city. 
(3) ?Designation of beneficiary. Each firefighter shall complete a form prescribed by the board 
designating a beneficiary or beneficiaries. 
(b) ?Opt-out option. The fire chief may, in the event he has elected to participate in another pension 
program within 90 days of his employment as fire chief, notify the board and the city, in writing, of his 
election not to be a member of the system. In the event of any such election, his accumulated 
contributions shall be returned and he shall be barred from future membership in the system. 
However, in the event the fire chief has been a member of the system and has attained early or 
normal retirement age and elects to continue employment as a firefighter after DROP participation or 
to be re-employed as a firefighter after retirement as otherwise provided herein, the fire chief may 
elect not to be a member during any continuing or re-employment period without forfeiting any 
benefit attributable to his initial period of employment, except that benefit payments shall be 
discontinued during any period of employment as a firefighter continuing after DROP participation or 
upon re-employment as a firefighter after retirement. 
(Code 1993, § 63-62; Ord. No. 1646, § 1, 6-2-2004; Ord. No. 1757, § 1, 7-20-2005) 


Sec. 54-68. - Board of trustees. 
(a) ?The sole and exclusive administration of and responsibilities for the proper operation of the 
retirement system and for making effective the provisions of this article is hereby vested in a board of 
trustees. The board is hereby designated as the plan administrator. The board shall consist of five 
trustees, two of whom, unless otherwise prohibited by law, shall be legal residents of the city, who 
shall be appointed by the city council, and two of whom shall be members of the system, who shall 
be elected by a majority of the firefighters who are members of the system. DROP participants shall 
be eligible to be elected as member trustees but may not vote for elected trustees. The fifth trustee 
shall be chosen by a majority of the previous four trustees as provided for herein, and such person's 
name shall be submitted to the city council. Upon receipt of the fifth person's name, the city council 
shall, as a ministerial duty, appoint such person to the board of trustees as its fifth trustee. The fifth 
trustee shall have the same rights as each of the other four trustees appointed or elected as herein 
provided and shall serve a two-year term unless he sooner vacates the office. Each resident trustee 
shall serve as trustee for a period of two years, unless he sooner vacates the office or is sooner 
replaced by the city council, at whose pleasure he shall serve. Each member trustee shall serve as 
trustee for a period of two years, unless he sooner leaves the employment of the city as a firefighter 
or otherwise vacates his office as a trustee, whereupon a successor shall be chosen in the same 
manner as the departing trustee. Each trustee may succeed himself in office. The board shall 
establish and administer the nominating and election procedures for each election. The board shall 
meet at least quarterly each year. The board shall be a legal entity with, in addition to other powers 
and responsibilities contained herein, the power to bring and defend lawsuits of every kind, nature, 
and description. 
(b) ?The trustees shall, by a majority vote, elect a chairperson and a secretary. The secretary of the 
board shall keep a complete minute book of the actions, proceedings, or hearings of the board. The 
trustees shall not receive any compensation as such, but may receive expenses and per diem as 
provided by law. 
(c) ?Each trustee shall be entitled to one vote on the board. Three affirmative votes shall be necessary 
for any decision by the trustees at any meeting of the board. A trustee shall have the right to abstain 
from voting as the result of a conflict of interest, provided that trustee complies with the provisions of 
F.S. § 112.3143. 
(d) ?The board shall engage such actuarial, accounting, legal, and other services as shall be required to 
transact the business of the system. The compensation of all persons engaged by the board and all 
other expenses of the board necessary for the operation of the system shall be paid from the fund at 
such rates and in such amounts as the board shall agree. In the event the board chooses to use the 
city's legal counsel, actuary or other professional, technical or other advisors, it shall do so only 
under terms and conditions acceptable to the board. 
(e) ?The duties and responsibilities of the board shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the 
following: 
(1) ?To construe the provisions of the system and determine all questions arising thereunder. 
(2) ?To determine all questions relating to eligibility and membership. 
(3) ?To determine and certify the amount of all retirement allowances or other benefits hereunder. 
(4) ?To establish uniform rules and procedures to be followed for administrative purposes, benefit 
applications and all matters required to administer the system. 
(5) ?To distribute to members, at regular intervals, information concerning the system. 
(6) ?To receive and process all applications for benefits. 
(7) ?To authorize all payments whatsoever from the fund, and to notify the disbursing agent, in 
writing, of approved benefit payments and other expenditures arising through operation of the 
system and fund. 
(8) ?To have performed actuarial studies and valuations, at least as often as required by law, and 
make recommendations regarding any and all changes in the provisions of the system. 
(9) ?To perform such other duties as are required to prudently administer the system. 
(10) ?To appoint an administrator of the system if deemed appropriate by the board. 
(Code 1993, § 63-63; Ord. No. 1646, § 1, 6-2-2004; Ord. No. 2022, § 1, 4-16-2008) 


Sec. 54-69. - Finances and fund management; establishment and operation of fund. 
(a) ?As part of the system, there exists the fund, into which shall be deposited all of the contributions and 
assets whatsoever attributable to the system. 
(b) ?The actual custody and supervision of the fund (and assets thereof) shall be vested in the board. 
Payment of benefits and disbursements from the fund shall be made by the disbursing agent, but 
only upon written authorization from the board. 
(c) ?All funds of the Municipal Firefighters' Retirement Trust Fund may be deposited by the board with 
the finance director of the city, acting in a ministerial capacity only, who shall be liable in the same 
manner and to the same extent as he is liable for the safekeeping of funds for the city. However, any 
funds and securities so deposited with the finance director of the city shall be kept in a separate fund 
by the finance director or clearly identified as such funds of the Municipal Firefighters' Retirement 
Trust Fund. In lieu thereof, the board shall deposit the funds of the Municipal Firefighters' Retirement 
Trust Fund in a qualified public depository as defined in F.S. § 280.02, which depository with regard 
to such funds shall conform to and be bound by all of the provisions of F.S. ch. 280. In order to fulfill 
its investment responsibilities as set forth herein, the board may retain the services of a custodian 
bank, an investment advisor registered under the Investment Advisors Act of 1940 or otherwise 
exempt from such required registration, an insurance company, or a combination of these, for the 
purposes of investment decisions and management. Such investment manager shall have discretion, 
subject to any guidelines as prescribed by the board, in the investment of all fund assets. 
(d) ?All funds and securities of the system may be commingled in the fund, provided that accurate 
records are maintained at all times reflecting the financial composition of the fund, including accurate 
current accounts and entries as regards the following: 
(1) ?Current amounts of accumulated contributions of members on both an individual and 
aggregate account basis; 
(2) ?Receipts and disbursements; 
(3) ?Benefit payments; 
(4) ?Current amounts clearly reflecting all monies, funds and assets whatsoever attributable to 
contributions and deposits from the city; 
(5) ?All interest, dividends and gains (or losses) whatsoever; and 
(6) ?Such other entries as may be properly required so as to reflect a clear and complete financial 
report of the fund. 
(e) ?An audit shall be performed annually by a certified public accountant for the most recent fiscal year 
of the system, showing a detailed listing of assets and a statement of all income and disbursements 
during the year. Such income and disbursements must be reconciled with the assets at the 
beginning and end of the year. Such report shall reflect a complete evaluation of assets on both a 
cost and market basis, as well as other items normally included in a certified audit. 
(f) ?The board shall have the following investment powers and authority: 
(1) ?The board shall be vested with full legal title to said fund, subject, however, and in any event to 
the authority and power of the city council to amend or terminate this fund, provided, that no 
amendment or fund termination shall ever result in the use of any assets of this fund except for 
the payment of regular expenses and benefits under this system, except as otherwise provided 
herein. All contributions from time to time paid into the fund, and the income thereof, without 
distinction between principal and income, shall be held and administered by the board or its 
agent in the fund and the board shall not be required to segregate or invest separately any 
portion of the fund. 
(2) ?All monies paid into or held in the fund shall be invested and re-invested by the board, and the 
investment of all or any part of such funds shall be limited to: 
a. ?Annuity and life insurance contracts with life insurance companies in amounts sufficient to 
provide, in whole or in part, the benefits to which all of the members in the fund shall be 
entitled under the provisions of this system and pay the initial and subsequent premium 
thereon. 
b. ?Time or savings accounts of a national bank, a state bank insured by the Bank Insurance 
Fund or a savings/building and loan association insured by the Savings Association 
Insurance Fund which is administered by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, or a 
state or federal chartered credit union whose share accounts are insured by the National 
Credit Union Share Insurance Fund. 
c. ?Obligations of the United States or obligations guaranteed as to principal and interest by 
the government of the United States or by an agency of the government of the United 
States. 
d. ?Stocks, commingled funds administered by national or state banks, mutual funds and 
bonds or other evidences of indebtedness, provided that: 
1. ?Except as provided in subsection (f)(2)d.2. of this section, all individually held 
securities and all securities in a commingled or mutual fund must be issued or 
guaranteed by a corporation organized under the laws of the United States, any state 
or organized territory of the United States, or the District of Columbia. 
2. ?Up to ten percent of the assets of the fund may be invested in foreign securities. 
3. ?The board shall not invest more than five percent of its assets in the common stock or 
capital stock of any one issuing company; nor shall the aggregate investment of any 
one issuing company exceed five percent of the outstanding capital stock of that 
company; nor shall the aggregate of its investments in common stock, capital stock 
and convertible bonds at market exceed 65 percent of the assets of the fund. 
(3) ?At least once every three years, and more often as determined by the board, the board shall 
retain a professionally qualified independent consultant, as defined in F.S. § 175.071, to 
evaluate the performance of all current investment managers and make recommendations 
regarding the retention of all such investment managers. These recommendations shall be 
considered by the board at its next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(4) ?The board may retain in cash and keep unproductive of income such amount of the fund as it 
may deem advisable, having regard for the cash requirements of the system. 
(5) ?Neither the board nor any trustee shall be liable for the making, retention or sale of any 
investment or re-investment made as herein provided, nor for any loss or diminishment of the 
fund, except that due to his or its own negligence, willful misconduct or lack of good faith. 
(6) ?The board may cause any investment in securities held by it to be registered in or transferred 
into its name as trustee or into the name of such nominee as it may direct, or it may retain them 
unregistered and in a form permitting transferability, but the books and records shall at all times 
show that all investments are part of the trust fund. 
(7) ?The board is empowered, but is not required, to vote upon any stocks, bonds, or securities of 
any corporation, association, or trust and to give general or specific proxies or powers of 
attorney with or without power of substitution; to participate in mergers, reorganizations, 
recapitalizations, consolidations, and similar transactions with respect to such securities; to 
deposit such stock or other securities in any voting trust or any protective or like committee with 
the trustees or with depositories designated thereby; to amortize or fail to amortize any part or 
all of the premium or discount resulting from the acquisition or disposition of assets; and 
generally to exercise any of the powers of an owner with respect to stocks, bonds, or other 
investments comprising the fund which it may deem to be to the best interest of the fund to 
exercise. 
(8) ?The board shall not be required to make any inventory or appraisal or report to any court, nor to 
secure any order of court for the exercise of any power contained herein. 
(9) ?Where any action which the board is required to take or any duty or function which it is required 
to perform either under the terms herein or under the general law applicable to it as trustee 
under this article can reasonably be taken or performed only after receipt by it from a member, 
the city, or any other entity of specific information, certification, direction or instruction, the board 
shall be free of liability in failing to take such action or perform such duty or function until such 
information, certification, direction or instruction has been received by it. 
(10) ?Any overpayments or underpayments from the fund to a member, retiree or beneficiary 
caused by errors of computation shall be adjusted, with interest, at a rate per annum approved 
by the board in such a manner that the actuarial equivalent of the benefit to which the member, 
retiree or beneficiary was correctly entitled, shall be paid. Overpayments shall be charged 
against payments next succeeding the correction, or collected in another manner if prudent. 
Underpayments shall be made up from the fund in a prudent manner. 
(11) ?The board shall sustain no liability whatsoever for the sufficiency of the fund to meet the 
payments and benefits provided for herein. 
(12) ?In any application to or proceeding or action in the courts, only the board shall be a necessary 
party, and no member or other person having an interest in the fund shall be entitled to any 
notice or service of process. Any judgment entered in such a proceeding or action shall be 
conclusive upon all persons. 
(13) ?Any of the foregoing powers and functions reposed in the board may be performed or carried 
out by the board through duly authorized agents, provided, that the board at all times maintains 
continuous supervision over the acts of any such agent; provided, further, that legal title to said 
fund shall always remain in the board. 
(Code 1993, § 63-64; Ord. No. 1646, § 1, 6-2-2004) 


Sec. 54-70. - Contributions. 
(a) ?Member contributions. 
(1) ?Amount. Each member of the system shall be required to make regular contributions to the 
fund in the amount of 9.3 percent of the members' salary. Member contributions withheld by the 
city on behalf of the member shall be deposited with the board immediately after each pay 
period. The contributions made by each member to the fund shall be designated as employer 
contributions pursuant to section 414(h) of the Internal Revenue Code. Such designation is 
contingent upon the contributions being excluded from the members' gross income for federal 
income tax purposes. For all other purposes of the system, such contributions shall be 
considered to be member contributions. 
(2) ?Method. Such contributions shall be made by payroll deduction. 
(b) ?State contributions. Any monies received or receivable by reason of laws of the state for the 
express purpose of funding and paying for retirement benefits for firefighters of the city shall be 
deposited in the fund comprising part of this system immediately, and under no circumstances more 
than five days after receipt by the city. 
(c) ?City contributions. So long as this system is in effect, the city shall make quarterly contributions to 
the fund in an amount equal to the difference in each year between the total aggregate member 
contributions for the year, plus state contributions for such year, and the total cost for the year, as 
shown by the most recent actuarial valuation of the system, but in no event shall the city's annual 
contribution be less than four percent of the total salary of plan members. The total cost for any year 
shall be defined as the total normal cost plus the additional amount sufficient to amortize the 
unfunded past service liability as provided in part VII of F.S. ch. 112. 
(d) ?Other. Private donations, gifts and contributions may be deposited to the fund and shall be used for 
the benefit of the fund as determined by the board. 
(Code 1993, § 63-65; Ord. No. 1646, § 1, 6-2-2004; Ord. No. 2451, § I, 10-21-2015) 


Sec. 54-71. - Benefit amounts and eligibility. 
(a) ?Normal retirement date. A member's normal retirement date shall be the first day of the month 
coincident with or next following the earlier of the attainment of age 55 years and the completion of 
ten years of credited service or completion of 22 years of credited service, regardless of age. A 
member may retire on his normal retirement date or on the first day of any month thereafter, and 
each member shall become 100 percent vested in his accrued benefit on the member's normal 
retirement date. Normal retirement under the system is retirement from employment with the city on 
or after the normal retirement date. 
(b) ?Normal retirement benefit. A member retiring hereunder on or after his normal retirement date shall 
receive a monthly benefit which shall commence on the first day of the month coincident with or next 
following his retirement and be continued thereafter during the member's lifetime, ceasing upon 
death, but with 120 monthly payments guaranteed in any event. The monthly retirement benefit shall 
equal three percent of average final compensation for each year of credited service during the first 
ten years of service, 3½ percent for years 11 through 20 and four percent for each year of credited 
service after 20 years. 
(c) ?Early retirement date. A member may retire on his early retirement date which shall be the first day 
of any month coincident with or next following the attainment of age 50 years and the completion of 
ten years of credited service. Early retirement under the system is retirement from employment with 
the city on or after the early retirement date and prior to the normal retirement date. 
(d) ?Early retirement benefit. A member retiring hereunder on his early retirement date may receive 
either a deferred or an immediate monthly retirement benefit payable for life, as follows: 
(1) ?A deferred monthly retirement benefit which shall commence on what would have been his 
normal retirement date had he continued employment as a firefighter and shall be continued on 
the first day of each month thereafter. The amount of each such deferred monthly retirement 
benefit shall be determined in the same manner as for retirement on his normal retirement date, 
except that credited service and average final compensation shall be determined as of his early 
retirement date. 
(2) ?An immediate monthly retirement benefit which shall commence on his early retirement date 
and shall be continued on the first day of each month thereafter. The benefit payable shall be as 
determined in subsection (d)(1) of this section, reduced by three percent for each year by which 
the commencement of benefits precedes the date which would have been the member's normal 
retirement date had he continued employment as a firefighter. 
(e) ?Coordination of benefits. 
(1) ?Notwithstanding any other provision of this plan, a member who is employed by the city on or 
after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and who, prior to such 
appointment, was employed in a position covered by another city retirement plan, shall become 
a member of this plan upon the effective date of such employment. Thereafter, the employee 
shall be entitled to the benefits specified in this plan and all of the employee's prior credited 
service under any other city retirement plan may be applied under this plan for purposes of 
vesting and eligibility for retirement or participation in the DROP only. 
(2) ?If credited service under this plan is used to determine a member's vesting or eligibility for 
retirement or participation in the DROP under any other city plan, the member's average final 
compensation shall be calculated as provided under this plan at the time of termination from this 
plan. This plan shall provide the member his average final compensation independent from any 
other plan upon retirement and separation from service with the city. 
(3) ?Any employee who has elected the deferred retirement option plan option as identified under 
section 54-93 may continue this option regardless of any transfer into another position within the 
city covered by another retirement plan, so long as the employee is employed by the city. 
(4) ?An eligible member who elects to coordinate benefits under the provisions outlined within this 
plan shall contribute to the plan an amount equal to the full actuarial cost of the election, such 
that there is no actuarial impact on any city plan. 
(Code 1993, § 63-66; Ord. No. 1646, § 1, 6-2-2004; Ord. No. 2330, § I, 10-16-2013; Ord. No. 
2451, § II, 10-21-2015) 


Sec. 54-72. - Pre-retirement death. 
(a) ?Prior to vesting or eligibility for retirement. The beneficiary of a deceased member who was not 
receiving monthly benefit payments, or who was not yet vested or eligible for early or normal 
retirement shall receive a refund of 100 percent of the member's accumulated contributions. 
(b) ?Deceased member vested or eligible for retirement. The beneficiary of any member who dies and 
who, at the date of his death, was vested or eligible for early or normal retirement shall be entitled to 
a benefit as follows: 
(1) ?If the member was vested but not eligible for normal or early retirement, the beneficiary shall 
receive a benefit payable for ten years, beginning on the date that the deceased member would 
have been eligible for early or normal retirement, at the option of the beneficiary. The benefit 
shall be calculated as for normal retirement based on the deceased member's credited service 
and average final compensation as of the date of his death and reduced as for early retirement, 
if applicable. The beneficiary may also elect to receive an immediate benefit, payable for ten 
years, which is actuarially reduced to reflect the commencement of benefits prior to the early 
retirement date. 
(2) ?If the deceased member was eligible for normal or early retirement, the beneficiary shall 
receive a benefit payable for ten years, beginning on the first day of the month following the 
member's death or at the deceased member's otherwise normal or early retirement date, at the 
option of the beneficiary. The benefit shall be calculated as for normal retirement based on the 
deceased member's credited service and average final compensation as of the date of his 
death and reduced as for early retirement, if applicable. 
(3) ?A beneficiary may not elect an optional form of benefit; however, the board may elect to make 
a lump sum payment pursuant to subsection 54-75(g). 
(4) ?A beneficiary may, in lieu of any benefit provided for in subsection (b)(1) or (2) of this section, 
elect to receive a refund of the deceased member's accumulated contributions. 
(Code 1993, § 63-67; Ord. No. 1646, § 1, 6-2-2004) 


Sec. 54-73. - Disability. 
(a) ?Disability benefits in line of duty. Any member who shall become totally and permanently disabled to 
the extent that he is unable, by reason of a medically determinable physical or mental impairment, to 
render useful and efficient service as a firefighter, which disability was directly caused by the 
performance of his duty as a firefighter, shall, upon establishing the same to the satisfaction of the 
board, be entitled to a monthly pension equal to 2½ percent of his average final compensation 
multiplied by the total years of credited service, but in any event, the minimum amount paid to the 
member shall be 42 percent of the average final compensation of the member. Terminated persons, 
either vested or non-vested, are not eligible for disability benefits, except that those terminated by 
the city for medical reasons may apply for a disability within 30 days after termination. 
(b) ?In line of duty presumptions. 
(1) ?Presumption. Any condition or impairment of health of a member caused by hypertension or 
heart disease shall be presumed to have been suffered in the line of duty unless the contrary is 
shown by competent evidence, provided that such member shall have successfully passed a 
physical examination upon entering into such service, which examination failed to reveal any 
evidence of such condition; and provided, further, that such presumption shall not apply to 
benefits payable or granted in a policy of life insurance or disability insurance. 
(2) ?Additional presumption. The presumption provided for in this subsection (b)(2) shall apply only 
to those conditions described in this subsection (b)(2) that are diagnosed on or after January 1, 
1996. 
a. ?Definitions. As used in this subsection (b)(2), the following definitions apply: 
    Body fluids means blood and body fluids containing visible blood and other body fluids 
to which universal precautions for prevention of occupational transmission of blood-borne 
pathogens, as established by the Centers For Disease Control, apply. For purposes of 
potential transmission of meningococcal meningitis or tuberculosis, the term "body fluids" 
includes respiratory, salivary, and sinus fluids, including droplets, sputum, and saliva, 
mucous, and other fluids through which infectious airborne organisms can be transmitted 
between persons. 
    Emergency rescue or public safety member means any member employed full-time by 
the city as a firefighter, paramedic, emergency medical technician, law enforcement officer, 
or correctional officer who, in the course of employment, runs a high risk of occupational 
exposure to hepatitis, meningococcal meningitis, or tuberculosis, and who is not employed 
elsewhere in a similar capacity. However, the term "emergency rescue or public safety 
member" does not include any person employed by a public hospital licensed under F.S. 
ch. 395, or any person employed by a subsidiary thereof. 
    Hepatitis means hepatitis A, hepatitis B, hepatitis non-A, hepatitis non-B, hepatitis C, 
or any other strain of hepatitis generally recognized by the medical community. 
    High risk of occupational exposure means that risk that is incurred because a person 
subject to the provisions of this subsection, in performing the basic duties associated with 
his employment: 
(i) ?Provides emergency medical treatment in a non-healthcare setting where there is 
a potential for transfer of body fluids between persons; 
(ii) ?At the site of an accident, fire, or other rescue or public safety operation, or in an 
emergency rescue or public safety vehicle, handles body fluids in or out of 
containers or works with or otherwise handles needles or other sharp instruments 
exposed to body fluids; 
(iii) ?Engages in the pursuit, apprehension, and arrest of law violators or suspected 
law violators and, in performing such duties, may be exposed to body fluids; or 
(iv) ?Is responsible for the custody, and physical restraint when necessary, of 
prisoners or inmates within a prison, jail, or other criminal detention facility, while 
on work detail outside the facility, or while being transported and, in performing 
such duties, may be exposed to body fluids. 
    Occupational exposure , in the case of hepatitis, meningococcal meningitis, or 
tuberculosis, means an exposure that occurs during the performance of job duties that may 
place a worker at risk of infection. 
b. ?Presumption. Any emergency rescue or public safety member who suffers a condition or 
impairment of health that is caused by hepatitis, meningococcal meningitis, or tuberculosis, 
that requires medical treatment, and that results in total or partial disability or death, shall 
be presumed to have a disability suffered in the line of duty, unless the contrary is shown 
by competent evidence; however, in order to be entitled to the presumption, the member 
must, by written affidavit as provided in F.S. § 92.50, verify by written declaration that, to 
the best of his knowledge and belief: 
1. ?In the case of a medical condition caused by or derived from hepatitis, he has not: 
(i) ?Been exposed, through transfer of bodily fluids, to any person known to have 
sickness or medical conditions derived from hepatitis, outside the scope of his 
employment; 
(ii) ?Had a transfusion of blood or blood components, other than a transfusion arising 
out of an accident or injury happening in connection with his present 
employment, or received any blood products for the treatment of a coagulation 
disorder since last undergoing medical tests for hepatitis, which tests failed to 
indicate the presence of hepatitis; 
(iii) ?Engaged in unsafe sexual practices or other high-risk behavior, as identified by 
the Centers For Disease Control or the Surgeon General of the United States, or 
had sexual relations with a person known to him to have engaged in such unsafe 
sexual practices or other high-risk behavior; or 
(iv) ?Used intravenous drugs not prescribed by a physician. 
2. ?In the case of meningococcal meningitis, in the ten days immediately preceding 
diagnosis, he was not exposed, outside the scope of his employment, to any person 
known to have meningococcal meningitis or known to be an asymptomatic carrier of 
the disease. 
3. ?In the case of tuberculosis, in the period of time since the member's last negative 
tuberculosis skin test, he has not been exposed outside the scope of his employment 
to any person known by him to have tuberculosis. 
c. ?Immunization. Whenever any standard, medically recognized vaccine or other form of 
immunization or prophylaxis exists for the prevention of a communicable disease for which 
a presumption is granted under this section, if medically indicated in the given 
circumstances pursuant to immunization policies established by the Advisory Committee 
on Immunization Practices of the U.S. Public Health Service, an emergency rescue or 
public safety member may be required by the city to undergo the immunization or 
prophylaxis unless the member's physician determines in writing that the immunization or 
other prophylaxis would pose a significant risk to the member's health. Absent such written 
declaration, failure or refusal by an emergency rescue or public safety member to undergo 
such immunization or prophylaxis disqualifies the member from the benefits of the 
presumption. 
d. ?Record of exposures. The city shall maintain a record of any known or reasonably 
suspected exposure of an emergency rescue or public safety member in its employ to the 
diseases described in this section, and shall immediately notify the member of such 
exposure. An emergency rescue or public safety member shall file an incident or accident 
report with the city of each instance of known or suspected occupational exposure to 
hepatitis infection, meningococcal meningitis, or tuberculosis. 
e. ?Required medical tests; pre-employment physical. In order to be entitled to the 
presumption provided by this section: 
1. ?An emergency rescue or public safety member must, prior to diagnosis, have 
undergone standard, medically acceptable tests for evidence of the communicable 
disease for which the presumption is sought, or evidence of medical conditions 
derived therefrom, which tests fail to indicate the presence of infection. This 
subsection does not apply in the case of meningococcal meningitis. 
2. ?On or after June 15, 1995, an emergency rescue or public safety member may be 
required to undergo a pre-employment physical examination that tests for and fails to 
reveal any evidence of hepatitis or tuberculosis. 
(c) ?Disability benefits not in line of duty. Any member with ten years or more credited service who shall 
become totally and permanently disabled to the extent that he is unable, by reason of a medically 
determinable physical or mental impairment, to render useful and efficient service as a firefighter, 
which disability is not directly caused by the performance of his duties as a firefighter, shall, upon 
establishing the same to the satisfaction of the board, be entitled to a monthly pension equal to 2½ 
percent of his average final compensation multiplied by the total years of credited service. 
Terminated persons, either vested or non-vested, are not eligible for disability benefits, except that 
those terminated by the city for medical reasons may apply for a disability within 30 days after 
termination. 
(d) ?Conditions disqualifying disability benefits. Each firefighter who is claiming disability benefits shall 
establish, to the satisfaction of the board, that such disability or death was not occasioned primarily 
by: 
(1) ?Excessive or habitual use of any drugs or narcotics. 
(2) ?Injury or disease sustained while willfully and illegally participating in fights, riots or civil 
insurrections or while committing a crime. 
(3) ?Injury or disease sustained while serving in any branch of the armed forces. 
(4) ?Injury or disease sustained after his employment as a firefighter with the city shall have 
terminated. 
(e) ?Physical examination requirement. 
(1) ?A member shall not become eligible for disability benefits until and unless he undergoes a 
physical examination by a qualified physician and/or surgeon, who shall be selected by the 
board for that purpose. The board shall not select the member's treating physician or surgeon 
for this purpose, except in an unusual case where the board determines that it would be 
reasonable and prudent to do so. 
(2) ?Any retiree receiving disability benefits under provisions of this article may be required by the 
board to submit sworn statements of his condition accompanied by a physician's statement 
(provided at the retiree's expense) to the board annually, and may be required by the board to 
undergo additional periodic re-examinations by a qualified physician and/or surgeon, who shall 
be selected by the board, to determine if such a disability has ceased to exist. If the board finds 
that the retiree is no longer permanently and totally disabled to the extent that he is unable to 
render useful and efficient service as a firefighter, the board shall recommend to the city that the 
retiree be returned to performance of duty as a firefighter, and the retiree so returned shall enjoy 
the same rights that he had at the time he was placed upon pension. In the event the retiree so 
ordered to return shall refuse to comply with the order within 30 days, if residing outside the 
state, or 15 days if residing within the state, from the issuance thereof, he shall forfeit the right 
to his pension. 
(3) ?The cost of the physical examination and/or re-examination of the member claiming or the 
retiree receiving disability benefits shall be borne by the fund. All other reasonable costs as 
determined by the board incident to the physical examination, such as, but not limited to, 
transportation, meals and hotel accommodations, shall be borne by the fund. 
(4) ?If the retiree recovers from disability and re-enters the service of the city as a firefighter, his 
service will be deemed to have been continuous, but the period beginning with the first month 
for which he received a disability retirement income payment and ending with the date he re-
entered the service of the city will not be considered as credited service for the purposes of the 
plan. 
(5) ?The board shall have the power and authority to make the final decisions regarding all disability 
claims. 
(f) ?Disability payments. The monthly benefit to which a member is entitled in the event of the member's 
disability retirement shall be payable on the first day of the first month after the board of trustees 
determines such entitlement. However, the monthly retirement income shall be payable as of the 
date the board determined such entitlement, and any portion due for a partial month shall be paid 
together with the first payment. The last payment will be: 
(1) ?If the retiree recovers from the disability prior to his normal retirement date, the payment due 
next preceding the date of such recovery; or 
(2) ?If the retiree dies without recovering from the disability or attains his normal retirement date 
while still disabled, the payment due next preceding his death or the 120th monthly payment, 
whichever is later. 
Provided, however, the disability retiree may select, at any time prior to the date on which benefit 
payments begin, an optional form of benefit payment as described in section 54-75(a)(1) or (a)(2), which 
shall be the actuarial equivalent of the normal form of benefit. 
(g) ?Workers' compensation. When a retiree is receiving a disability pension and workers' compensation 
benefits pursuant to F.S. ch. 440 for the same disability, and the total monthly benefits received from 
both exceed 100 percent of the member's average monthly wage as defined in F.S. ch. 440, the 
disability pension benefit shall be reduced so that the total monthly amount received by the retiree 
does not exceed 100 percent of such average monthly wage. The amount of any lump sum workers' 
compensation payment shall be converted to an equivalent monthly benefit payable for ten years 
certain by dividing the lump sum amount by 83.9692. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event 
shall the disability pension benefit be reduced below the greater of 42 percent of average final 
compensation and two percent of average final compensation times years of credited service. 
(Code 1993, § 63-68; Ord. No. 1646, § 1, 6-2-2004) 


Sec. 54-74. - Vesting. 
    If a member terminates his employment as a firefighter, either voluntarily or by discharge, and is not 
eligible for any other benefits under this system, the member shall be entitled to the following: 
(1) ?If the member has less than ten years of credited service in total under all pension plans 
sponsored by the city upon termination, the member shall only be entitled to a refund of his 
accumulated contribution. Such member may elect to receive a refund of accumulated 
contributions without interest upon separation from the city or leave his contributions deposited 
with the fund for up to five years, after which the member will receive the refund of accumulated 
contributions, without interest. 
(2) ?If the member has ten or more years of credited service in total under all pension plans 
sponsored by the city upon termination, the member shall be entitled to a monthly retirement 
benefit, determined in the same manner as identified under section 54-71, pertaining to benefit 
amounts and eligibility, and based upon the member's credited service, average final 
compensation and the benefit accrual rate as of the date of termination, payable to him 
commencing at the member's otherwise normal or early retirement date, determined as if he 
had remained employed, provided he does not elect to withdraw his accumulated contributions 
and provided the member survives to his otherwise normal or early retirement date. If the 
member does not withdraw his accumulated contributions and does not survive to his otherwise 
normal or early retirement date, his designated beneficiary shall be entitled to a benefit as 
provided herein for a deceased member, vested or eligible for retirement under section 54-72. 
(Code 1993, § 63-69; Ord. No. 1646, § 1, 6-2-2004; Ord. No. 2330, § II, 10-16-2013) 


Sec. 54-75. - Optional forms of benefits. 
(a) ?In lieu of the amount and form of retirement income payable in the event of normal or early 
retirement as specified herein, a member, upon written request to the board of trustees, may elect to 
receive a retirement income or benefit of equivalent actuarial value payable in accordance with one 
of the following options: 
(1) ?A retirement income of a monthly amount payable to the retiree for his lifetime only. 
(2) ?A retirement income of a modified monthly amount, payable to the retiree during the lifetime of 
the retiree and following the death of the retiree, 100 percent, 75 percent, 66 2/3 percent or 50 
percent of such monthly amount payable to a joint pensioner for his lifetime. Except where the 
retiree's joint pensioner is his spouse, the payments to the joint pensioner as a percentage of 
the payments to the retiree shall not exceed the applicable percentage provided for in the 
applicable table in the treasury regulations. 
(3) ?If a member retires prior to the time at which Social Security benefits are payable, he may elect 
to receive an increased retirement benefit until such time as Social Security benefits shall be 
assumed to commence and a reduced benefit thereafter in order to provide, to as great an 
extent as possible, a more level retirement allowance during the entire period of retirement. The 
amounts payable shall be as recommended by the actuaries for the system, based upon the 
Social Security law in effect at the time of the member's retirement. 
(4) ?For any member who does not participate in the DROP, a member may elect a percentage of 
the benefit in a lump sum, as follows: 
a. ?Ten percent lump sum benefit with 90 percent paid under the normal form or as per 
subsection (a)(1), (2) or (3) of this section. 
b. ?Fifteen percent lump sum benefit with 85 percent paid under the normal form or as per 
subsection (a)(1), (2) or (3) of this section. 
c. ?Twenty percent lump sum benefit with 80 percent paid under the normal form or as per 
subsection (a)(1), (2) or (3) of this section. 
d. ?Twenty-five percent lump sum benefit with 75 percent paid under the normal form or as per 
subsection (a)(1), (2) or (3) of this section. 
(b) ?The member, upon electing any option of this section, will designate the joint pensioner (subsection 
(a)(2) of this section) or beneficiary (or beneficiaries) to receive the benefit, if any, payable under the 
system in the event of the member's death and will have the power to change such designation from 
time to time. Such designation will name a joint pensioner or one or more primary beneficiaries 
where applicable. A member may change his beneficiary at any time. If a member has elected an 
option with a joint pensioner and the member's retirement income benefits have commenced, the 
member may thereafter change his designated beneficiary at any time, but may only change his joint 
pensioner twice. Subject to the restriction in the previous sentence, a member may substitute a new 
joint pensioner for a deceased joint pensioner. 
(c) ?The consent of a member's or retiree's joint pensioner or beneficiary to any such change shall not 
be required. The rights of all previously designated beneficiaries to receive benefits under the system 
shall thereupon cease. 
(d) ?Upon change of a retiree's joint pensioner in accordance with this section, the amount of the 
retirement income payable to the retiree shall be actuarially redetermined to take into account the 
age of the former joint pensioner, the new joint pensioner and the retiree, and to ensure that the 
benefit paid is the actuarial equivalent of the member's then-current benefit at the time of the 
change. Any such retiree shall pay the actuarial recalculation expenses. Each request for a change 
will be made in writing on a form prepared by the board and on completion will be filed with the 
board. In the event that no designated beneficiary survives the retiree, such benefits as are payable 
in the event of the death of the retiree subsequent to his retirement shall be paid as provided in 
section 54-76. 
(e) ?Retirement income payments shall be made under the option elected in accordance with the 
provisions of this section and shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1) ?If a member dies prior to his normal retirement date or early retirement date, whichever first 
occurs, no retirement benefit will be payable under the option to any person, but the benefits, if 
any, will be determined under section 54-72. 
(2) ?If the designated beneficiary (or beneficiaries) or joint pensioner dies before the member's 
retirement under the system, the option elected will be canceled automatically and a retirement 
income of the normal form and amount will be payable to the retiree upon his retirement as if 
the election had not been made, unless a new election is made in accordance with the 
provisions of this section or a new beneficiary is designated by the member prior to his 
retirement. 
(3) ?If both the retiree and the beneficiary (or beneficiaries) designated by the member or retiree die 
before the full payment has been effected under any option providing for payments for a period 
certain and life thereafter made pursuant to the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the 
board may, in its discretion, direct that the commuted value of the remaining payments be paid 
in a lump sum and in accordance with section 54-76. 
(4) ?If a member continues beyond his normal retirement date pursuant to the provisions of section 
54-71(a) and dies prior to his actual retirement and while an option made pursuant to the 
provisions of this section is in effect, monthly retirement income payments will be made, or a 
retirement benefit will be paid, under the option to a beneficiary (or beneficiaries) designated by 
the member in the amount or amounts computed as if the member had retired under the option 
on the date on which his death occurred. 
(f) ?A retiree may not change his retirement option after the date of cashing or depositing his first 
retirement check. 
(g) ?Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the board, in its discretion, may elect to make a 
lump sum payment to a member or a member's beneficiary in the event that the monthly benefit 
amount is less than $100.00 or the total commuted value of the remaining monthly income payments 
to be paid does not exceed $5,000.00. Any such payment made to any person pursuant to the power 
and discretion conferred upon the board by the preceding sentence shall operate as a complete 
discharge of all obligations under the system with regard to such member and shall not be subject to 
review by anyone, but shall be final, binding and conclusive on all persons. 
(Code 1993, § 63-70; Ord. No. 1646, § 1, 6-2-2004; Ord. No. 1809, § 2, 2-15-2006; Ord. No. 
2022, § 2, 4-16-2008) 


Sec. 54-76. - Beneficiaries. 
(a) ?Each member or retiree may, on a form provided for that purpose, signed and filed with the board, 
designate a beneficiary (or beneficiaries) to receive the benefit, if any, which may be payable in the 
event of his death. Each designation may be revoked or changed by such member or retiree by 
signing and filing with the board a new designation of beneficiary form. Upon such change, the rights 
of all previously designated beneficiaries to receive any benefits under the system shall cease. 
(b) ?If a deceased member or retiree failed to name a beneficiary in the manner prescribed in subsection 
(a) of this section, or if the beneficiary (or beneficiaries) named by a deceased member or retiree 
predeceases the member or retiree, the death benefit, if any, which may be payable under the 
system with respect to such deceased member or retiree shall be paid to the estate of the member 
or retiree and the board, in its discretion, may direct that the commuted value of the remaining 
monthly income benefits be paid in a lump sum. 
(c) ?Any payment made to any person pursuant to this section shall operate as a complete discharge of 
all obligations under the system with regard to the deceased member and any other persons with 
rights under the system, and shall not be subject to review by anyone but shall be final, binding and 
conclusive on all persons ever interested hereunder. 
(Code 1993, § 63-71; Ord. No. 1646, § 1, 6-2-2004) 


Sec. 54-77. - Claims procedures before the board decision. 
(a) ?The board shall establish administrative claims procedures to be utilized in processing written 
requests (claims), on matters which affect the substantial rights of any person (claimant), including 
members, retirees, beneficiaries, or any person affected by a decision of the board. 
(b) ?The board shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the 
production of documents for discovery prior to and at any proceedings provided for in the board's 
claims procedures. The claimant may request, in writing, the issuance of subpoenas by the board. A 
reasonable fee may be charged for the issuance of any subpoenas not to exceed the fees set forth 
in state statutes. 
(Code 1993, § 63-72; Ord. No. 1646, § 1, 6-2-2004) 


Sec. 54-78. - Reports to division of retirement. 
    Each year, and no later than March 15, the board shall file an annual report with the division of 
retirement containing the documents and information required by F.S. § 175.261. 
(Code 1993, § 63-73; Ord. No. 1646, § 1, 6-2-2004) 


Sec. 54-79. - Roster of retirees. 
    The secretary of the board shall keep a record of all persons enjoying a pension under the provisions 
of this article in which it shall be noted the time when the pension is allowed and when the same shall 
cease to be paid. Additionally, the secretary shall keep a record of all members in such a manner as to 
show the name, address, date of employment and date such employment is terminated. 
(Code 1993, § 63-74; Ord. No. 1646, § 1, 6-2-2004) 


Sec. 54-80. - State and federal limitations on pension benefits. 
(a) ?Basic limitation. 
(1) ?Subject to the adjustments hereinafter set forth, the maximum amount of annual retirement 
income payable with respect to a member under this plan shall not exceed $160,000.00. 
(2) ?For purposes of applying the above limitation, benefits payable in any form other than a straight 
life annuity with no ancillary benefits shall be adjusted, as provided by treasury regulations, so 
that such benefits are the actuarial equivalent of a straight life annuity. For purposes of this 
section, the following benefits shall not be taken into account: 
a. ?Any ancillary benefit which is not directly related to retirement income benefits; 
b. ?Any other benefit not required under section 415(b)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code and 
regulations thereunder to be taken into account for purposes of the limitation of section 
415(b)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(b) ?Participation in other defined benefit plans. The limitation of this section with respect to any member 
who at any time has been a member in any other defined benefit plan (as defined in section 414(j) of 
the Internal Revenue Code) maintained by the city shall apply as if the total benefits payable under 
all defined benefit plans in which the member has been a member were payable from one plan. 
(c) ?Adjustments in limitations. 
(1) ?In the event the member's retirement benefits become payable before age 62 years, the 
$160,000.00 limitation prescribed by this section shall be reduced in accordance with 
regulations issued by the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to the provisions of section 415(b) 
of the Internal Revenue Code, so that such limitation (as so reduced) equals an annual benefit 
(beginning when such retirement income benefit begins) which is equivalent to a $160,000.00 
annual benefit beginning at age 62 years. 
(2) ?In the event the member's benefit is based on at least 15 years of credited service, the 
adjustments provided for in subsection (c)(1) of this section shall not apply. 
(3) ?The reductions provided for in subsection (c)(1) of this section shall not be applicable to 
disability benefits paid pursuant to section 54-73 or pre-retirement death benefits paid pursuant 
to section 54-72. 
(4) ?In the event the member's retirement benefit becomes payable after age 65 years, for 
purposes of determining whether this benefit meets the limitation set forth in subsection (a) of 
this section herein, such benefit shall be adjusted so that it is actuarially equivalent to the 
benefit beginning at age 65 years. This adjustment shall be made in accordance with 
regulations promulgated by the Secretary of the Treasury or his delegate. 
(d) ?Less than ten years of service. The maximum retirement benefits payable under this section to any 
member who has completed less than ten years of credited service with the city shall be the amount 
determined under subsection (a) of this section multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the 
number of the member's years of credited service and the denominator of which is ten. The 
reduction provided for in this subsection shall not be the application to disability benefits paid 
pursuant to section 54-73 or pre-retirement death benefits paid pursuant to section 54-72. 
(e) ?$10,000.00 limit. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the retirement benefit payable with respect to a 
member shall be deemed not to exceed the limitations set forth in this section if the benefits payable 
with respect to such member under this system and under all other qualified defined benefit pension 
plans to which the city contributes do not exceed $10,000.00 for the applicable plan year, and for 
any prior plan year, and the city has not at any time maintained a qualified defined contribution plan 
in which the member participated. 
(f) ?Reduction of benefits. Reduction of benefits and/or contributions to all plans, where required, shall 
be accomplished by first reducing the member's benefit under any defined benefit plans in which the 
member participated, such reduction to be made first with respect to the plan in which the member 
most recently accrued benefits and thereafter in such priority as shall be determined by the board 
and the plan administrator of such other plans, and next by reducing or allocating excess forfeitures 
for defined contribution plans in which the member participated, such reduction to be made first with 
respect to the plan in which the member most recently accrued benefits and thereafter in such 
priority as shall be established by the board and the plan administrator for such other plans; 
provided, however, that necessary reductions may be made in a different manner and priority 
pursuant to the agreement of the board and the plan administrator of all other plans covering such 
member 
(g) ?Cost-of-living adjustments. The limitations as stated in subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section 
shall be adjusted to the time payment of a benefit begins in accordance with any cost-of-living 
adjustments prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to section 415(d) of the Internal 
Revenue Code. 
(h) ?Additional limitation on pension benefits. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary: 
(1) ?The normal retirement benefit or pension payable to a retiree who becomes a member of the 
system and who has not previously participated in such system on or after January 1, 1980, 
shall not exceed 100 percent of his average final compensation. However, nothing contained in 
this section shall apply to supplemental retirement benefits or to pension increases attributable 
to cost-of-living increases or adjustments. 
(2) ?No member of the system shall be allowed to receive a retirement benefit or pension which is 
in part or in whole based upon any service with respect to which the member is already 
receiving, or will receive in the future, a retirement benefit or pension from a different employer's 
retirement system or plan. This restriction does not apply to Social Security benefits or federal 
benefits under ch. 67, tit. 10, U.S. Code. 
(Code 1993, § 63-75; Ord. No. 1646, § 1, 6-2-2004) 


Sec. 54-81. - Minimum distribution of benefits. 
(a) ?General rules. 
(1) ?Effective date. The provisions of this section will apply for purposes of determining required 
minimum distributions for calendar years beginning with the 2003 calendar year. 
(2) ?Precedence. The requirements of this section will take precedence over any inconsistent 
provisions of the plan. 
(3) ?Requirements of treasury regulations. All distributions required under this section will be 
determined and made in accordance with the treasury regulations under section 401(a)(9) of the 
Internal Revenue Code. 
(4) ?TEFRA section 242(b)(2) elections. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section other 
than this subsection (a)(4), distributions may be made under a designation made before 
January 1, 1984, in accordance with section 242(b)(2) of the Tax Equity and Fiscal 
Responsibility Act (TEFRA) and the provisions of the plan that related to section 242(b)(2) of 
TEFRA. 
(b) ?Time and manner of distribution. 
(1) ?Required beginning date. The member's entire interest will be distributed, or begin to be 
distributed, to the member no later than the member's required beginning date, which shall not 
be later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the calendar year in which the 
member attains age 70½ years or the calendar year in which the member retires, unless 
otherwise provided for in the plan or required by law. 
(2) ?Death of member before distributions begin. If the member dies before distributions begin, the 
member's entire interest will be distributed, or begin to be distributed, no later than as follows: 
a. ?If the member's surviving spouse is the member's sole designated beneficiary, then 
distributions to the surviving spouse will begin by December 31 of the calendar year 
immediately following the calendar year in which the member died, or by December 31 of 
the calendar year in which the member would have attained age 70½ years, if later. 
b. ?If the member's surviving spouse is not the member's sole designated beneficiary, then 
distributions to the designated beneficiary will begin by December 31 of the calendar year 
immediately following the calendar year in which the member died. 
c. ?If there is no designated beneficiary as of September 30 of the year following the year of 
the member's death, the member's entire interest will be distributed by December 31 of the 
calendar year containing the fifth anniversary of the member's death. 
d. ?If the member's surviving spouse is the member's sole designated beneficiary and the 
surviving spouse dies after the member but before distributions to the surviving spouse 
begin, this subsection (b)(2), other than subsection (b)(2)a, will apply as if the surviving 
spouse were the member. 
For purposes of this subsection (b)(2) and subsection (e) of this section, distributions are 
considered to begin on the member's required beginning date or, if subsection (b)(2)d of this 
section applies, the date of distributions are required to begin to the surviving spouse under 
subsection (b)(2)a of this section. If annuity payments irrevocably commence to the member 
before the member's required beginning date (or to the member's surviving spouse before the 
date distributions are required to begin to the surviving spouse under subsection (b)(2)a of this 
section), the date distributions are considered to begin is the date distributions actually 
commence. 
(3) ?Form of distribution. Unless the member's interest is distributed in the form of an annuity 
purchased from an insurance company or in a single sum on or before the required beginning 
date, as of the first distribution calendar year, distributions will be made in accordance of 
subsections (c), (d) and (e) of this section. If the member's interest is distributed in the form of 
an annuity purchased from an insurance company, distributions thereunder will be made in 
accordance with the requirements of section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code and 
treasury regulations. Any part of the member's interest which is in the form of an individual 
account described in section 414(k) of the Internal Revenue Code will be distributed in a 
manner satisfying the requirements of section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code and 
treasury regulations that apply to individual accounts. 
(c) ?Determination of amount to be distributed each year. 
(1) ?General annuity requirements. If the member's interest is paid in the form of annuity 
distributions under the plan, payments under the annuity will satisfy the following requirements: 
a. ?The annuity distributions will be paid in periodic payments made at intervals not longer than 
one year. 
b. ?The distribution period will be over a life (or lives) or over a period certain not longer than 
the period described in subsection (d) or (e) of this section. 
c. ?Once payments have begun over a period certain, the period certain will not be changed 
even if the period certain is shorter than the maximum permitted. 
d. ?Payments will either be non-increasing or increase only as follows: 
1. ?By an annual percentage increase that does not exceed the cumulative annual 
percentage increase in a cost-of-living index that is based on prices of all items and 
issued by the Bureau of Labor Statistics or by a fixed annual increase of five percent 
or less. 
2. ?To the extent of the reduction in the amount of the member's payments to provide for 
a survivor benefit upon death, but only if the beneficiary whose life was being used to 
determine the distribution period described in subsection (d) of this section dies or is 
no longer the member's beneficiary pursuant to a qualified domestic relations order 
within the meaning of section 414(p) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
3. ?To provide cash refunds of accumulated contributions upon the member's death. 
4. ?To pay increased benefits that result from a plan amendment. 
(2) ?Amount required to be distributed by required beginning date. The amount that must be 
distributed on or before the member's required beginning date (or, if the member dies before 
distributions begin, the date distributions are required to begin under subsection (b)(2)a or 
(b)(2)b of this section) is the payment that is required for one payment interval. The second 
payment need not be made until the end of the next payment interval even if that payment 
interval ends in the next calendar year. Payment intervals are the periods for which payments 
are received, e.g., bi-monthly, monthly, semi-annually, or annually. All of the member's benefit 
accruals as of the last day of the first distribution calendar year will be included in the calculation 
of the amount of the annuity payments for payment intervals ending on or after the member's 
required beginning date. 
(3) ?Additional accruals after first distribution calendar year. Any additional benefits accruing to the 
member in a calendar year after the first distribution calendar year will be distributed beginning 
with the first payment interval ending in the calendar year immediately following the calendar 
year in which such amount accrues. 
(d) ?Requirements for annuity distributions that commence during a member's lifetime. 
(1) ?Joint life annuities where the beneficiary is not the member's spouse. If the member's interest 
is being distributed in the form of a joint and survivor annuity for the joint lives of the member 
and a non-spouse beneficiary, annuity payments to be made on or after the member's required 
beginning date to the designated beneficiary after the member's death must not at any time 
exceed the applicable percentage of the annuity payment for such period that would have been 
payable to the member using the table set forth in O&A-2 of section 1.401(a)(9)-6T of the 
treasury regulations. If the form of distribution combines a joint and survivor annuity for the joint 
lives of the member and a non-spouse beneficiary and a period certain annuity, the 
requirements in the preceding sentence will apply to annuity payments to be made to the 
designated beneficiary after the expiration of the period certain. 
(2) ?Period certain annuities. Unless the member's spouse is the sole designated beneficiary and 
the form of distribution is a period certain and no life annuity, the period certain for an annuity 
distribution commencing during the member's lifetime may not exceed the applicable 
distribution period for the member under the Uniform Lifetime Table set forth in section 
1.401(a)(9)-9 of the treasury regulations for the calendar year that contains the annuity starting 
date. If the annuity starting date precedes the year in which the member reaches age 70 years, 
the applicable distribution period for the member is the distribution period for age 70 years 
under the Uniform Lifetime Table set forth in section 1.401(a)(9)-9 of the treasury regulations, 
plus the excess of 70 over the age of the member as of the member's birthday in the year that 
contains the annuity starting date. If the member's spouse is the member's sole designated 
beneficiary and the form of distribution is a period certain and no life annuity, the period certain 
may not exceed the longer of the member's applicable distribution period, as determined under 
this subsection (d)(2), or the joint life and last survivor expectancy of the member and the 
member's spouse as determined under the Joint and Last Survivor Table set forth in section 
1.401(a)(9)-9 of the treasury regulations, using the member's and spouse's attained ages as of 
the member's and spouse's birthdays in the calendar year that contains the annuity starting 
date. 
(e) ?Requirements for minimum distributions where member dies before date distributions begin. 
(1) ?Member survived by designated beneficiary. If the member dies before the date distribution of 
his interest begins and there is a designated beneficiary, the member's entire interest will be 
distributed, beginning no later than the time described in subsection (b)(2)a or (b)(2)b of this 
section, over the life of the designated beneficiary or over a period certain not exceeding: 
a. ?Unless the annuity starting date is before the first distribution calendar year, the life 
expectancy of the designated beneficiary determined using the beneficiary's age as of the 
beneficiary's birthday in the calendar year immediately following the calendar year of the 
member's death. 
b. ?If the annuity starting date is before the first distribution calendar year, the life expectancy 
of the designated beneficiary determined using the beneficiary's age as of the beneficiary's 
birthday in the calendar year that contains the annuity starting date. 
(2) ?No designated beneficiary. If the member dies before the date distributions begin and there is 
no designated beneficiary as of September 30 of the year following the year of the member's 
death, distribution of the member's entire interest will be completed by December 31 of the 
calendar year containing the fifth anniversary of the member's death. 
(3) ?Death of surviving spouse before distributions to surviving spouse begin. If the member dies 
before the date distribution of his interest begins, the member's surviving spouse is the 
member's sole designated beneficiary, and the surviving spouse dies before distributions to the 
surviving spouse begin, this subsection (e) will apply as if the surviving spouse were the 
member, except that the time by which distributions must begin will be determined without 
regard to subsection (b)(2)a of this section. 
(f) ?Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the 
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different 
meaning: 
    Designated beneficiary means the individual who is designated as the beneficiary under the plan and 
is the designated beneficiary under section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code and section 
1.401(a)(9)-1, O&A-4, of the treasury regulations. 
    Distribution calendar year means a calendar year for which a minimum distribution is required. For 
distributions beginning before the member's death, the first distribution calendar year is the calendar year 
immediately preceding the calendar year which contains the member's required beginning date. For 
distributions beginning after the member's death, the first distribution calendar year is the calendar year in 
which distributions are required to begin pursuant to subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
    Life expectancy means life expectancy as computed by use of the Single Life Table in section 
1.401(a)(9)-9 of the treasury regulations. 
    Required beginning date means the date specified in subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(Code 1993, § 63-76; Ord. No. 1646, § 1, 6-2-2004; Ord. No. 1809, § 3, 2-15-2006) 


Sec. 54-82. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a) ?Interest of members in system. At no time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities under the system 
with respect to retirees and members and their spouses or beneficiaries shall any part of the corpus 
or income of the fund be used for or diverted to any purpose other than for their exclusive benefit. 
(b) ?No reduction of accrued benefits. No amendment or ordinance shall be adopted by the city council 
which shall have the effect of reducing the then-vested accrued benefits of members or a member's 
beneficiaries. 
(c) ?Qualification of system. It is intended that the system will constitute a qualified pension plan under 
the applicable provisions of the Internal Revenue Code, as now in effect or hereafter amended. Any 
modification or amendment of the system may be made retroactively, if necessary or appropriate, to 
qualify or maintain the system as a plan meeting the requirements of the applicable provisions of the 
Internal Revenue Code as now in effect or hereafter amended, or any other applicable provisions of 
the U.S. federal tax laws, as now in effect or hereafter amended or adopted, and the regulations 
issued thereunder. 
(d) ?Use of forfeitures. Forfeitures arising from terminations of service members shall serve only to 
reduce future city contributions. 
(e) ?Compliance with F.S. ch. 175. It is intended that the system will continue to qualify for funding under 
F.S. § 175.101. Accordingly, unless otherwise required by law, any provision of the system which 
violates the requirements of F.S. ch. 175, as amended from time to time, shall be superseded by and 
administered in accordance with the requirements of such chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 63-77; Ord. No. 1646, § 1, 6-2-2004) 


Sec. 54-83. - Repeal or termination of system. 
(a) ?This article establishing the system and fund, and subsequent ordinances pertaining to said system 
and fund, may be modified, terminated, or amended, in whole or in part, provided, that if this or any 
subsequent ordinance shall be amended or repealed in its application to any person benefiting 
hereunder, the amount of benefits which at the time of any such alteration, amendment, or repeal 
shall have accrued to the member or beneficiary shall not be affected thereby, except to the extent 
that the assets of the fund may be determined to be inadequate. 
(b) ?If this article shall be repealed, or if contributions to the system are discontinued, or if there is a 
transfer, merger or consolidation of government units, services or functions as provided in F.S. ch. 
121, the board shall continue to administer the system in accordance with the provisions of this 
article for the sole benefit of the then-members, any beneficiaries then receiving retirement 
allowances, and any future persons entitled to receive benefits under one of the options provided for 
in this article who are designated by any of said members. In the event of repeal, discontinuance of 
contributions, or transfer, merger or consolidation of government units, services or functions, there 
shall be full vesting (100 percent) of benefits accrued to the date of repeal, and the assets of the 
system shall be allocated in an equitable manner to provide benefits on a proportionate basis to the 
persons so entitled in accordance with the provisions thereof. 
(c) ?The following shall be the order of priority for purposes of allocating the assets of the system as of 
the date of repeal of this article, or if contributions to the system are discontinued, with the date of 
such discontinuation being determined by the board: 
(1) ?Apportionment shall first be made in respect of each retiree receiving a retirement or disability 
benefit hereunder on such date, each person receiving a benefit on such date on account of a 
retired or disabled (but since deceased) member, and each member who has, by such date, 
become eligible for normal retirement but has not yet retired, an amount which is the actuarial 
equivalent of such benefit, provided, that if such asset value is less than the aggregate of such 
amounts, such amounts shall be proportionately reduced so that the aggregate of such reduced 
amounts will be equal to such asset value. 
(2) ?If there is any asset value remaining after the apportionment under subsection (c)(1) of this 
section, apportionment shall next be made in respect of each member in the service of the city 
on such date who is vested and who is not entitled to an apportionment under subsection (c)(1) 
of this section, in the amount required to provide the actuarial equivalent of the vested portion of 
the accrued normal retirement benefit (but not less than accumulated contributions), based on 
the credited service and average final compensation as of such date, and each vested former 
member then entitled to a deferred benefit who has not, by such date, begun receiving benefit 
payments, in the amount required to provide said actuarial equivalent of the vested portion of 
the accrued normal retirement benefit (but not less than accumulated contributions), provided, 
that if such remaining asset value is less than the aggregate of the amounts apportioned 
hereunder, such latter amounts shall be proportionately reduced so that the aggregate of such 
reduced amounts will be equal to such remaining asset value. 
(3) ?If there is any asset value after the apportionments under subsections (c)(1) and (2) of this 
section, apportionment shall be made in respect of each member in the service of the city on 
such date who is not entitled to an apportionment under subsections (c)(1) and (2) of this 
section in the amount equal to member's accumulated contributions, provided, that if such 
remaining asset value is less than the aggregate of the amounts apportioned hereunder, such 
latter amount shall be proportionately reduced so that the aggregate of such reduced amounts 
will be equal to such remaining asset value. 
(4) ?If there is any asset value remaining after the apportionments under subsections (c)(1), (2) and 
(3) of this section, apportionment shall lastly be made in respect of each member included in 
subsection (c)(3) of this section to the extent of the actuarial equivalent of the non-vested 
accrued normal retirement benefit, less the amount apportioned in subsection (c)(3) of this 
section, based on the credited service and average final compensation as of such date, 
provided, that if such remaining asset value is less than the aggregate of the amounts 
apportioned hereunder, such amounts shall be reduced so that the aggregate of such reduced 
amounts will be equal to such remaining asset value. 
(5) ?In the event that there is asset value remaining after the full apportionment specified in 
subsections (c)(1), (2), (3) and (4) of this section, such excess shall be returned to the city, less 
return of the state's contributions to the state, provided, that if the excess is less than the total 
contributions made by the city and the state to the date of termination, such excess shall be 
divided proportionately to the total contributions made by the city and the state. 
a. ?The allocation of the fund provided for in this subsection may, as decided by the board, be 
carried out through the purchase of insurance company contracts to provide the benefits 
determined in accordance with this subsection. The fund may be distributed in one sum to 
the persons entitled to said benefits or the distribution may be carried out in such other 
equitable manner as the board may direct. The fund may be continued in existence for 
purposes of subsequent distributions. 
b. ?If, at any time during the first ten years after the effective date of the ordinance originally 
establishing the system (Ordinance Number 711), the system shall be terminated or the full 
current costs of the system shall not have been met, anything in the system to the contrary 
notwithstanding, city contributions which may be used for the benefit of any one of the 25 
highest paid members on the effective date whose anticipated annual retirement allowance 
provided by the city's contributions at the member's normal retirement date would exceed 
$1,500.00 shall not exceed the greater of either $20,000.00 or an amount computed by 
multiplying the smaller of $10,000.00 or 20 percent of such member's average annual 
earnings during his last five years of service by the number of years of service since the 
effective date. In the event that it shall hereafter be determined by statute, court decision, 
ruling by the Commissioner of Internal Revenue, or otherwise, that the provisions of this 
subsection are not then necessary to qualify the system under the Internal Revenue Code, 
this subsection shall be ineffective without the necessity of further amendment of this 
article. 
(d) ?After all the vested and accrued benefits provided hereunder have been paid and after all other 
liabilities have been satisfied, then and only then shall any remaining funds revert to the general fund 
of the city. 
(Code 1993, § 63-78; Ord. No. 1646, § 1, 6-2-2004) 


Sec. 54-84. - Exemption from execution, etc.; non-assignability. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law, the pensions, annuities, or any other benefits accrued or 
accruing to any person under the provisions of this article and the accumulated contributions and the 
cash securities in the fund created under this article are hereby exempted from any state, county or 
municipal tax, and shall not be subject to execution, attachment, garnishment or any legal process 
whatsoever, and shall be unassignable. 
(Code 1993, § 63-79; Ord. No. 1646, § 1, 6-2-2004) 


Sec. 54-85. - Pension validity. 
    The board shall have the power to examine into the facts upon which any pension shall heretofore 
have been granted under any prior or existing law or shall hereafter be granted or obtained erroneously, 
fraudulently or illegally for any reason. The board is empowered to purge the pension rolls or correct the 
pension amount of any person heretofore granted a pension under prior or existing law or any person 
hereafter granted a pension under this article if the same is found to be erroneous, fraudulent or illegal for 
any reason and to reclassify any person who has heretofore under any prior or existing law been or who 
shall hereafter under this article be erroneously, improperly or illegally classified. Any overpayments or 
underpayments shall be corrected and paid or repaid in a reasonable manner determined by the board. 
(Code 1993, § 63-80; Ord. No. 1646, § 1, 6-2-2004) 


Sec. 54-86. - Forfeiture of pension. 
(a) ?Any member who is convicted of the following offenses committed prior to retirement, or whose 
employment is terminated by reason of his admitted commission, aid or abetment of the following 
specified offenses, shall forfeit all rights and benefits under this pension fund, except for the return of 
his accumulated contributions as of the date of termination. Specified offenses are as follows: 
(1) ?The committing, aiding or abetting of an embezzlement of public funds. 
(2) ?The committing, aiding or abetting of any theft by a public officer or employee from an 
employer. 
(3) ?Bribery in connection with the employment of a public officer or employee. 
(4) ?Any felony specified in F.S. ch. 838. 
(5) ?The committing of an impeachable offense. 
(6) ?The committing of any felony by a public officer or employee who willfully and with intent to 
defraud the public or the public agency for which he acts or in which he is employed of the right 
to receive the faithful performance of his duty as a public officer or employee, realizes or obtains 
or attempts to obtain a profit, gain, or advantage for himself or for some other person through 
the use or attempted use of the power, rights, privileges, duties or position of his public office or 
employment position. 
(b) ?The term "conviction" shall be defined as an adjudication of guilt by a court of competent jurisdiction; 
a plea of guilty or a nolo contendere; a jury verdict of guilty when adjudication of guilt is withheld and 
the accused is placed on probation; or a conviction by the Senate of an impeachable offense. 
(c) ?The term "court" shall be defined as any state or federal court of competent jurisdiction which is 
exercising its jurisdiction to consider a proceeding involving the alleged commission of a specified 
offense. Prior to forfeiture, the board of trustees shall hold a hearing on which notice shall be given to 
the member whose benefits are being considered for forfeiture. Said member shall be afforded the 
right to have an attorney present. No formal rules of evidence shall apply, but the member shall be 
afforded a full opportunity to present his case against forfeiture. 
(d) ?Any member who has received benefits from the system in excess of his accumulated contributions 
after the member's rights were forfeited shall be required to pay back to the fund the amount of the 
benefits received in excess of his accumulated contributions. The board of trustees may implement 
all legal action necessary to recover such funds. 
(Code 1993, § 63-81; Ord. No. 1646, § 1, 6-2-2004) 


Sec. 54-87. - Conviction and forfeiture; false, misleading or fraudulent statements. 
(a) ?It is unlawful for a person to willfully and knowingly make, or cause to be made, or to assist, 
conspire with, or urge another to make or cause to be made, any false, fraudulent, or misleading oral 
or written statement, or withhold or conceal material information to obtain any benefit from the 
system. 
(b) ?A person who violates subsection (a) of this section commits a misdemeanor of the first degree, 
punishable as provided in F.S. § 775.082 or 775.083. 
(c) ?In addition to any applicable criminal penalty, upon conviction for a violation described in subsection 
(a) of this section, a member or beneficiary of the system may, in the discretion of the board, be 
required to forfeit the right to receive any or all benefits to which the person would otherwise be 
entitled under the system. For purposes of this subsection, the term "conviction" means a 
determination of guilt that is the result of a plea or trial, regardless of whether adjudication is 
withheld. 
(Code 1993, § 63-82; Ord. No. 1646, § 1, 6-2-2004) 


Sec. 54-88. - Indemnification. 
(a) ?To the extent not covered by insurance contracts in force from time to time, the city shall indemnify, 
defend and hold harmless members of the board from all personal liability for damages and costs, 
including court costs and attorney fees arising out of claims, suits, litigation, or threat of same, herein 
referred to as "claims," against these individuals because of acts or circumstances connected with or 
arising out of their official duties as members of the board of trustees. The city reserves the right, in 
its sole discretion, to settle or not settle the claim at any time and to appeal or to not appeal from any 
adverse judgment or ruling, and in either event will indemnify, defend and hold harmless any 
members of the board of trustees from the judgment, execution, or levy thereon. 
(b) ?This section shall not be construed so as to relieve any insurance company or other entity liable to 
defend the claim or liable for payment of the judgment or claim from any liability, nor does this 
section waive any provision of law affording the city immunity from any suit in whole or part, or waive 
any other substantive or procedural rights the city may have. Beginning with the effective date of the 
ordinance from which this article is derived, any person who enters employment with the city as a 
volunteer firefighter, as defined in F.S. § 175.032, may elect in writing, and within six months of 
employment, not to be a member of this plan and thereupon receive a full refund of any accumulated 
contributions. 
(c) ?This section shall not apply to nor shall the city be responsible in any manner to defend or pay for 
claims arising out of acts or omissions of members of the board of trustees which constitute felonies 
or gross malfeasance or gross misfeasance in office. 
(Code 1993, § 63-83; Ord. No. 1646, § 1, 6-2-2004) 


Sec. 54-89. - Direct transfers of eligible rollover distributions; elimination of mandatory distributions. 
(a) ?Rollover distributions. 
(1) ?Generally. This section applies to distributions made on or after January 1, 2002. 
Notwithstanding any provision of the system to the contrary that would otherwise limit a 
distributee's election under this section, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner 
prescribed by the board, to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an 
eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover. 
(2) ?Definitions. 
    Direct rollover means a payment by the plan to the eligible retirement plan specified by the 
distributee. 
    Distributee includes an employee or former employee. In addition, the employee's or 
former employee's surviving spouse is a distributee with regard to the interest of the spouse. 
    Eligible retirement plan means an individual retirement account described in section 408(a) 
of the Internal Revenue Code, an individual retirement annuity described in section 408(b) of 
the Internal Revenue Code, or an annuity plan described in section 403(a) of the Internal 
Revenue Code, an eligible deferred compensation plan described in section 457(b) of the 
Internal Revenue Code which is maintained by an eligible employer described in section 
457(e)(1)(A) of the Internal Revenue Code and which agrees to separately account for amounts 
transferred into such plan from this plan, an annuity contract described in section 403(b) of the 
Internal Revenue Code, or a qualified trust described in section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue 
Code that accepts the distributee's eligible rollover distribution. This definition shall apply in the 
case of an eligible rollover distribution to the surviving spouse. 
    Eligible rollover distribution means any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the 
credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include: any 
distribution that is one of the series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently 
than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint 
life expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a 
specified period of ten years or more; any distribution to the extent such distribution is required 
under section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code; and the portion of any distribution that is 
not includible in gross income. Any portion of any distribution which would be includible in gross 
income will be an eligible rollover distribution if the distribution is made to an individual 
retirement account described in section 408(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, to an individual 
retirement annuity described in section 408(b) of the Internal Revenue Code or to a qualified 
defined contribution plan described in section 401(a) or 403(a) of the Internal Revenue Code 
that agrees to separately account for amounts so transferred, including separately accounting 
for the portion of such distribution which is includible in gross income and the portion of such 
distribution which is not so includible. 
(b) ?Rollovers or transfers into the fund. On or after January 1, 2002, the system will accept, solely for 
the purpose of purchasing credited service as provided herein, permissible member-requested 
transfers of funds from other retirement or pension plans, member rollover cash contributions and/or 
direct cash rollovers of distributions made on or after January 1, 2002, as follows: 
(1) ?Transfers and direct rollovers or member rollover contributions from other plans. The system 
will accept either a direct rollover of an eligible rollover distribution or a member contribution of 
an eligible rollover distribution from a qualified plan described in section 401(a) or 403(a) of the 
Internal Revenue Code, from an annuity contract described in section 403(b) of the Internal 
Revenue Code or from an eligible plan under section 457(b) of the Internal Revenue Code 
which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality 
of a state or political subdivision of a state. The system will also accept legally permissible 
member-requested transfers of funds from other retirement or pension plans. 
(2) ?Member rollover contributions from IRAs. The system will accept a member rollover 
contribution of the portion of a distribution from an individual retirement account or annuity 
described in section 408(a) or 408(b) of the Internal Revenue Code that is eligible to be rolled 
over and would otherwise be includible in gross income. 
(c) ?Elimination of mandatory distributions. Notwithstanding any other provision herein to the contrary, in 
the event this plan provides for a mandatory (involuntary) cash distribution from the plan not 
otherwise required by law, for an amount in excess of $1,000.00, such distribution shall be made 
from the plan only upon written request of the member and completion by the member of a written 
election on forms designated by the board, to either receive a cash lump sum or to rollover the lump 
sum amount. 
(Code 1993, § 63-84; Ord. No. 1646, § 1, 6-2-2004; Ord. No. 1809, § 4, 2-15-2006) 


Sec. 54-90. - Family and Medical Leave Act. 
    The periods of time in excess of 160 hours during the 12-month period ending each December 31 
that a member is on leave without pay from the city pursuant to the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) 
shall be added to his credited service, provided that: 
(1) ?The member contributes to the fund the sum that he would have contributed, based on his 
salary and the member contribution rate in effect at the time that the credited service is 
requested, had he been a member of the system for the years or fractional parts of years for 
which he is requesting credit plus amounts actuarially determined such that the crediting of 
service does not result in any cost to the fund plus payment of costs for all professional services 
rendered to the board in connection with the purchase of years of credited service. 
(2) ?The request for credited service for FMLA leave time for the 12-month period prior to each 
December 31 and payment of professional fees shall be made on or before March 31. 
(3) ?Payment by the member of the required amount shall be made on or before April 30 for the 
preceding 12-month period ending December 31 and shall be made in one lump sum payment, 
upon receipt of which credit service shall be issued. 
(4) ?Credited service purchased pursuant to this section shall count toward vesting. 
(5) ?No payment shall be required for the first 160 hours of FMLA leave time in any calendar year; 
no request for credit shall be required and such time shall count toward vesting. 
(6) ?Purchase of credited service for leave without pay pursuant to FMLA in excess of 160 hours 
during the 12-month period ending each December 31 is an option that a member may or may 
not elect to exercise. 
(Code 1993, § 63-85; Ord. No. 1646, § 1, 6-2-2004) 


Sec. 54-91. - Military service prior to employment. 
    The years or fractional parts of years that a firefighter serves or has served on active duty in the 
military service of the armed forces of the United States, the United States Merchant Marine or the United 
States Coast Guard, voluntarily or involuntarily, and honorably or under honorable conditions, prior to first 
and initial employment with the city fire department, shall be added to his years of credited service, 
provided that: 
(1) ?The member contributes to the fund the sum that he would have contributed, based on his 
salary and the member contribution rate in effect at the time that the credited service is 
requested, had he been a member of the system for the years or fractional parts of years for 
which he is requesting credit plus amounts actuarially determined such that the crediting of 
service does not result in any cost to the fund plus payment of costs for all professional services 
rendered to the board in connection with the purchase of years of credited service. 
(2) ?Multiple requests may be made by the member at any time prior to retirement. 
(3) ?Payment by the member of the required amount shall be made within three months of his 
request for credit, but not later than his retirement date in any event, and shall be made in one 
lump sum payment upon receipt of which credited service shall be given. 
(4) ?There shall be no maximum purchase of credit under this section. 
(5) ?Credited service purchased pursuant to this section shall not count toward vesting or eligibility 
for not-in-line-of-duty disability benefits. 
(Code 1993, § 63-86; Ord. No. 1646, § 1, 6-2-2004) 


Sec. 54-92. - Prior fire service. 
    Unless otherwise prohibited by law and except as provided for in section 54-66, the years or 
fractional parts of years that a member previously served as a full-time firefighter with the city during a 
period of previous employment and for which period accumulated contributions were withdrawn from the 
fund, or the years and fractional parts of years that a member served as a full-time firefighter for any other 
municipal, county, state, federal or special district fire department in the United States, shall be added to 
his years of credited service, provided that: 
(1) ?The member contributes to the fund the sum that he would have contributed, based on his 
salary and the member contribution rate in effect at the time that the credited service is 
requested, had he been a member of the system for the years or fractional parts of years for 
which he is requesting credit plus amounts actuarially determined such that the crediting of 
service does not result in any cost to the fund plus payment of costs for all professional services 
rendered to the board in connection with the purchase of years of credited service. 
(2) ?Multiple requests may be made by the member at any time prior to retirement. 
(3) ?Payment by the member of the required amount shall be made within three months of his 
request for credit, but not later than his retirement date in any event, and shall be made in one 
lump sum payment upon receipt of which credited service shall be given. 
(4) ?There shall be no maximum purchase of credit under this section, and all years of credited 
service added pursuant to this section for prior service with the city shall count for all purposes, 
including vesting. There shall be no maximum purchase of credited service under this section 
for the purchase of other fire service and such credited service shall count for all purposes 
except vesting and eligibility for not-in-line-of-duty disability benefits. 
(5) ?In no event, however, may credited service be purchased pursuant to this section for prior 
service with any other municipal, county, state, federal or special district fire department, if such 
prior service forms or will form the basis of a retirement benefit or pension from a different 
employer's retirement system or plan as set forth in section 54-80, State and federal limitations 
on pension benefits. 
(Code 1993, § 63-87; Ord. No. 1646, § 1, 6-2-2004) 


Sec. 54-93. - Deferred retirement option plan. 
(a) ?Definitions. As used in this section, the following definitions apply: 
    DROP means the City of Apopka Firefighters' Deferred Retirement Option Plan. 
    DROP account means the account established for each DROP participant under subsection (c) 
of this section. 
(b) ?Participation. 
(1) ?Eligibility to participate. In lieu of terminating his employment as a firefighter, any member who 
is eligible for normal retirement under the system may elect to defer receipt of such service 
retirement pension and to participate in the DROP. 
(2) ?Election to participate. A member's election to participate in the DROP must be made in writing 
in a time and manner determined by the board, and shall be effective on the first day of the first 
calendar month which is at least 15 business days after it is received by the board. 
(3) ?Period of participation. A member who elects to participate in the DROP under subsection 
(b)(2) of this section shall participate in the DROP for a period not to exceed 96 months, 
beginning at the time his election to participate in the DROP first becomes effective. A member 
may participate only once. Any person who is currently in the DROP as of December 31, 2003, 
may extend his DROP participation as provided herein. Any retiree who has retired under 
normal retirement and who has not previously participated in the DROP and who is re-employed 
by the city as a firefighter may elect to enter the DROP as provided herein. 
(4) ?Termination of participation. 
a. ?A member's participation in the DROP shall cease by: 
1. ?Continuation of his employment as a firefighter at the end of his period of participation 
in the DROP as determined under subsection (b)(3) of this section; 
2. ?Termination of his employment as a firefighter; or 
3. ?Written notification of the board by the member of his election to cease DROP 
participation, which participation shall cease on the first day of the month following 
such notification. 
b. ?Upon the member's termination of participation in the DROP, pursuant to subsection 
(b)(4)a of this section, all amounts provided for in subsection (c)(2) of this section, including 
monthly benefits and investment earnings or losses, shall cease to be transferred from the 
system to his DROP account. Any amounts remaining in his DROP account shall be paid 
to him in accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of this section when he ceases 
participation in the DROP. 
c. ?A member who terminates his participation in the DROP under this subsection (b)(4) shall 
not be permitted to again become a participant in the DROP. 
(5) ?Effect of DROP participation on the system. 
a. ?A member's credited service and his accrued benefit under the system shall be determined 
on the date his election to participate in the DROP first becomes effective. The member 
shall not accrue any additional credited service or any additional benefits under the system 
(except for any additional benefits provided under any cost-of-living adjustment in the 
system) while he is a participant in the DROP. A member shall not be eligible for disability 
or pre-retirement death benefits while he is a participant in the DROP. After a member 
commences participation, he shall be permitted to again contribute to the system and be 
eligible for disability or pre-retirement death benefits, only as provided for in section 54-94. 
b. ?No amounts shall be paid to a member from the system while the member is a participant 
in the DROP. 
(c) ?Funding. 
(1) ?Establishment of DROP account. A DROP account shall be established for each member 
participating in the DROP. A member's DROP account shall consist of amounts transferred to 
the DROP under subsection (c)(2) of this section, and earnings on those amounts. 
(2) ?Transfers from retirement system. 
a. ?As of the first day of each month of a member's period of participation in the DROP, the 
monthly retirement benefit he would have received under the system had he terminated his 
employment as a firefighter and elected to receive monthly benefit payments thereunder 
shall be transferred to his DROP account, except as otherwise provided for in subsection 
(b)(4)b. of this section. A member's period of participation in the DROP shall be determined 
in accordance with the provisions of subsections (b)(3) and (b)(4) of this section, but in no 
event shall it continue past the date he terminates his employment as a firefighter. 
b. ?Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b)(4)b. of this section, a member's DROP 
account under this subsection (c)(2) shall be debited or credited with earnings after each 
fiscal year quarter. The average daily balance in a member's DROP account shall be 
credited or debited at a rate equal to the net investment return realized by the system for 
that quarter. The term "net investment return," for the purpose of this subsection, is the 
total return of the assets in which the member's DROP account is invested by the board, 
net of brokerage commissions, transaction costs and management fees. 
c. ?A member's DROP account shall only be credited or debited with earnings and monthly 
benefits while the member is a participant in the DROP. A member's final DROP account 
value for distribution to the member upon termination of participation in the DROP shall be 
the value of the account at the end of the quarter immediately preceding termination of 
participation, plus any monthly periodic additions made to the DROP account subsequent 
to the end of the previous quarter and prior to distribution. If a member is employed by the 
city fire department after participating in the DROP for the permissible period of DROP 
participation, then beginning with the member's first month of employment following the 
last month of the permissible period of DROP participation, the member's DROP account 
will no longer be credited or debited with earnings, and monthly benefits will then be paid 
directly to the member only upon his termination of employment as a firefighter. Re-
employment or continuation of employment shall be subject to section 54-94. 
(d) ?Distribution of DROP accounts on termination of employment. 
(1) ?Eligibility for benefits. A member shall receive the balance in his DROP account in accordance 
with the provisions of this subsection (d) upon his termination of DROP participation. 
(2) ?Form of distribution. 
a. ?Unless the member elects otherwise, distribution of his DROP account shall be made in a 
cash lump sum. A member may elect, in such time and manner as the board shall 
prescribe, to receive an optional form of benefit described below: 
1. ?Until the value of the member's DROP account is completely depleted, payments in 
approximately equal quarterly or annual installments over a period designated by the 
member, not to exceed the life expectancy of the last survivor of the member and his 
beneficiary. In the event that the member dies before all installments have been paid, 
the remaining balance in his DROP account shall be paid in an immediate cash lump 
sum to his beneficiary, or if none is designated, then to the member's estate. 
2. ?The purchase of a non-forfeitable fixed annuity payable in such form as the member 
may elect. Elections under this subsection (d)(2)a.2. shall be in writing and shall be 
made in such time or manner as the board shall determine. 
b. ?Notwithstanding the preceding, if a member dies before his benefits commence, his DROP 
account shall be paid to his beneficiary in such optional form as his beneficiary may select. 
If no beneficiary designation is made, the DROP account shall be distributed to the 
member's estate. 
(3) ?Date of payment of distribution. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (d), distribution 
of a member's DROP account shall be made as soon as administratively practicable following 
the member's cessation of DROP participation. Distribution of the amount in a member's DROP 
account will not be made unless the member completes a written request for distribution and a 
written election on forms designated by the board to either receive a cash lump sum or a 
rollover of the lump sum amount. 
(4) ?Proof of death and right of beneficiary or other person. The board may require and rely upon 
such proof of death and such evidence of the right of any beneficiary or other person to receive 
the value of a deceased member's DROP account as the board may deem proper, and its 
determination of the right of that beneficiary or other person to receive payment shall be 
conclusive. 
(5) ?Distribution limitation. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection (d), all 
distributions from the DROP shall conform to the minimum distribution of benefits provisions as 
provided for herein. 
(6) ?Direct rollover of certain distributions. This subsection applies to distributions made on or after 
January 1, 2002. Notwithstanding any provision of the DROP to the contrary, a distributee may 
elect to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid in a direct rollover as otherwise 
provided under the system in section 54-89. 
(e) ?Administration of the DROP. 
(1) ?Board administers the DROP. The general administration of the DROP, the responsibility for 
carrying out the provisions of the DROP, and the responsibility of overseeing the investment of 
the DROP's assets shall be placed in the board. The members of the board may appoint from 
their number such subcommittees with such powers as they shall determine; may adopt such 
administrative procedures and regulations as they deem desirable for the conduct of their 
affairs; may authorize one or more of their number or any agent to execute or deliver any 
instrument or make any payment on their behalf; may retain counsel, employ agents and 
provide for such clerical, accounting, actuarial and consulting services as they may require in 
carrying out the provisions of the DROP; and may allocate among themselves or delegate to 
other persons all or such portion of their duties under the DROP, other than those granted to 
them as trustees under any trust agreement adopted for use in implementing the DROP, as 
they, in their sole discretion, shall decide. A trustee shall not vote on any question relating 
exclusively to himself. 
(2) ?Individual accounts, records and reports. The board shall maintain, or cause to be maintained, 
records showing the operation and condition of the DROP, including records showing the 
individual balances in each member's DROP account, and the board shall keep or cause to be 
kept in convenient form such data as may be necessary for the valuation of the assets and 
liabilities of the DROP. The board shall prepare or cause to be prepared and distributed to 
members participating in the DROP and other individuals or filed with the appropriate 
governmental agencies, as the case may be, all necessary descriptions, reports, information 
returns, and data required to be distributed or filed for the DROP pursuant to the Internal 
Revenue Code, the applicable portions of the Act and any other applicable laws. 
(3) ?Establishment of rules. Subject to the limitations of the DROP, the board from time to time shall 
establish rules for the administration of the DROP and the transaction of its business. The board 
shall have discretionary authority to construe and interpret the DROP (including, but not limited 
to, determination of an individual's eligibility for DROP participation, the right and amount of any 
benefit payable under the DROP and the date on which any individual ceases to be a 
participant in the DROP). The determination of the board as to the interpretation of the DROP or 
its determination of any disputed questions shall be conclusive and final to the extent permitted 
by applicable law. The board shall also oversee the investment of the DROP's assets. 
(4) ?Limitation of liability. 
a. ?The trustees shall not incur any liability individually or on behalf of any other individuals for 
any act or failure to act, made in good faith in relation to the DROP or the funds of the 
DROP. 
b. ?Neither the board nor any trustee of the board shall be responsible for any reports 
furnished by any expert retained or employed by the board, but they shall be entitled to rely 
thereon as well as on certificates furnished by an accountant or an actuary, and on all 
opinions of counsel. The board shall be fully protected with respect to any action taken or 
suffered by it in good faith in reliance upon such expert, accountant, actuary or counsel, 
and all actions taken or suffered in such reliance shall be conclusive upon any person with 
any interest in the DROP. 
(5) ?Expenses. To compensate the system for the expenses of administering and operating the 
DROP, each member's DROP account shall be charged an annual administrative fee which 
shall be reviewed and subject to increase or decrease annually. The initial expense charge of 
0.75 percent of the account balance shall be deducted from the member's DROP account after 
each fiscal year quarter at the rate of 0.1875 percent of the account's average daily balance 
during that quarter. 
(f) ?General provisions. 
(1) ?Amendment of DROP. The DROP may be amended by an ordinance of the city at any time 
and from time to time, and retroactively if deemed necessary or appropriate, to amend in whole 
or in part any or all of the provisions of the DROP. However, except as otherwise provided by 
law, no amendment shall make it possible for any part of the DROP's funds to be used for, or 
diverted to, purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of persons entitled to benefits under 
the DROP. No amendment shall be made which has the effect of decreasing the balance of the 
DROP account of any member. 
(2) ?Facility of payment. If the board shall find that a member or other person entitled to a benefit 
under the DROP is unable to care for his affairs because of illness or accident or is a minor, the 
board may direct that any benefit due him, unless claim shall have been made for the benefit by 
a duly appointed legal representative, be paid to his spouse, a child, a parent or other blood 
relative, or to a person with whom he resides. Any payment so made shall be a complete 
discharge of the liabilities of the DROP for that benefit. 
(3) ?Information. Each member, beneficiary or other person entitled to a benefit, before any benefit 
shall be payable to him or on his account under the DROP, shall file with the board the 
information that it shall require to establish his rights and benefits under the DROP. 
(4) ?Prevention of escheat. If the board cannot ascertain the whereabouts of any person to whom a 
payment is due under the DROP, the board may, no earlier than three years from the date such 
payment is due, mail a notice of such due and owing payment to the last-known address of 
such person, as shown on the records of the board or the city. If such person has not made 
written claim therefor within three months of the date of the mailing, the board may, if it so elects 
and upon receiving advice from counsel to the DROP, direct that such payment and all 
remaining payments otherwise due such person be canceled on the records of the DROP. Upon 
such cancellation, the DROP shall have no further liability therefor except that, in the event such 
person or his beneficiary later notifies the board of his whereabouts and requests the payment 
due to him under the DROP, the amount so applied shall be paid to him in accordance with the 
provisions of the DROP. 
(5) ?Written elections; notification. 
a. ?Any elections, notifications or designations made by a member pursuant to the provisions 
of the DROP shall be made in writing and filed with the board in a time and manner 
determined by the board under rules uniformly applicable to all employees similarly 
situated. The board reserves the right to change from time to time the manner for making 
notifications, elections or designations by members under the DROP if it determines after 
due deliberation that such action is justified in that it improves the administration of the 
DROP. In the event of a conflict between the provisions for making an election, notification 
or designation set forth in the DROP and such new administrative procedures, those new 
administrative procedures shall prevail. 
b. ?Each member or retiree who has a DROP account shall be responsible for furnishing the 
board with his current address and any subsequent changes in his address. Any notice 
required to be given to a member or retiree hereunder shall be deemed given if directed to 
him at the last such address given to the board and mailed by registered or certified United 
States mail. If any check mailed by registered or certified United States mail to such 
address is returned, mailing of checks will be suspended until such time as the member or 
retiree notifies the board of his address. 
(6) ?Benefits not guaranteed. All benefits payable to a member from the DROP shall be paid only 
from the assets of the member's DROP account and neither the city nor the board shall have 
any duty or liability to furnish the DROP with any funds, securities or other assets except to the 
extent required by any applicable law. 
(7) ?Construction. 
a. ?The DROP shall be construed, regulated and administered under the laws of the state, 
except where other applicable law controls. 
b. ?The titles and headings of the subsections in this section are for convenience only. In the 
case of ambiguity or inconsistency, the text, rather than the titles or headings, shall control. 
(8) ?Forfeiture of retirement benefits. Nothing in this section shall be construed to remove DROP 
participants from the application of any forfeiture provisions applicable to the system. DROP 
participants shall be subject to forfeiture of all retirement benefits, including DROP benefits. 
(9) ?Effect of DROP participation on employment. Participation in the DROP is not a guarantee of 
employment, and DROP participants shall be subject to the same employment standards and 
policies that are applicable to employees who are not DROP participants. 
(Code 1993, § 63-88; Ord. No. 1646, § 1, 6-2-2004; Ord. No. 1809, § 5, 2-15-2006) 


Sec. 54-94. - Re-employment after retirement. 
(a) ?Any retiree under this system, except for disability retirement as previously provided for, may be re-
employed by any public or private employer, except the city, and may receive compensation from 
that employment without limiting or restricting in any way the retirement benefits payable under this 
system. Re-employment by the city shall be subject to the limitations set forth in this section. 
(b) ?After normal retirement. Any retiree who is retired under normal (or early) retirement pursuant to this 
system and who is re-employed as a firefighter and, by virtue of that re-employment, is eligible to 
participate in this system, shall, upon being re-employed, discontinue receipt of benefits. Upon re-
employment, the member shall be deemed to be fully vested and the additional credited service 
accrued during the subsequent employment period shall be used in computing a second benefit 
amount attributable to the subsequent employment period, which benefit amount shall be added to 
the benefit determined upon the initial retirement to determine the total benefit payable upon final 
retirement. Calculations of benefits upon retirement shall be based upon the benefit accrual rate, 
average final compensation, and credited service (and early retirement reduction factor, if applicable) 
as of that date and the retirement benefit amount for any subsequent employment period shall be 
based upon the benefit accrual rate, average final compensation (based only on the subsequent 
employment period and not including any period of DROP participation), and credited service (and 
early retirement reduction factor, if applicable) as of the date of subsequent retirement. The amount 
of any death or disability benefit received during a subsequent period of employment shall be 
reduced by the amount of accrued benefit eligible to be paid for a prior period of employment. The 
optional form of benefit and any joint pensioner selected upon initial retirement shall not be subject to 
change upon subsequent retirement except as otherwise provided herein, but the retiree may select 
a different optional form and joint pensioner applicable only to the subsequent retirement benefit. 
(c) ?Any retiree who is retired under normal retirement pursuant to this system who is re-employed by 
the city in a position other than as a firefighter, shall, upon being re-employed, continue receipt of 
benefits for the period of any subsequent employment period. Former DROP participants shall begin 
receipt of benefits under these circumstances. 
(d) ?After early retirement. Any retiree who is retired under early retirement pursuant to this system and 
who subsequently becomes an employee of the city in any capacity, shall discontinue receipt of 
benefits from the system. If the re-employed person, by virtue of his re-employment, is eligible to 
participate in this system, that person shall accrue a second benefit as provided for in subsection (b) 
of this section and benefit payments shall remain suspended during any such subsequent 
employment period. If the re-employed person is not eligible to participate in this system, that 
person's pension benefit payments shall be suspended until the earlier of termination of employment 
or such time as the re-employed retiree reaches the date that he would have been eligible for normal 
retirement under this system had he continued employment and not elected early retirement. The 
term "normal retirement," as used in this subsection, shall be the current normal retirement date 
provided for under this system. 
(e) ?Re-employment of terminated vested persons. Re-employed terminated vested persons shall not be 
subject to the provisions of this section until such time as they begin to actually receive benefits. 
Upon receipt of benefits, terminated vested persons shall be treated as normal or early retirees for 
purposes of applying the provisions of this section and their status as early or normal retirees shall 
be determined by the date they elect to begin to receive their benefits. 
(f) ?DROP participants. Members or retirees who are or were in the deferred retirement option plan shall 
have the options provided for in this section for re-employment, or, if the DROP retiree has not 
terminated DROP participation, continued employment, as if the retiree was a retiree under normal 
retirement. Upon re-employment or continued employment following DROP participation, a DROP 
participant shall receive a distribution of his DROP account in accordance with the DROP. 
(Code 1993, § 63-89; Ord. No. 1646, § 1, 6-2-2004) 


Sec. 54-95. - Purchase of permissive credited service. 
    A member may, within six months of retirement from the plan, elect to purchase an increased benefit 
multiplier that would provide a monthly retirement benefit that is actuarially equivalent to the member 
purchasing additional years, or fractions of years, of credited service. An eligible member may purchase 
permissive service credit in the form of an incrementally higher benefit multiplier level for the participant's 
credited service that is the actuarial equivalent of up to five years of additional credited service under the 
following terms and conditions: 
(1) ?The member contributes to the plan the full actuarial cost of the higher benefit level purchased 
hereunder such that the increase in benefit multiplier results in no cost to the plan. As part of the 
application for the purchase of this type of permissive service credit, the member shall 
contribute to the plan the cost of such purchased permissive service credit. The permissive 
service credit purchase under this section shall not be recognized or credited by the plan until 
the member has entered the DROP or retired. 
(2) ?Requests may be made by the member within six months of retirement from the plan. Payment 
by the member of the required contribution shall be made no later than the retirement date, and 
shall be made in one lump sum payment, upon receipt of which, permissive service credit shall 
be recognized and credited. The term "retirement," for the purposes of this section only, is the 
date of commencement of the employee's monthly retirement benefit under this plan, or any 
other city plan or DROP, at the member's normal or early retirement date and not the 
employee's separation date. 
(3) ?To the extent permitted by law, including relevant Internal Revenue Code provisions, as 
amended from time to time, in lieu or in addition to employee contributions, the plan will accept 
inter-plan transfers (rollovers) as provided in section 54-89 to fund the purchase of the 
permissive service credit comprised of a higher benefit level provided herein. 
(4) ?Permissive service credit purchased pursuant to this section shall not count toward vesting or 
eligibility for not-in-line-of-duty disability benefits. 
(Code 1993, § 63-90; Ord. No. 2330, § III, 10-16-2013) 


Secs. 54-96—54-118. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - POLICE OFFICERS' RETIREMENT SYSTEM[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Police officers' pension, F.S. § 185.01 et seq. 


Sec. 54-119. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accumulated contributions means a member's own contributions without interest. For those 
members who purchase credited service with interest or at no cost to the system, any payment 
representing the amount attributable to member contributions based on the applicable member 
contribution rate, and any payment representing interest and any required actuarially calculated payments 
for the purchase of such credited service shall be included in accumulated contributions. 
    Actuarial equivalent means a benefit or amount of equal value, based upon the 1983 Group Annuity 
Mortality Table and an interest rate of eight percent per annum, using appropriate actuarial methods. 
    Average final compensation means 1/12 of the average salary of the three best years of the last five 
years of credited service prior to retirement, termination, or death, or the career average as a full-time 
police officer, whichever is greater. A year shall be 12 consecutive months. 
    Beneficiary means the person entitled to receive benefits hereunder at the death of a member who 
has been designated in writing by the member and filed with the board. If no such designation is in effect, 
or if no person so designated is living at the time of death of the member, the beneficiary shall be the 
estate of the member. 
    Board means the board of trustees, which shall administer and manage the system herein provided 
and serve as trustees of the fund. 
    City means the City of Apopka, Florida. 
    Credited service means the total number of years and fractional parts of years of service as a police 
officer with member contributions, when required, omitting intervening years or fractional parts of years 
when such member was not employed by the city as a police officer. A member may voluntarily leave his 
accumulated contributions in the fund for a period of five years after leaving the employ of the city 
pending the possibility of being re-employed as a police officer without losing credit for the time that he 
was a member of the system. If a vested member leaves the employ of the police department his 
accumulated contributions will be returned only upon his written request. Any period of 160 hours or less 
during any calendar year that a member is on leave without pay from the city pursuant to the Family and 
Medical Leave Act shall be included as credited service. Periods in excess of 160 hours shall be included 
as credited service only in accordance with section 54-143. If a member who is not vested is not re-
employed as a police officer with the police department within five years, his accumulated contributions, if 
less than $1,000.00, shall be returned. If a member who is not vested is not re-employed within five 
years, his accumulated contributions, if $1,000.00 or more, will be returned only upon the written request 
of the member and upon completion of a written election to receive a cash lump sum or to rollover the 
lump sum amount on forms designated by the board. Upon return of a member's accumulated 
contributions, all of his rights and benefits under the system are forfeited and terminated. Upon any re-
employment, a police officer shall not receive credit for the years and fractional parts of years of service 
for which he has withdrawn his accumulated contributions from the fund, unless the police officer repays 
into the fund the contributions he has withdrawn, with interest, as determined by the board, within 90 days 
after his re-employment. The years or fractional parts of years that a member serves in the military 
service of the armed forces of the United States, the United States Merchant Marine or the United States 
Coast Guard, voluntarily or involuntarily, after separation from employment as a police officer with the city 
to perform training or service, shall be added to his years of credited service for all purposes, including 
vesting, provided that: 
(1) ?The police officer must return to his employment as a police officer within one year from the 
earlier of the date of his military discharge or release from active service. 
(2) ?The member is entitled to re-employment under the provisions of the Uniformed Services 
Employment and Re-employment Rights Act (USERRA), (P.L. 103-353). 
(3) ?The maximum credit for military service pursuant to this subsection shall be five years. 
    Effective date means February 19, 1992. 
    Fund means the trust fund established herein as part of the system. 
    Internal Revenue Code means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time to time. 
    Masculine gender means that the masculine gender, where used herein, unless the context 
specifically requires otherwise, shall include both the feminine and masculine genders. 
    Member means an actively employed police officer who fulfills the prescribed membership 
requirements. Benefit improvements which, in the past, have been provided for by amendments to the 
system adopted by city ordinance, and any benefit improvements which might be made in the future, shall 
apply prospectively and shall not apply to members who terminate employment or who retire prior to the 
effective date of any ordinance adopting such benefit improvements, unless such ordinance specifically 
provides to the contrary. 
    Plan year means the 12-month period beginning October 1 and ending September 30 of the 
following year. 
    Police officer means an actively employed full-time person, employed by the city, including his initial 
probationary employment period, who is certified as a police officer as a condition of employment in 
accordance with the provisions of F.S. § 943.14, who is vested with authority to bear arms and make 
arrests, and whose primary responsibility is the prevention and detection of crime or the enforcement of 
the penal, traffic, or highway laws of the state. 
    Retiree means a member who has entered retirement status. 
    Retirement means a member's separation from city employment with eligibility for immediate receipt 
of benefits under the system. 
    Salary means the total compensation for services rendered to the city as a police officer reportable 
on the member's W-2 form plus all tax deferred, tax sheltered or tax exempt items of income derived from 
elective employee deductions or salary reductions. Compensation in excess of the limitations set forth in 
section 401(a)(17) of the Internal Revenue Code shall be disregarded. The limitation on compensation for 
an "eligible employee" shall not be less than the amount which was allowed to be taken into account 
hereunder as in effect on July 1, 1993. The term "eligible employee" means an individual who was a 
member before the first plan year beginning after December 31, 1995. 
    Spouse means the lawful wife or husband of a member or retiree at the time benefits become 
payable. 
    System means the City of Apopka Municipal Police Officers' Retirement Trust Fund as contained 
herein, and all amendments thereto. 
(Code 1993, § 63-101; Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 1-19-2000; Ord. No. 1434, § 1, 5-1-2002; Ord. No. 
1756, § 1, 6-1-2005; Ord. No. 1810, § 1, 2-15-2006) 


Sec. 54-120. - Membership. 
(a) ?Conditions of eligibility. 
(1) ?All police officers as of February 19, 1992, excepting those previously opting out, and all future 
police officers, shall become members of this system as a condition of employment. 
(2) ?All future new police officers after February 19, 1992, shall be required to complete a medical 
examination as prescribed by the city. 
(b) ?Designation of beneficiary. Each police officer shall complete a form prescribed by the board 
designating a beneficiary or beneficiaries. 
(Code 1993, § 63-102; Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 1-19-2000) 


Sec. 54-121. - Board of trustees. 
(a) ?The sole and exclusive administration of and responsibilities for the proper operation of the 
retirement system and for making effective the provisions of this article is hereby vested in a board of 
trustees. The board is hereby designated as the plan administrator. The board shall consist of five 
trustees, two of whom, unless otherwise prohibited by law, shall be legal residents of the city, who 
shall be appointed by the city council, and two of whom shall be members of the system, who shall 
be elected by a majority of the police officers who are members of the system. The fifth trustee shall 
be chosen by a majority of the previous four trustees as provided for herein, and such person's name 
shall be submitted to the city council. Upon receipt of the fifth person's name, the city council shall, 
as a ministerial duty, appoint such person to the board of trustees as its fifth trustee. The fifth trustee 
shall have the same rights as each of the other four trustees appointed or elected as herein provided 
and shall serve a two-year term, unless he sooner vacates the office. Each resident trustee shall 
serve as trustee for a period of two years, unless he sooner vacates the office or is sooner replaced 
by the city council, at whose pleasure he shall serve. Each trustee shall serve as trustee for a period 
of two years, unless he sooner leaves the employment of the city as a police officer or otherwise 
vacates his office as trustee, whereupon a successor shall be chosen in the same manner as the 
departing trustee. Each trustee may succeed himself in office. DROP participants can be elected as 
but not vote for elected trustees. The board shall establish and administer the nominating and 
election procedures for each election. The board shall meet at least quarterly each year. The board 
shall be a legal entity with, in addition to other powers and responsibilities contained herein, the 
power to bring and defend lawsuits of every kind, nature, and description. 
(b) ?The trustees shall, by a majority vote, elect a chairperson and a secretary. The secretary of the 
board shall keep a complete minute book of the actions, proceedings, or hearings of the board. The 
trustees shall not receive any compensation as such, but may receive expenses and per diem as 
provided by law. 
(c) ?Each trustee shall be entitled to one vote on the board. Three affirmative votes shall be necessary 
for any decision by the trustees at any meeting of the board. A trustee shall have the right to abstain 
from voting as the result of a conflict of interest, provided that trustee complies with the provisions of 
F.S. § 112.3143. 
(d) ?The board shall engage such actuarial, accounting, legal, and other services as shall be required to 
transact the business of the system. The compensation of all persons engaged by the board and all 
other expenses of the board necessary for the operation of the system shall be paid from the fund at 
such rates and in such amounts as the board shall agree. In the event the board chooses to use the 
city's legal counsel, actuary or other professional, technical or other advisors, it shall do so only 
under terms and conditions acceptable to the board. 
(e) ?The duties and responsibilities of the board shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the 
following: 
(1) ?To construe the provisions of the system and determine all questions arising thereunder. 
(2) ?To determine all questions relating to eligibility and membership. 
(3) ?To determine and certify the amount of all retirement allowances or other benefits hereunder. 
(4) ?To establish uniform rules and procedures to be followed for administrative purposes, benefit 
applications and all matters required to administer the system. 
(5) ?To distribute to members, at regular intervals, information concerning the system. 
(6) ?To receive and process all applications for benefits. 
(7) ?To authorize all payments whatsoever from the fund and to notify the disbursing agent, in 
writing, of approved benefit payments and other expenditures arising through operation of the 
system and fund. 
(8) ?To have performed actuarial studies and valuations, at least as often as required by law, and 
make recommendations regarding any and all changes in the provisions of the system. 
(9) ?To perform such other duties as are required to prudently administer the system. 
(10) ?To appoint an administrator of the system if deemed appropriate by the board. 
(Code 1993, § 63-103; Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 1-19-2000; Ord. No. 2023, § 1, 4-16-2008) 


Sec. 54-122. - Finances and fund management; establishment and operation of fund. 
(a) ?As part of the system, there exists the fund into which shall be deposited all of the contributions and 
assets whatsoever attributable to the system. 
(b) ?The actual custody and supervision of the fund (and assets thereof) shall be vested in the board. 
Payment of benefits and disbursements from the fund shall be made by the disbursing agent, but 
only upon written authorization from the board. 
(c) ?All funds of the Municipal Police Retirement Trust Fund may be deposited by the board with the 
finance director of the city acting in a ministerial capacity only, who shall be liable in the same 
manner and to the same extent as he is liable for the safekeeping of funds for the city. However, any 
funds so deposited with the finance director of the city shall be kept in a separate fund by the finance 
director or clearly identified as such funds of the Municipal Police Retirement Trust Fund. In lieu 
thereof, the board shall deposit the funds of the Municipal Police Retirement Trust Fund in a qualified 
public depository as defined in F.S. § 280.02, which depository with regard to such funds shall 
conform to and be bound by all of the provisions of F.S. ch. 280. In order to fulfill its investment 
responsibilities as set forth herein, the board may retain the services of a custodian bank, an 
investment advisor registered under the Investment Advisors Act of 1940 or otherwise exempt from 
such required registration, an insurance company, or a combination of these, for the purposes of 
investment decisions and management. Such investment manager shall have discretion, subject to 
any guidelines as prescribed by the board, in the investment of all fund assets. 
(d) ?All funds and securities of the system may be commingled in the fund, provided, that accurate 
records are maintained at all times reflecting the financial composition of the fund, including accurate 
current accounts and entries as regards the following: 
(1) ?Current amounts of accumulated contributions of members on both an individual and 
aggregate account basis; 
(2) ?Receipts and disbursements; 
(3) ?Benefit payments; 
(4) ?Current amounts clearly reflecting all monies, funds and assets whatsoever attributable to 
contributions and deposits from the city; 
(5) ?All interest, dividends and gains (or losses) whatsoever; and 
(6) ?Such other entries as may be properly required so as to reflect a clear and complete financial 
report of the fund. 
(e) ?An audit shall be performed annually by a certified public accountant for the most recent fiscal year 
of the system, showing a detailed listing of assets and a statement of all income and disbursements 
during the year. Such income and disbursements must be reconciled with the assets at the 
beginning and end of the year. Such report shall reflect a complete evaluation of assets on both a 
cost and market basis, as well as other items normally included in a certified audit. 
(f) ?The board shall have the following investment powers and authority: 
(1) ?The board shall be vested with full legal title to said fund, subject, however, and in any event to 
the authority and power of the city council to amend or terminate this fund, provided, that no 
amendment or fund termination shall ever result in the use of any assets of this fund except for 
the payment of regular expenses and benefits under this system, except as otherwise provided 
herein. All contributions from time to time paid into the fund, and the income thereof, without 
distinction between principal and income, shall be held and administered by the board or its 
agent in the fund and the board shall not be required to segregate or invest separately any 
portion of the fund. 
(2) ?All monies paid into or held in the fund shall be invested and re-invested by the board and the 
investment of all or any part of such funds shall be limited to: 
a. ?Annuity and life insurance contracts with life insurance companies in amounts sufficient to 
provide, in whole or in part, the benefits to which all of the members in the fund shall be 
entitled under the provisions of this system and pay the initial and subsequent premium 
thereon. 
b. ?Time or savings accounts of a national bank, a state bank insured by the Bank Insurance 
Fund or a savings/building and loan association insured by the Savings Association 
Insurance Fund which is administered by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or a 
state or federal chartered credit union whose share accounts are insured by the National 
Credit Union Share Insurance Fund. 
c. ?Obligations of the United States or obligations guaranteed as to principal and interest by 
the government of the United States or by an agency of the government of the United 
States. 
d. ?Stocks, commingled funds administered by national or state banks, mutual funds and 
bonds or other evidences of indebtedness, provided that: 
1. ?Except as provided in subsection (f)(2)d.2. of this section, all individually held 
securities and all securities in a commingled or mutual fund must be issued or 
guaranteed by a corporation organized under the laws of the United States, any state 
or organized territory of the United States, or the District of Columbia. 
2. ?Up to ten percent of the assets of the fund may be invested in foreign securities. 
3. ?The board shall not invest more than five percent of its assets in the common stock or 
capital stock of any one issuing company; nor shall the aggregate investment of any 
one issuing company exceed five percent of the outstanding capital stock of that 
company; nor shall the aggregate of its investments in common stock, capital stock 
and convertible bonds at market exceed 65 percent of the assets of the fund. 
(3) ?At least once every three years, and more often as determined by the board, the board shall 
retain a professionally qualified independent consultant, as defined in F.S. § 185.06, to evaluate 
the performance of all current investment managers and make recommendations regarding the 
retention of all such investment managers. These recommendations shall be considered by the 
board at its next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(4) ?The board may retain in cash and keep unproductive of income such amount of the fund as it 
may deem advisable, having regard for the cash requirements of the system. 
(5) ?Neither the board nor any trustee shall be liable for the making, retention or sale of any 
investment or re-investment made as herein provided, nor for any loss or diminishment of the 
fund, except that due to his or its own negligence, willful misconduct or lack of good faith. 
(6) ?The board may cause any investment in securities held by it to be registered in or transferred 
into its name as trustee or into the name of such nominee as it may direct, or it may retain them 
unregistered and in a form permitting transferability, but the books and records shall at all times 
show that all investments are part of the fund. 
(7) ?The board is empowered, but is not required, to vote upon any stocks, bonds, or securities of 
any corporation, association, or trust and to give general or specific proxies or powers of 
attorney with or without power of substitution; to participate in mergers, reorganizations, 
recapitalizations, consolidations, and similar transactions with respect to such securities; to 
deposit such stock or other securities in any voting trust or any protective or like committee with 
the trustees or with depositories designated thereby; to amortize or fail to amortize any part or 
all of the premium or discount resulting from the acquisition or disposition of assets; and 
generally to exercise any of the power of an owner with respect to stocks, bonds, or other 
investments comprising the fund which it may deem to be to the best interest of the fund to 
exercise. 
(8) ?The board shall not be required to make any inventory or appraisal or report to any court, nor to 
secure any order of court for the exercise of any power contained herein. 
(9) ?Where any action which the board is required to take or any duty or function which it is required 
to perform either under the terms herein or under the general law applicable to it as trustee 
under this article can reasonably be taken or performed only after receipt by it from a member, 
the city, or any other entity of specific information, certification, direction or instruction, the board 
shall be free of liability in failing to take such action or perform such duty or function until such 
information, certification, direction or instruction has been received by it. 
(10) ?Any overpayments or underpayments from the fund to a member, retiree or beneficiary 
caused by errors of computation shall be adjusted with interest at a rate per annum approved by 
the board in such a manner that the actuarial equivalent of the benefit to which the member, 
retiree or beneficiary was correctly entitled, shall be paid. Overpayments shall be charged 
against payments next succeeding the correction or collected in another manner, if prudent. 
Underpayments shall be made up from the fund in a prudent manner. 
(11) ?The board shall sustain no liability whatsoever for the sufficiency of the fund to meet the 
payments and benefits provided for herein. 
(12) ?In any application to or proceeding or action in the courts, only the board shall be a necessary 
party, and no member or other person having an interest in the fund shall be entitled to any 
notice or service of process. Any judgment entered in such a proceeding or action shall be 
conclusive upon all persons. 
(13) ?Any of the foregoing powers and functions reposed in the board may be performed or carried 
out by the board through duly authorized agents, provided, that the board at all times maintains 
continuous supervision over the acts of any such agent; provided, further, that legal title to said 
fund shall always remain in the board. 
(Code 1993, § 63-104; Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 1-19-2000) 


Sec. 54-123. - Contributions. 
(a) ?Member contributions. 
(1) ?Amount. Each member of the system shall be required to make regular contributions to the 
fund in the amount of nine percent of his salary. Member contributions withheld by the city on 
behalf of the member shall be deposited with the board immediately after each pay period. The 
contributions made by each member to the fund shall be designated as employer contributions 
pursuant to § 414(h) of the Internal Revenue Code. Such designation is contingent upon the 
contributions being excluded from the members' gross income for federal income tax purposes. 
For all other purposes of the system, such contributions shall be considered to be member 
contributions. 
(2) ?Method. Such contributions shall be made by payroll deduction. 
(b) ?State contributions. Any monies received or receivable by reason of laws of the state for the 
express purpose of funding and paying for retirement benefits for police officers of the city shall be 
deposited in the trust fund comprising part of this system immediately and under no circumstances 
more than five days after receipt by the city. 
(c) ?City contributions. So long as this system is in effect, the city shall make quarterly contributions to 
the trust fund in an amount equal to the difference in each year, between the total aggregate 
member contributions for the year, plus state contributions for such year, and the total cost for the 
year, as shown by the most recent actuarial valuation of the system, but in no event shall the city's 
annual contribution be less than four percent of the total salary of plan members. Should the required 
city annual contribution be calculated to be more than 10.9 percent, benefits may be reduced 
prospectively and/or member contributions may be increased so that the contribution of 10.9 percent 
from the city shall not be exceeded. The total cost for any year shall be defined as the total normal 
cost plus the additional amount sufficient to amortize the unfunded past service liability as provided 
in part VII of F.S. ch. 112. 
(d) ?Other. Private donations, gifts and contributions may be deposited to the fund and shall be used for 
the benefit of the fund as determined by the board. 
(Code 1993, § 63-105; Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 1-19-2000; Ord. No. 2445, § I, 10-21-2015) 


Sec. 54-124. - Benefit amounts and eligibility. 
(a) ?Normal retirement date. A member's normal retirement date shall be the first day of the month 
coincident with or the next following the earlier of the attainment of age 45 years and the completion 
of ten years of credited service, or upon the completion of 20 years of credited service, regardless of 
age. A member may retire on his normal retirement date or on the first day of any month thereafter, 
and each member shall become 100 percent vested in his accrued benefit on the member's normal 
retirement date. Normal retirement under the system is retirement from employment with the city on 
or after the normal retirement date. 
(b) ?Normal retirement benefit. A member retiring hereunder on or after his normal retirement date shall 
receive a monthly benefit which shall commence on the first day of the month coincident with or next 
following his retirement and be continued thereafter during the member's lifetime, ceasing upon 
death, but with 120 monthly payments guaranteed in any event. The monthly retirement benefit shall 
equal four percent for each year of credited service. 
(c) ?Early retirement date. A member may retire on his early retirement date which shall be the first day 
of any month coincident with or next following the attainment of age 40 years and the completion of 
ten years of credited service. Early retirement under the system is retirement from employment with 
the city on or after the early retirement date and prior to the normal retirement date. 
(d) ?Early retirement benefit. A member retiring hereunder on his early retirement date may receive 
either a deferred or an immediate monthly retirement benefit payable for life in the same form as for 
normal retirement as follows: 
(1) ?A deferred monthly retirement benefit which shall commence on what would have been his 
normal retirement date had he continued employment as a police officer and shall be continued 
on the first day of each month thereafter. The amount of each such deferred monthly retirement 
benefit shall be determined in the same manner as for retirement on his normal retirement date, 
except that credited service and average final compensation shall be determined as of his early 
retirement date; or 
(2) ?An immediate monthly retirement benefit which shall commence on his early retirement date 
and shall be continued on the first day of each month thereafter. The benefit payable shall be as 
determined in subsection (d)(1) of this section, reduced by three percent for each year by which 
the commencement of benefits precedes the date which would have been the member's normal 
retirement date had he continued employment as a police officer. 
(e) ?Cost of living adjustment. Retirees (not including disability retirees or terminated vested persons) 
whose benefits commence on or after March 1, 1998, their joint pensioners and beneficiaries, shall 
receive a $500.00 lump sum cost-of-living allowance beginning on the fifth anniversary of the 
commencement of the retiree's benefits and a like amount on each fifth anniversary thereafter. 
(f) ?Coordination of benefits. 
(1) ?Notwithstanding any other provision of this plan, a member who is employed by the city on or 
after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and who, prior to such 
appointment, was employed in a position covered by another city retirement plan, shall become 
a member of this plan upon the effective date of such employment. Thereafter, the employee 
shall be entitled to the benefits specified in this plan and all of the employee's prior credited 
service under any other city retirement plan may be applied under this plan for purposes of 
vesting and eligibility for retirement or participation in the DROP only. 
(2) ?If credited service under this plan is used to determine a member's vesting or eligibility for 
retirement or participation in the DROP under any other city plan, the member's average final 
compensation shall be calculated as provided under this plan at the time of termination from this 
plan. This plan shall provide the member his average final compensation independent from any 
other plan upon retirement and separation from service with the city. 
(3) ?Any employee who has elected the deferred retirement option plan option as identified under 
section 54-146 may continue this option regardless of any transfer into another position within 
the city covered by another retirement plan so long as the employee is employed by the city. 
(4) ?An eligible member who elects to coordinate benefits under the provisions outlined within this 
plan shall contribute to the plan an amount equal to the full actuarial cost of the election, such 
that there is no actuarial impact on any city plan. 
(Code 1993, § 63-106; Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 1-19-2000; Ord. No. 1756, § 2, 6-1-2005; Ord. No. 
2023, § 2, 4-16-2008; Ord. No. 2332, § I, 10-16-2013; Ord. No. 2445, § II, 10-21-2015) 


Sec. 54-125. - Pre-retirement death. 
(a) ?Prior to vesting or eligibility for retirement. The beneficiary of a deceased member who was not 
receiving monthly benefit payments or who was not yet vested or eligible for retirement shall receive 
a refund of 100 percent of the member's accumulated contributions. 
(b) ?Deceased member vested or eligible for retirement. The beneficiary of any member who dies and 
who at the date of his death was vested or eligible for early or normal retirement shall be entitled to a 
benefit as follows: 
(1) ?If the member was vested, but not eligible for normal or early retirement, the beneficiary shall 
receive a benefit payable for ten years, beginning on the date that the deceased member would 
have been eligible for early or normal retirement, at the option of the beneficiary. The benefit 
shall be calculated as for normal retirement based on the deceased member's credited service 
and average final compensation as of the date of his death and reduced as for early retirement, 
if applicable. The beneficiary may also elect to receive an immediate benefit, payable for ten 
years, which is actuarially reduced to reflect the commencement of benefits prior to the early 
retirement date. 
(2) ?If the deceased member was eligible for normal or early retirement, the beneficiary shall 
receive a benefit payable for ten years, beginning on the first day of the month following the 
member's death or at the deceased member's otherwise normal or early retirement date, at the 
option of the beneficiary. The benefit shall be calculated as for normal retirement based on the 
deceased member's credited service and average final compensation as of the date of his 
death and reduced as for early retirement, if applicable. 
(3) ?A beneficiary may not elect an optional form of benefit; however, the board may elect to make 
a lump sum payment pursuant to subsection 54-128(g). 
(4) ?A beneficiary may, in lieu of any benefit provided for in subsection (b)(1) or (2) of this section, 
elect to receive a refund of the deceased member's accumulated contributions. 
(Code 1993, § 63-107; Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 1-19-2000) 


Sec. 54-126. - Disability. 
(a) ?Disability benefits in line of duty. Any member who shall become totally and permanently disabled to 
the extent that he is unable, by reason of a medically determinable physical or mental impairment, to 
render useful and efficient service as a police officer, which disability was directly caused by the 
performance of his duty as a police officer, shall, upon establishing the same to the satisfaction of 
the board, be entitled to a monthly pension equal to 3.6 percent of his average final compensation 
multiplied by the total years of credited service, but in any event, the minimum amount paid to the 
member shall be 42 percent of the average final compensation of the member. Notwithstanding the 
previous sentence, in the event a member is determined by the board to be disabled in the line of 
duty and the disability resulted from the perpetration of an intentional act of violence directed toward 
the police officer and the board reasonably believes the perpetrator intended to cause great bodily 
harm or permanent disfigurement of the police officer, the minimum amount paid to the member shall 
be a benefit determined in the same manner as for normal retirement, unreduced, and assuming the 
member had completed 20 years of credited service. Terminated persons, either vested or non-
vested, are not eligible for disability benefits, except that those terminated by the city for medical 
reasons may apply for a disability within 30 days after termination. 
(b) ?In line of duty presumptions. 
(1) ?Presumption. Any condition or impairment of health of a member caused by hypertension or 
heart disease shall be presumed to have been suffered in the line of duty unless the contrary is 
shown by competent evidence, provided, that such member shall have successfully passed a 
physical examination upon entering into such service, which examination failed to reveal any 
evidence of such condition; and provided, further, that such presumption shall not apply to 
benefits payable or granted in a policy of life insurance or disability insurance. 
(2) ?Additional presumption. The presumption provided for in this subsection (b)(2) shall apply only 
to those conditions described in this subsection (b)(2) that are diagnosed on or after January 1, 
1996. 
a. ?Definitions. As used in this subsection (b)(2), the following definitions apply: 
    Body fluids means blood and body fluids containing visible blood and other body fluids 
to which universal precautions for prevention of occupational transmission of blood-borne 
pathogens, as established by the Centers For Disease Control, apply. For purposes of 
potential transmission of meningococcal meningitis or tuberculosis, the term "body fluids" 
includes respiratory, salivary, and sinus fluids, including droplets, sputum, and saliva, 
mucous, and other fluids through which infectious airborne organisms can be transmitted 
between persons. 
    Emergency rescue or public safety member means any member employed full-time by 
the city as a firefighter, paramedic, emergency medical technician, law enforcement officer, 
or correctional officer who, in the course of employment, runs a high risk of occupational 
exposure to hepatitis, meningococcal meningitis, or tuberculosis, and who is not employed 
elsewhere in a similar capacity. However, the term "emergency rescue or public safety 
member" does not include any person employed by a public hospital licensed under F.S. 
ch. 395, or any person employed by a subsidiary thereof. 
    Hepatitis means hepatitis A, hepatitis B, hepatitis non-A, hepatitis non-B, hepatitis C, 
or any other strain of hepatitis generally recognized by the medical community. 
    High risk of occupational exposure means that risk that is incurred because a person 
subject to the provisions of this subsection, in performing the basic duties associated with 
his employment: 
(i) ?Provides emergency medical treatment in a non-healthcare setting where there is 
a potential for transfer of body fluids between persons; 
(ii) ?At the site of an accident, fire, or other rescue or public safety operation, or in an 
emergency rescue or public safety vehicle, handles body fluids in or out of 
containers or works with or otherwise handles needles or other sharp instruments 
exposed to body fluids; 
(iii) ?Engages in the pursuit, apprehension, and arrest of law violators or suspected 
law violators and, in performing such duties, may be exposed to body fluids; or 
(iv) ?Is responsible for the custody, and physical restraint when necessary, of 
prisoners or inmates within a prison, jail, or other criminal detention facility, while 
on work detail outside the facility, or while being transported, and, in performing 
such duties, may be exposed to body fluids. 
    Occupational exposure , in the case of hepatitis, meningococcal meningitis, or 
tuberculosis, means an exposure that occurs during the performance of job duties that may 
place a worker at risk of infection. 
b. ?Presumption. Any emergency rescue or public safety member who suffers a condition or 
impairment of health that is caused by hepatitis, meningococcal meningitis, or tuberculosis, 
that requires medical treatment, and that results in total or partial disability or death shall 
be presumed to have a disability suffered in the line of duty, unless the contrary is shown 
by competent evidence; however, in order to be entitled to the presumption, the member 
must, by written affidavit as provided in F.S. § 92.50, verify by written declaration that, to 
the best of his knowledge and belief: 
1. ?In the case of a medical condition caused by or derived from hepatitis, he has not: 
(i) ?Been exposed, through transfer of bodily fluids, to any person known to have 
sickness or medical conditions derived from hepatitis, outside the scope of his 
employment; 
(ii) ?Had a transfusion of blood or blood components, other than a transfusion arising 
out of an accident or injury happening in connection with his present 
employment, or received any blood products for the treatment of a coagulation 
disorder since last undergoing medical tests for hepatitis, which tests failed to 
indicate the presence of hepatitis; 
(iii) ?Engaged in unsafe sexual practices or other high-risk behavior, as identified by 
the Centers For Disease Control or the Surgeon General of the United States, or 
had sexual relations with a person known to him to have engaged in such unsafe 
sexual practices or other high-risk behavior; or 
(iv) ?Used intravenous drugs not prescribed by a physician. 
2. ?In the case of meningococcal meningitis, in the ten days immediately preceding 
diagnosis, he was not exposed outside the scope of his employment to any person 
known to have meningococcal meningitis or known to be an asymptomatic carrier of 
the disease. 
3. ?In the case of tuberculosis, in the period of time since the member's last negative 
tuberculosis skin test, he has not been exposed outside the scope of his employment 
to any person known by him to have tuberculosis. 
c. ?Immunization. Whenever any standard, medically recognized vaccine or other form of 
immunization or prophylaxis exists for the prevention of a communicable disease for which 
a presumption is granted under this section, if medically indicated in the given 
circumstances pursuant to immunization policies established by the Advisory Committee 
on Immunization Practices of the U.S. Public Health Service, an emergency rescue or 
public safety member may be required by the city to undergo the immunization or 
prophylaxis, unless the member's physician determines in writing that the immunization or 
other prophylaxis would pose a significant risk to the member's health. Absent such written 
declaration, failure or refusal by an emergency rescue or public safety member to undergo 
such immunization or prophylaxis disqualifies the member from the benefits of the 
presumption. 
d. ?Record of exposures. The city shall maintain a record of any known or reasonably 
suspected exposure of an emergency rescue or public safety member in its employ to the 
diseases described in this section, and shall immediately notify the member of such 
exposure. An emergency rescue or public safety member shall file an incident or accident 
report with the city of each instance of known or suspected occupational exposure to 
hepatitis infection, meningococcal meningitis, or tuberculosis. 
e. ?Required medical tests; pre-employment physical. In order to be entitled to the 
presumption provided by this section: 
1. ?An emergency rescue or public safety member must, prior to diagnosis, have 
undergone standard, medically acceptable tests for evidence of the communicable 
diseases for which the presumption is sought, or evidence of medical conditions 
derived therefrom, which tests fail to indicate the presence of infection. This 
subsection does not apply in the case of meningococcal meningitis. 
2. ?On or after June 15, 1995, an emergency rescue or public safety member may be 
required to undergo a pre-employment physical examination that tests for and fails to 
reveal any evidence of hepatitis or tuberculosis. 
(c) ?Disability benefits not in line of duty. Any member with ten years or more credited service who shall 
become totally and permanently disabled to the extent that he is unable, by reason of a medically 
determinable physical or mental impairment, to render useful and efficient service as a police officer, 
which disability is not directly caused by the performance of his duties as a police officer, shall, upon 
establishing the same to the satisfaction of the board, be entitled to a monthly pension equal to 3.6 
percent of his average final compensation multiplied by the total years of credited service. 
Terminated persons, either vested or non-vested, are not eligible for disability benefits, except that 
those terminated by the city for medical reasons may apply for a disability within 30 days after 
termination. 
(d) ?Conditions disqualifying disability benefits. Each member who is claiming disability benefits shall 
establish, to the satisfaction of the board, that such disability was not occasioned primarily by: 
(1) ?Excessive or habitual use of any drugs, intoxicants, or narcotics. 
(2) ?Injury or disease sustained while willfully and illegally participating in fights, riots or civil 
insurrections or while committing a crime. 
(3) ?Injury or disease sustained while serving in any branch of the armed forces. 
(4) ?Injury or disease sustained after his employment as a police officer with the city shall have 
terminated. 
(e) ?Physical examination requirement. 
(1) ?A member shall not become eligible for disability benefits until and unless he undergoes a 
physical examination by a qualified physician and/or surgeon, who shall be selected by the 
board for that purpose. The board shall not select the member's treating physician or surgeon 
for this purpose except in an unusual case where the board determines that it would be 
reasonable and prudent to do so. Any retiree receiving disability benefits under provisions of 
this article may be required by the board to submit sworn statements of his condition 
accompanied by a physician's statement (provided at the retiree's expense) to the board 
annually, and may be required by the board to undergo additional periodic re-examinations by a 
qualified physician and/or surgeon who shall be selected by the board to determine if such 
disability has ceased to exist. If the board finds that the retiree is no longer permanently and 
totally disabled to the extent that he is unable to render useful and efficient service as a police 
officer, the board shall recommend to the city that the retiree be returned to performance of duty 
as a police officer, and the retiree so returned shall enjoy the same rights that he had at the time 
he was placed upon pension. In the event the retiree so ordered to return shall refuse to comply 
with the order within 30 days, if residing outside the state, or 15 days, if residing within the state, 
from the issuance thereof, he shall forfeit the right to his pension. 
(2) ?The cost of the physical examination and/or re-examination of the member claiming or retiree 
receiving disability benefits shall be borne by the fund. All other reasonable costs as determined 
by the board incident to the physical examination, such as, but not limited to, transportation, 
meals and hotel accommodations, shall be borne by the fund. 
(3) ?If the retiree recovers from disability and re-enters the service of the city as a police officer, his 
service will be deemed to have been continuous, but the period beginning with the first month 
for which he received a disability retirement income payment and ending with the date he re-
entered the service of the city will not be considered as credited service for the purposes of the 
system. 
(4) ?The board shall have the power and authority to make the final decisions regarding all disability 
claims. 
(f) ?Disability payments. The monthly benefit to which a member is entitled in the event of the member's 
disability retirement shall be payable on the first day of the first month after the board determines 
such entitlement. However, the monthly retirement income shall be payable as of the date the board 
determined such entitlement, and any portion due for a partial month shall be paid together with the 
first payment. The last payment will be: 
(1) ?If the retiree recovers from the disability prior to his normal retirement date, the payment due 
next preceding the date of such recovery; or 
(2) ?If the retiree dies without recovering from disability or attains his normal retirement date while 
still disabled, the payment due next preceding his death or the 120th monthly payment, 
whichever is later. 
Provided, however, the disability retiree may select, at any time prior to the date on which benefit 
payments begin, an optional form of benefit payment as described in section 54-128(a)(1) or (2), 
which shall be the actuarial equivalent of the normal form of benefit. 
(g) ?Workers' compensation. When a retiree is receiving a disability pension and workers' compensation 
benefits pursuant to F.S. ch. 440 for the same disability, and the total monthly benefits received from 
both exceed 100 percent of the member's average monthly wage as defined in F.S. ch. 440, the 
disability pension benefit shall be reduced so that the total monthly amount received by the retiree 
does not exceed 100 percent of such average monthly wage. The amount of any lump sum workers' 
compensation payment shall be converted to an equivalent monthly benefit payable for ten years 
certain by dividing the lump sum amount by 83.9692. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event 
shall the disability pension benefit be reduced below the greater of 42 percent of average final 
compensation and two percent of average final compensation times years of credited service. 
(Code 1993, § 63-108; Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 1-19-2000; Ord. No. 1434, § 2, 5-1-2002; Ord. No. 
1756, § 3, 6-1-2005) 


Sec. 54-127. - Vesting. 
    If a member terminates his employment as a police officer, either voluntarily or by discharge, and is 
not eligible for any other benefits under this system, the member shall be entitled to the following: 
(1) ?If the member has less than ten years of credited service in total under all pension plans 
sponsored by the city upon termination, the member shall only be entitled to a refund of his 
accumulated contribution. Such member may elect to receive a refund of accumulated 
contributions, without interest, upon separation from the city or leave his contributions deposited 
with the fund for up to five years, after which the member will receive the refund of accumulated 
contributions, without interest. 
(2) ?If the member has ten or more years of credited service in total under all pension plans 
sponsored by the city upon termination, the member shall be entitled to a monthly retirement 
benefit, determined in the same manner as identified under section 54-124, pertaining to benefit 
amounts and eligibility, and based upon the member's credited service, average final 
compensation and the benefit accrual rate as of the date of termination, payable to him 
commencing at the member's otherwise normal or early retirement date, determined as if he 
had remained employed, provided he does not elect to withdraw his accumulated contributions, 
and provided the member survives his otherwise normal or early retirement date. If the member 
does not withdraw his accumulated contributions and does not survive to his otherwise normal 
or early retirement date, his designated beneficiary shall be entitled to a benefit as provided 
herein for a deceased member vested or eligible for retirement under section 54-125. 
(3) ?Any vested member of the system whose position is terminated, for whatever reason, but who 
remains employed by the city in some other capacity shall have all retirement benefits accrued 
up to the date of such termination under this system preserved, provided he does not elect to 
withdraw his accumulated contributions from this system. Such accrued retirement benefits 
shall be payable at his otherwise early (reduced as for early retirement) or normal retirement 
date hereunder, or later, in accordance with the provisions of this system; provided, further, 
however, that benefits shall not be payable under this system during any period of continued 
employment by the city. 
(Code 1993, § 63-109; Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 1-19-2000; Ord. No. 2332, § II, 10-16-2013) 


Sec. 54-128. - Optional forms of benefits. 
(a) ?In lieu of the amount and form of retirement income payable in the event of normal or early 
retirement as specified herein, a member, upon written request to the board, may elect to receive a 
retirement income or benefit of equivalent actuarial value payable in accordance with one of the 
following options: 
(1) ?A retirement income of a monthly amount payable to the retiree for his lifetime only. 
(2) ?A retirement income of a modified monthly amount, payable to the retiree during the lifetime of 
the retiree and following the death of the retiree, 100 percent, 75 percent, 66 2/3 percent or 50 
percent of such monthly amount payable to a joint pensioner for his lifetime. Except where the 
retiree's joint pensioner is his spouse, the payments to the joint pensioner as a percentage of 
the payments to the retiree shall not exceed the applicable percentage provided for in the 
applicable table in the treasury regulations. 
(3) ?If a member retires prior to the time at which Social Security benefits are payable, he may elect 
to receive an increased retirement benefit until such time as Social Security benefits shall be 
assumed to commence and a reduced benefit thereafter in order to provide, to as great an 
extent as possible, a more level retirement allowance during the entire period of retirement. The 
amounts payable shall be as recommended by the actuaries for the system, based upon the 
Social Security law in effect at the time of the member's retirement. 
(4) ?For any member who does not participate in the DROP, a member may elect a percentage of 
benefit in a lump sum, as follows: 
a. ?Ten percent lump sum benefit with 90 percent paid under the normal form or as per 
subsection (a)(1), (2) or (3) of this section. 
b. ?Fifteen percent lump sum benefit with 85 percent paid under the normal form or as per 
subsection (a)(1), (2) or (3) of this section. 
c. ?Twenty percent lump sum benefit with 80 percent paid under the normal form or as per 
subsection (a)(1), (2) or (3) of this section. 
d. ?Twenty-five percent lump sum benefit with 75 percent paid under the normal form or as per 
subsection (a)(1), (2) or (3) of this section. 
(b) ?The member, upon electing any option of this section, will designate the joint pensioner (subsection 
(a)(2) of this section) or beneficiary (or beneficiaries) to receive the benefit, if any, payable under the 
system in the event of the member's death and will have the power to change such designation from 
time to time. Such designation will name a joint pensioner, or one or more primary beneficiaries, 
where applicable. A member may change his beneficiary at any time. If a member has elected an 
option with a joint pensioner and the member's retirement income benefits have commenced, the 
member may thereafter change his designated beneficiary at any time, but may only change his joint 
pensioner twice. Subject to the restriction in the previous sentence, a member may substitute a new 
joint pensioner for a deceased joint pensioner. 
(c) ?The consent of a police officer's joint pensioner or beneficiary to any such change shall not be 
required. The rights of all previously designated beneficiaries to receive benefits under the system 
shall thereupon cease. 
(d) ?Upon change of a retiree's joint pensioner in accordance with this section, the amount of the 
retirement income payable to the retiree shall be actuarially redetermined to take into account the 
age of the former joint pensioner, the new joint pensioner, and the retiree, and to ensure that the 
benefit paid is the actuarial equivalent of the member's then-current benefit at the time of the 
change. Any such retiree shall pay the actuarial recalculation expenses. Each request for a change 
will be made in writing on a form prepared by the board, and on completion, will be filed with the 
board. In the event that no designated beneficiary survives the retiree, such benefits as are payable 
in the event of the death of the retiree subsequent to his retirement shall be paid as provided in 
section 54-129. 
(e) ?Retirement income payments shall be made under the option elected in accordance with the 
provisions of this section and shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1) ?If a member dies prior to his normal retirement date or early retirement date, whichever first 
occurs, no retirement benefit will be payable under the option to any person, but the benefits, if 
any, will be determined under section 54-125. 
(2) ?If the designated beneficiary (or beneficiaries) or joint pensioner dies before the member's 
retirement under the system, the option elected will be canceled automatically and a retirement 
income of the normal form and amount will be payable to the retiree upon his retirement as if 
the election had not been made unless a new election is made in accordance with the 
provisions of this section or a new beneficiary is designated by the member prior to his 
retirement. 
(3) ?If both the retiree and the beneficiary (or beneficiaries) designated by member or retiree die 
before the full payment has been effected under any option providing for payments for a period 
certain and life thereafter made pursuant to the provisions of subsection (e)(1) of this section, 
the board may, in its discretion, direct that the commuted value of the remaining payments be 
paid in a lump sum and in accordance with section 54-129. 
(4) ?If a member continues beyond his normal retirement date pursuant to the provisions of section 
54-124(a) and dies prior to his actual retirement and while an option made pursuant to the 
provisions of this section is in effect, monthly retirement income payments will be made, or a 
retirement benefit will be paid, under the option to a beneficiary (or beneficiaries) designated by 
the member in the amount or amounts computed as if the member had retired under the option 
on the date on which his death occurred. 
(f) ?A retiree may not change his retirement option after the date of cashing or depositing his first 
retirement check. 
(g) ?Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the board, in its discretion, may elect to make a 
lump sum payment to a member or a member's beneficiary in the event that the monthly benefit 
amount is less than $100.00 or the total commuted value of the remaining monthly income payments 
to be paid do not exceed $3,500.00. Any such payment made to any person pursuant to the power 
and discretion conferred upon the board by the preceding sentence shall operate as a complete 
discharge of all obligations under the system with regard to such member and shall not be subject to 
review by anyone, but shall be final, binding and conclusive on all persons. 
(Code 1993, § 63-110; Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 1-19-2000; Ord. No. 1810, § 2, 2-15-2006; Ord. No. 
2023, § 3, 4-16-2008) 


Sec. 54-129. - Beneficiaries. 
(a) ?Each member or retiree may, on a form provided for that purpose, signed and filed with the board, 
designate a beneficiary (or beneficiaries) to receive the benefit, if any, which may be payable in the 
event of his death. Each designation may be revoked or changed by such member or retiree by 
signing and filing with the board a new designation of beneficiary form. 
(b) ?If a deceased member or retiree failed to name a beneficiary in the manner prescribed in subsection 
(a) of this section, or if the beneficiary (or beneficiaries) named by a deceased member or retiree 
predeceases the member or retiree, the death benefit, if any, which may be payable under the 
system with respect to such deceased member or retiree, shall be paid to the estate of the member 
or retiree, and the board, in its discretion, may direct that the commuted value of the remaining 
monthly income benefits be paid in a lump sum. 
(c) ?Any payment made to any person pursuant to this section shall operate as a complete discharge of 
all obligations under the system with regard to the deceased member and any other persons with 
rights under the system and shall not be subject to review by anyone but shall be final, binding and 
conclusive on all persons ever interested hereunder. 
(Code 1993, § 63-111; Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 1-19-2000; Ord. No. 1434, § 3, 5-1-2002) 


Sec. 54-130. - Claims procedures before the board decision. 
(a) ?The board shall establish administrative claims procedures to be utilized in processing written 
requests (claims), on matters which affect the substantial rights of any person (claimant), including 
members, retirees, beneficiaries, or any person affected by a decision of the board. 
(b) ?The board shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the 
production of documents for discovery prior to and at any proceedings provided for in the board's 
claims procedures. The claimant may request in writing the issuance of subpoenas by the board. A 
reasonable fee may be charged for the issuance of any subpoenas not to exceed the fees set forth 
in state statutes. 
(Code 1993, § 63-112; Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 1-19-2000) 


Sec. 54-131. - Reports to division of retirement. 
    Each year, and no later than March 15, the board shall file an annual report with the division of 
retirement containing the documents and information required by F.S. § 185.221. 
(Code 1993, § 63-113; Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 1-19-2000) 


Sec. 54-132. - Roster of retirees. 
    The secretary of the board shall keep a record of all persons enjoying a pension under the provisions 
of this article in which it shall be noted the time when the pension is allowed and when the same shall 
cease to be paid. Additionally, the secretary shall keep a record of all members in such a manner as to 
show the name, address, date of employment and date such employment is terminated. 
(Code 1993, § 63-114; Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 1-19-2000) 


Sec. 54-133. - State and federal limitations on pension benefits. 
(a) ?Basic limitation. 
(1) ?Subject to the adjustments hereinafter set forth, the maximum amount of annual retirement 
income payable with respect to a member under this plan shall not exceed $160,000.00. 
(2) ?For purposes of applying the above limitation, benefits payable in any form other than a straight 
life annuity with no ancillary benefits shall be adjusted, as provided by treasury regulations, so 
that such benefits are the actuarial equivalent of a straight life annuity. For purposes of this 
section, the following benefits shall not be taken into account: 
a. ?Any ancillary benefit which is not directly related to retirement income benefits; 
b. ?Any other benefit not required under section 415(b)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code and 
regulations thereunder to be taken into account for purposes of the limitation of section 
415(b)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(b) ?Participation in other defined benefit plans. The limitation of this section with respect to any member 
who at any time has been a member in any other defined benefit plan (as defined in section 414(j) of 
the Internal Revenue Code) maintained by the city shall apply as if the total benefits payable under 
all defined benefit plans in which the member has been a member were payable from one plan. 
(c) ?Adjustments in limitations. 
(1) ?In the event the member's retirement benefits become payable before age 62 years, the 
$160,000.00 limitation prescribed by this section shall be reduced in accordance with 
regulations issued by the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to the provisions of section 415(b) 
of the Internal Revenue Code, so that such limitation (as so reduced) equals an annual benefit 
(beginning when such retirement income benefit begins) which is equivalent to a $160,000.00 
annual benefit beginning at age 62 years. 
(2) ?In the event the member's benefit is based on at least 15 years of credited service, the 
adjustments provided for in subsection (c)(1) of this section shall not apply. 
(3) ?The reductions provided for in subsection (c)(1) of this section shall not be applicable to 
disability benefits paid pursuant to section 54-126 or pre-retirement death benefits paid 
pursuant to section 54-125. 
(4) ?In the event the member's retirement benefit becomes payable after age 65, for purposes of 
determining whether this benefit meets the limitation set forth in subsection (a) of this section, 
such benefit shall be adjusted so that it is actuarially equivalent to the benefit beginning at age 
65. This adjustment shall be made in accordance with regulations promulgated by the Secretary 
of the Treasury or his delegate. 
(d) ?Less than ten years of service. The maximum retirement benefits payable under this section to any 
member who has completed less than ten years of credited service with the city shall be the amount 
determined under subsection (a) of this section multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the 
number of the member's years of credited service and the denominator of which is ten. The 
reduction provided for in this subsection shall not be applicable to disability benefits paid pursuant to 
section 54-126 or pre-retirement death benefits paid pursuant to section 54-125. 
(e) ?$10,000.00 limit. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the retirement benefit payable with respect to a 
member shall be deemed not to exceed the limitations set forth in this section if the benefits payable, 
with respect to such member under this system and under all other qualified defined benefit pension 
plans to which the city contributes, do not exceed $10,000.00 for the applicable plan year and for 
any prior plan year and the city has not at any time maintained a qualified defined contribution plan in 
which the member participated. 
(f) ?Reduction of benefits. Reduction of benefits and/or contributions to all plans, where required, shall 
be accomplished by first reducing the member's benefit under any defined benefit plans in which the 
member participated, such reduction to be made first with respect to the plan in which the member 
most recently accrued benefits and thereafter in such priority as shall be determined by the board 
and the plan administrator of such other plans, and next by reducing or allocating excess forfeitures 
for defined contribution plans in which the member participated, such reduction to be made first with 
respect to the plan in which the member most recently accrued benefits and thereafter in such 
priority as shall be established by the board and the plan administrator for such other plans; 
provided, however, that necessary reductions may be made in a different manner and priority 
pursuant to the agreement of the board and the plan administrator of all other plans covering such 
member. 
(g) ?Cost-of-living adjustments. The limitations as stated in subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section 
shall be adjusted to the time payment of a benefit begins in accordance with any cost-of-living 
adjustments prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to section 415(d) of the Internal 
Revenue Code. 
(h) ?Additional limitation on pension benefits. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary: 
(1) ?The normal retirement benefit or pension payable to a retiree who becomes a member of the 
system and who has not previously participated in such system, on or after January 1, 1980, 
shall not exceed 100 percent of his average final compensation. However, nothing contained in 
this section shall apply to supplemental retirement benefits or to pension increases attributable 
to cost-of-living increases or adjustments. 
(2) ?No member of the system shall be allowed to receive a retirement benefit or pension which is 
in part or in whole based upon any service with respect to which the member is already 
receiving, or will receive in the future, a retirement benefit or pension from a different employer's 
retirement system or plan. This restriction does not apply to Social Security benefits or federal 
benefits under ch. 67, tit. 10, U.S. Code. 
(Code 1993, § 63-115; Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 1-19-2000; Ord. No. 1434, § 4, 5-1-2002; Ord. No. 
1756, § 4, 6-1-2005) 


Sec. 54-134. - Minimum distribution of benefits. 
(a) ?General rules. 
(1) ?Effective date. The provisions of this section will apply for purposes of determining required 
minimum distributions for calendar years beginning with the 2003 calendar year. 
(2) ?Precedence. The requirements of this section will take precedence over any inconsistent 
provisions of the plan. 
(3) ?Requirements of treasury regulations. All distributions required under this section will be 
determined and made in accordance with the treasury regulations under section 401(a)(9) of the 
Internal Revenue Code. 
(4) ?TEFRA section 242(b)(2) elections. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section other 
than this subsection (a)(4), distributions may be made under a designation made before 
January 1, 1984, in accordance with section 242(b)(2) of the Tax Equity and Fiscal 
Responsibility Act (TEFRA) and the provisions of the plan that related to section 242(b)(2) of 
TEFRA. 
(b) ?Time and manner of distribution. 
(1) ?Required beginning date. The member's entire interest will be distributed, or begin to be 
distributed, to the member no later than the member's required beginning date, which shall not 
be later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the calendar year in which the 
member attains age 70½ or the calendar year in which the member retires, unless otherwise 
provided for in the plan or required by law. 
(2) ?Death of member before distributions begin. If the member dies before distributions begin, the 
member's entire interest will be distributed, or begin to be distributed, no later than as follows: 
a. ?If the member's surviving spouse is the member's sole designated beneficiary, then 
distributions to the surviving spouse will begin by December 31 of the calendar year 
immediately following the calendar year in which the member died, or by December 31 of 
the calendar year in which the member would have attained age 70½, if later. 
b. ?If the member's surviving spouse is not the member's sole designated beneficiary, then 
distributions to the designated beneficiary will begin by December 31 of the calendar year 
immediately following the calendar year in which the member died. 
c. ?If there is no designated beneficiary as of September 30 of the year following the year of 
the member's death, the member's entire interest will be distributed by December 31 of the 
calendar year containing the fifth anniversary of the member's death. 
d. ?If the member's surviving spouse is the member's sole designated beneficiary and the 
surviving spouse dies after the member but before distributions to the surviving spouse 
begin, this subsection (b)(2), other than subsection (b)(2)a, will apply as if the surviving 
spouse were the member. 
For purposes of this subsection (b)(2) and subsection (e) of this section, distributions are 
considered to begin on the member's required beginning date or, if subsection (b)(2)d of this 
section applies, the date of distributions are required to begin to the surviving spouse under 
subsection (b)(2)a of this section. If annuity payments irrevocably commence to the member 
before the member's required beginning date (or to the member's surviving spouse before the 
date distributions are required to begin to the surviving spouse under subsection (b)(2)a of this 
section), the date distributions are considered to begin is the date distributions actually 
commence. 
(3) ?Form of distribution. Unless the member's interest is distributed in the form of an annuity 
purchased from an insurance company or in a single sum on or before the required beginning 
date, as of the first distribution calendar year, distributions will be made in accordance of 
subsections (c), (d) and (e) of this section. If the member's interest is distributed in the form of 
an annuity purchased from an insurance company, distributions thereunder will be made in 
accordance with the requirements of section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code and 
treasury regulations. Any part of the member's interest which is in the form of an individual 
account described in section 414(k) of the Internal Revenue Code will be distributed in a 
manner satisfying the requirements of section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code and 
treasury regulations that apply to individual accounts. 
(c) ?Determination of amount to be distributed each year. 
(1) ?General annuity requirements. If the member's interest is paid in the form of annuity 
distributions under the plan, payments under the annuity will satisfy the following requirements: 
a. ?The annuity distributions will be paid in periodic payments made at intervals not longer than 
one year. 
b. ?The distribution period will be over a life (or lives) or over a period certain not longer than 
the period described in subsection (d) or (e) of this section. 
c. ?Once payments have begun over a period certain, the period certain will not be changed 
even if the period certain is shorter than the maximum permitted. 
d. ?Payments will either be non-increasing or increase only as follows: 
1. ?By an annual percentage increase that does not exceed the cumulative annual 
percentage increase in a cost-of-living index that is based on prices of all items and 
issued by the Bureau of Labor Statistics or by a fixed annual increase of five percent 
or less. 
2. ?To the extent of the reduction in the amount of the member's payments to provide for 
a survivor benefit upon death, but only if the beneficiary whose life was being used to 
determine the distribution period described in subsection (d) of this section dies or is 
no longer the member's beneficiary pursuant to a qualified domestic relations order 
within the meaning of section 414(p) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
3. ?To provide cash refunds of accumulated contributions upon the member's death. 
4. ?To pay increased benefits that result from a plan amendment. 
(2) ?Amount required to be distributed by required beginning date. The amount that must be 
distributed on or before the member's required beginning date (or, if the member dies before 
distributions begin, the date distributions are required to begin under subsection (b)(2)a or 
(b)(2)b of this section) is the payment that is required for one payment interval. The second 
payment need not be made until the end of the next payment interval even if that payment 
interval ends in the next calendar year. Payment intervals are the periods for which payments 
are received, e.g., bi-monthly, monthly, semi-annually, or annually. All of the member's benefit 
accruals as of the last day of the first distribution calendar year will be included in the calculation 
of the amount of the annuity payments for payment intervals ending on or after the member's 
required beginning date. 
(3) ?Additional accruals after first distribution calendar year. Any additional benefits accruing to the 
member in a calendar year after the first distribution calendar year will be distributed beginning 
with the first payment interval ending in the calendar year immediately following the calendar 
year in which such amount accrues. 
(d) ?Requirements for annuity distributions that commence during a member's lifetime. 
(1) ?Joint life annuities where the beneficiary is not the member's spouse. If the member's interest 
is being distributed in the form of a joint and survivor annuity for the joint lives of the member 
and a non-spouse beneficiary, annuity payments to be made on or after the member's required 
beginning date to the designated beneficiary after the member's death must not at any time 
exceed the applicable percentage of the annuity payment for such period that would have been 
payable to the member using the table set forth in O&A-2 of section 1.401(a)(9)-6T of the 
treasury regulations. If the form of distribution combines a joint and survivor annuity for the joint 
lives of the member and a non-spouse beneficiary and a period certain annuity, the 
requirements in the preceding sentence will apply to annuity payments to be made to the 
designated beneficiary after the expiration of the period certain. 
(2) ?Period certain annuities. Unless the member's spouse is the sole designated beneficiary and 
the form of distribution is a period certain and no life annuity, the period certain for an annuity 
distribution commencing during the member's lifetime may not exceed the applicable 
distribution period for the member under the Uniform Lifetime Table set forth in section 
1.401(a)(9)-9 of the treasury regulations for the calendar year that contains the annuity starting 
date. If the annuity starting date precedes the year in which the member reaches age 70, the 
applicable distribution period for the member is the distribution period for age 70 under the 
Uniform Lifetime Table set forth in section 1.401(a)(9)-9 of the treasury regulations plus the 
excess of 70 over the age of the member as of the member's birthday in the year that contains 
the annuity starting date. If the member's spouse is the member's sole designated beneficiary 
and the form of distribution is a period certain and no life annuity, the period certain may not 
exceed the longer of the member's applicable distribution period, as determined under this 
subsection (d)(2), or the joint life and last survivor expectancy of the member and the member's 
spouse as determined under the Joint and Last Survivor Table set forth in section 1.401(a)(9)-9 
of the treasury regulations, using the member's and spouse's attained ages as of the member's 
and spouse's birthdays in the calendar year that contains the annuity starting date. 
(e) ?Requirements for minimum distributions where member dies before date distributions begin. 
(1) ?Member survived by designated beneficiary. If the member dies before the date distribution of 
his interest begins and there is a designated beneficiary, the member's entire interest will be 
distributed, beginning no later than the time described in subsection (b)(2)a or (b)(2)b of this 
section, over the life of the designated beneficiary or over a period certain not exceeding: 
a. ?Unless the annuity starting date is before the first distribution calendar year, the life 
expectancy of the designated beneficiary determined using the beneficiary's age as of the 
beneficiary's birthday in the calendar year immediately following the calendar year of the 
member's death. 
b. ?If the annuity starting date is before the first distribution calendar year, the life expectancy 
of the designated beneficiary determined using the beneficiary's age as of the beneficiary's 
birthday in the calendar year that contains the annuity starting date. 
(2) ?No designated beneficiary. If the member dies before the date distributions begin and there is 
no designated beneficiary as of September 30 of the year following the year of the member's 
death, distribution of the member's entire interest will be completed by December 31 of the 
calendar year containing the fifth anniversary of the member's death. 
(3) ?Death of surviving spouse before distributions to surviving spouse begin. If the member dies 
before the date distribution of his interest begins, the member's surviving spouse is the 
member's sole designated beneficiary, and the surviving spouse dies before distributions to the 
surviving spouse begin, this subsection (e) will apply as if the surviving spouse were the 
member, except that the time by which distributions must begin will be determined without 
regard to subsection (b)(2)a of this section. 
(f) ?Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the 
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different 
meaning: 
    Designated beneficiary means the individual who is designated as the beneficiary under the plan and 
is the designated beneficiary under section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code and section 
1.401(a)(9)-1, O&A-4, of the treasury regulations. 
    Distribution calendar year means a calendar year for which a minimum distribution is required. For 
distributions beginning before the member's death, the first distribution calendar year is the calendar year 
immediately preceding the calendar year which contains the member's required beginning date. For 
distributions beginning after the member's death, the first distribution calendar year is the calendar year in 
which distributions are required to begin pursuant to subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
    Life expectancy means life expectancy as computed by use of the Single Life Table in section 
1.401(a)(9)-9 of the treasury regulations. 
    Required beginning date means the date specified in subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(Code 1993, § 63-116; Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 1-19-2000; Ord. No. 1810, § 3, 2-15-2006) 


Sec. 54-135. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a) ?Interest of members in system. At no time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities under the system 
with respect to retirees and members and their spouses or beneficiaries shall any part of the corpus 
or income of the pension fund be used for or diverted to any purpose other than for their exclusive 
benefit. 
(b) ?No reduction of accrued benefits. No amendment or ordinance shall be adopted by the city council 
which shall have the effect of reducing the then-vested accrued benefits of members or a members' 
beneficiaries. 
(c) ?Qualification of system. It is intended that the system will constitute a qualified pension plan under 
the applicable provisions of the Internal Revenue Code, as now in effect or hereafter amended. Any 
modification or amendment of the system may be made retroactively, if necessary or appropriate, to 
qualify or maintain the system as a plan meeting the requirements of the applicable provisions of the 
Internal Revenue Code, as now in effect or hereafter amended, or any other applicable provisions of 
the U.S. federal tax laws, as now in effect or hereafter amended or adopted, and the regulations 
issued thereunder. 
(d) ?Use of forfeitures. Forfeitures arising from terminations of service of members shall serve only to 
reduce future city contributions. 
(e) ?Compliance with F.S. ch. 185. It is intended that the system will continue to qualify for funding under 
F.S. § 185.08. Accordingly, unless otherwise required by law, any provision of the system which 
violates the requirements of F.S. ch. 185, as amended from time to time, shall be superseded by and 
administered in accordance with the requirements of such chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 63-117; Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 1-19-2000; Ord. No. 1434, § 5, 5-1-2002) 


Sec. 54-136. - Repeal or termination of system. 
(a) ?This article establishing the system and fund, and subsequent ordinances pertaining to said system 
and fund, may be modified, terminated, or amended, in whole or in part, provided, that if this or any 
subsequent ordinance shall be amended or repealed in its application to any person benefiting 
hereunder, the amount of benefits which at the time of any such alteration, amendment, or repeal 
shall have accrued to the member or beneficiary shall not be affected thereby, except to the extent 
that the assets of the fund may be determined to be inadequate. 
(b) ?If this article shall be repealed, or if contributions to the system are discontinued or if there is a 
transfer, merger or consolidation of government units, services or functions as provided in F.S. ch. 
121, the board shall continue to administer the system in accordance with the provisions of this 
article for the sole benefit of the then-members, any beneficiaries then receiving retirement 
allowances, and any future persons entitled to receive benefits under one of the options provided for 
in this article who are designated by any of said members. In the event of repeal, discontinuance of 
contributions, or transfer, merger or consolidation of government units, services or functions, there 
shall be full vesting of 100 percent of benefits accrued to the date of repeal and the assets of the 
system shall be allocated in an equitable manner to provide benefits on a proportionate basis to the 
persons so entitled in accordance with the provisions thereof. 
(c) ?The following shall be the order of priority for purposes of allocating the assets of the system as of 
the date of repeal of this article or if contributions to the system are discontinued, with the date of 
such discontinuation being determined by the board: 
(1) ?Apportionment shall first be made in respect of each retiree receiving a retirement or disability 
benefit hereunder on such date, each person receiving a benefit on such date on account of a 
retired or disabled (but since deceased) member, and each member who has, by such date, 
become eligible for normal retirement but has not yet retired, an amount which is the actuarial 
equivalent of such benefit, provided, that if such asset value is less than the aggregate of such 
amounts, such amounts shall be proportionately reduced so that the aggregate of such reduced 
amounts will be equal to such asset value. 
(2) ?If there is any asset value remaining after the apportionment under subsection (c)(1) of this 
section, apportionment shall next be made in respect of each member in the service of the city 
on such date who is vested and who is not entitled to an apportionment under subsection (c)(1) 
of this section, in the amount required to provide the actuarial equivalent of the vested portion of 
the accrued normal retirement benefit (but not less than accumulated contributions), based on 
the credited service and average final compensation as of such date, and each vested former 
member then entitled to a deferred benefit who has not, by such date, begun receiving benefit 
payments, in the amount required to provide said actuarial equivalent of the vested portion of 
the accrued normal retirement benefit (but not less than accumulated contributions), provided, 
that if such remaining asset value is less than the aggregate of the amounts apportioned 
hereunder, such latter amounts shall be proportionately reduced so that the aggregate of such 
reduced amounts will be equal to such remaining asset value. 
(3) ?If there is any asset value after the apportionments under subsections (c)(1) and (2) of this 
section, apportionment shall be made in respect of each member in the service of the city on 
such date who is not entitled to an apportionment under subsections (c)(1) and (2) of this 
section in the amount equal to the member's accumulated contributions, provided, that if such 
remaining asset value is less than the aggregate of the amounts apportioned hereunder, such 
latter amount shall be proportionately reduced so that the aggregate of such reduced amounts 
will be equal to such remaining asset value. 
(4) ?If there is any asset value remaining after the apportionments under subsections (c)(1), (2) and 
(3) of this section, apportionment shall lastly be made in respect of each member included in 
subsection (c)(3) of this section to the extent of the actuarial equivalent of the non-vested 
accrued normal retirement benefit, less the amount apportioned in subsection (c)(3) of this 
section, based on the credited service and average final compensation as of such date, 
provided, that if such remaining asset value is less than the aggregate of the amounts 
apportioned hereunder, such amounts shall be reduced so that the aggregate of such reduced 
amounts will be equal to such remaining asset value. 
(5) ?In the event that there is asset value remaining after the full apportionment specified in 
subsections (c)(1), (2), (3) and (4) of this section, such excess shall be returned to the city, less 
return of the state's contributions to the state, provided, that if the excess is less than the total 
contributions made by the city and the state to the date of termination, such excess shall be 
divided proportionately to the total contributions made by the city and the state. 
a. ?The allocation of the fund provided for in this subsection may, as decided by the board, be 
carried out through the purchase of insurance company contracts to provide the benefits 
determined in accordance with this subsection. The fund may be distributed in one sum to 
the persons entitled to said benefits or the distribution may be carried out in such other 
equitable manner as the board may direct. The fund may be continued in existence for 
purposes of subsequent distributions. 
b. ?If, at any time during the first ten years after the effective date of the ordinance originally 
establishing the system (Ordinance Number 712), the system shall be terminated or the full 
current costs of the system shall not have been met, anything in the system to the contrary 
notwithstanding, city contributions which may be used for the benefit of any one of the 25 
highest paid members on the effective date whose anticipated annual retirement 
allowances provided by the city's contributions at the member's normal retirement date 
would exceed $1,500.00 shall not exceed greater of either $20,000.00 an amount 
computed by multiplying the smaller of $10,000.00 or 20 percent of such member's 
average annual earnings during his last five years of service by the number of years of 
service since the effective date. In the event that it shall hereafter be determined by 
statute, court decision, ruling by the Commissioner of Internal Revenue, or otherwise, that 
the provisions of this subsection are not then necessary to qualify the system under the 
Internal Revenue Code, this subsection shall be ineffective without the necessity of further 
amendment of this article. 
(d) ?After all the vested and accrued benefits provided hereunder have been paid and after all other 
liabilities have been satisfied, then, and only then, shall any remaining fund revert to the general fund 
of the city. 
(Code 1993, § 63-118; Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 1-19-2000) 


Sec. 54-137. - Domestic relations orders; retiree-directed payments; Exemption from execution, etc.; 
non-assignability. 
(a) ?Domestic relations orders. 
(1) ?Prior to the entry of any domestic relations order which affects or purports to affect the 
system's responsibility in connection with the payment of benefits of a retiree, the member or 
retiree shall submit the proposed order to the board for review to determine whether the system 
may legally honor the order. 
(2) ?If a domestic relations order is not submitted to the board for review prior to entry of the order, 
and the system is ordered to take action that it may not legally take, and the system expends 
administrative or legal fees in resolving the matter, the member or retiree who submits such an 
order will be required to reimburse the system for its expenses in connection with the order. 
(b) ?Retiree directed payments. The board may, upon written request by a retiree or by a dependent, 
when authorized by a retiree or the retiree's beneficiary, authorize the system to withhold from the 
monthly retirement payment those funds that are necessary to pay for the benefits being received 
through the city, to pay the certified bargaining agent of the city, and to make any payments for child 
support or alimony. 
(c) ?Exemption from execution, non-assignability. Except as otherwise provided by law, the pensions, 
annuities, or any other benefits accrued or accruing to any person under the provisions of this article 
and the accumulated contributions and the cash securities in the fund created under this article are 
hereby exempted from any state, county or municipal tax and shall not be subject to execution, 
attachment, garnishment or any legal process whatsoever and shall be unassignable. 
(Code 1993, § 63-119; Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 1-19-2000; Ord. No. 1756, § 5, 6-1-2005) 


Sec. 54-138. - Pension validity. 
    The board shall have the power to examine into the facts upon which any pension shall heretofore 
have been granted under any prior or existing law or shall hereafter be granted or obtained erroneously, 
fraudulently or illegally for any reason. The board is empowered to purge the pension rolls or correct the 
pension amount of any person heretofore granted a pension under prior or existing law or any person 
hereafter granted a pension under this article if the same is found to be erroneous, fraudulent or illegal for 
any reason, and to reclassify any person who has heretofore under any prior or existing law been or who 
shall hereafter under this article be erroneously, improperly or illegally classified. Any overpayments or 
underpayments shall be corrected and paid or repaid in a reasonable manner determined by the board. 
(Code 1993, § 63-120; Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 1-19-2000) 


Sec. 54-139. - Forfeiture of pension. 
(a) ?Any member who is convicted of the following offenses committed prior to retirement, or whose 
employment is terminated by reason of his admitted commission, aid or abetment of the following 
specified offenses, shall forfeit all rights and benefits under this pension fund, except for the return of 
his accumulated contributions as of the date of termination. Specified offenses are as follows: 
(1) ?The committing, aiding or abetting of an embezzlement of public funds; 
(2) ?The committing, aiding or abetting of any theft by a public officer or employee from an 
employer; 
(3) ?Bribery in connection with the employment of a public officer or employee; 
(4) ?Any felony specified in F.S. ch. 838; 
(5) ?The committing of an impeachable offense; 
(6) ?The committing of any felony by a public officer or employee who willfully and with intent to 
defraud the public or the public agency for which he acts or in which he is employed of the right 
to receive the faithful performance of his duty as a public officer or employee realizes or obtains 
or attempts to obtain a profit, gain, or advantage for himself or for some other person through 
the use or attempted use of the power, rights, privileges, duties or position of his public office or 
employment position. 
(b) ?The term "conviction" shall be defined as an adjudication of guilt by a court of competent jurisdiction; 
a plea of guilty or nolo contendere; a jury verdict of guilty when adjudication of guilt is withheld and 
the accused is placed on probation; or a conviction by the Senate of an impeachable offense. 
(c) ?The term "court" shall be defined as any state or federal court of competent jurisdiction which is 
exercising its jurisdiction to consider a proceeding involving the alleged commission of a specified 
offense. Prior to forfeiture, the board shall hold a hearing on which notice shall be given to the 
member whose benefits are being considered for forfeiture. Said member shall be afforded the right 
to have an attorney present. No formal rules of evidence shall apply, but the member shall be 
afforded a full opportunity to present his case against forfeiture. 
(d) ?Any member who has received benefits from the system in excess of his accumulated contributions 
after the member's rights were forfeited shall be required to pay back to the fund the amount of the 
benefits received in excess of his accumulated contributions. The board may implement all legal 
action necessary to recover such funds. 
(Code 1993, § 63-121; Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 1-19-2000) 


Sec. 54-140. - Conviction and forfeiture; false, misleading or fraudulent statements. 
(a) ?It is unlawful for a person to willfully and knowingly make, or cause to be made, or to assist, 
conspire with, or urge another to make, or cause to be made, any false, fraudulent, or misleading 
oral or written statement or withhold or conceal material information to obtain any benefit from the 
system. 
(b) ?A person who violates subsection (a) of this section commits a misdemeanor of the first degree, 
punishable as provided in F.S. § 775.082 or F.S. § 775.083. 
(c) ?In addition to any applicable criminal penalty, upon conviction for a violation described in subsection 
(a) of this section, a member or beneficiary of the system may, in the discretion of the board, be 
required to forfeit the right to receive any or all benefits to which the person would otherwise be 
entitled under the system. For purposes of this subsection, the term "conviction" means a 
determination of guilt that is the result of a plea or trial, regardless of whether adjudication is 
withheld. 
(Code 1993, § 63-122; Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 1-19-2000) 


Sec. 54-141. - Indemnification. 
(a) ?To the extent not covered by insurance contracts in force from time to time, the city shall indemnify, 
defend and hold harmless members of the board from all personal liability for damages and costs, 
including court costs and attorney fees, arising out of claims, suits, litigation, or threats of same, 
herein referred to as "claims," against these individuals because of acts or circumstances connected 
with or arising out of their official duty as members of the board. The city reserves the right, in its sole 
discretion, to settle or to not settle the claim at any time and to appeal or to not appeal from any 
adverse judgment or ruling, and in either event will indemnify, defend and hold harmless any 
members of the board from the judgment, execution, or levy thereon. 
(b) ?This section shall not be construed so as to relieve any insurance company or other entity liable to 
defend the claim or liable for payment of the judgment or claim from any liability nor does this section 
waive any provision of law affording the city immunity from any suit in whole or part, or waive any 
other substantive or procedural rights the city may have. 
(c) ?This section shall not apply to, nor shall the city be responsible in any manner to defend or pay for, 
claims arising out of acts or omissions of members of the board which constitute felonies or gross 
malfeasance or gross misfeasance in office. 
(Code 1993, § 63-123; Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 1-19-2000) 


Sec. 54-142. - Direct transfers of eligible rollover distributions; elimination of mandatory distributions. 
(a) ?Rollover distributions. 
(1) ?Generally. This section applies to distributions made on or after January 1, 2002. 
Notwithstanding any provision of the system to the contrary that would otherwise limit a 
distributee's election under this section, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner 
prescribed by the board, to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an 
eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover. 
(2) ?Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the 
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different 
meaning: 
    Direct rollover means a payment by the plan to the eligible retirement plan specified by the 
distributee. 
    Distributee means an employee or former employee. In addition, the employee's or former 
employee's surviving spouse is a distributee with regard to the interest of the spouse. 
    Eligible retirement plan means an individual retirement account described in section 408(a) 
of the Internal Revenue Code, an individual retirement annuity described in section 408(b) of 
the Internal Revenue Code, an annuity plan described in section 403(a) of the Internal Revenue 
Code, an eligible deferred compensation plan described in section 457(b) of the Internal 
Revenue Code which is maintained by an eligible employer described in section 457(e)(1)(A) of 
the Internal Revenue Code and which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into 
such plan from this plan, an annuity contract described in section 403(b) of the Internal 
Revenue Code, or a qualified trust described in section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code 
that accepts the distributee's eligible rollover distribution. This definition shall also apply in the 
case of an eligible rollover distribution to the surviving spouse. 
    Eligible rollover distribution means any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the 
credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include any 
distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently 
than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint 
life expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary or for a 
specified period of ten years or more; any distribution to the extent such distribution is required 
under section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code; and the portion of any distribution that is 
not includible in gross income. Any portion of any distribution which would be includible in gross 
income will be an eligible rollover distribution if the distribution is made to an individual 
retirement account described in section 408(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, to an individual 
retirement annuity described in section 408(b) of the Internal Revenue Code or to a qualified 
defined contribution plan described in section 401(a) or 403(a) of the Internal Revenue Code 
that agrees to separately account for amounts so transferred, including separately accounting 
for the portion of such distribution which is includible in gross income and the portion of such 
distribution which is not so includible. 
(b) ?Rollovers or transfers into the fund. On or after January 1, 2002, the system will accept, solely for 
the purpose of purchasing credited service as provided herein, permissible member rollover cash 
contributions and/or direct cash rollovers of distributions made on or after January 1, 2002, as 
follows: 
(1) ?Transfers and direct rollovers or member rollover contributions from other plans. The system 
will accept either a direct rollover of an eligible rollover distribution or a member contribution of 
an eligible rollover distribution from a qualified plan described in section 401(a) or 403(a) of the 
Internal Revenue Code, from an annuity contract described in section 403(b) of the Internal 
Revenue Code or from an eligible plan under section 457(b) of the Internal Revenue Code 
which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality 
of a state or political subdivision of a state. The system will also accept legally permissible 
member-requested transfers of funds from other retirement or pension plans. 
(2) ?Member rollover contributions from IRAs. The system will accept a member rollover 
contribution of the portion of a distribution from an individual retirement account or annuity 
described in section 408(a) or 408(b) of the Internal Revenue Code that is eligible to be rolled 
over and would otherwise be includible in gross income. 
(c) ?Elimination of mandatory distributions. Notwithstanding any other provision herein to the contrary, in 
the event this plan provides for a mandatory (involuntary) cash distribution from the plan not 
otherwise required by law, for an amount in excess of $1,000.00, such distribution shall be made 
from the plan only upon written request of the member and completion by the member of a written 
election on forms designated by the board, to either receive a cash lump sum or to rollover the lump 
sum amount. 
(Code 1993, § 63-124; Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 1-19-2000; Ord. No. 1434, § 6, 5-1-2002; Ord. No. 
1756, § 6, 6-1-2005; Ord. No. 1810, § 4, 2-15-2006) 


Sec. 54-143. - Family and Medical Leave Act. 
    The periods of time in excess of 160 hours during the 12-month period ending each December 31 
that a member is on leave without pay from the city pursuant to the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) 
shall be added to his credited service, provided that: 
(1) ?The member contributes to the fund the sum that he would have contributed, based on his 
salary and the member contribution rate in effect at the time that the credited service is 
requested, had he been a member of the system for the years or fractional parts of years for 
which he is requesting credit plus amounts actuarially determined such that the crediting of 
service does not result in any cost to the fund plus payment of costs for all professional services 
rendered to the board in connection with the purchase of periods of credited service. 
(2) ?The request for credited service for FMLA leave time for the 12-month period prior to each 
December 31 and payment of professional fees shall be made on or before March 31. 
(3) ?Payment by the member of the required amount shall be made on or before April 30 for the 
preceding 12-month period ending December 31, and shall be made in one lump sum payment, 
upon receipt of which, credited service shall be issued. 
(4) ?Credited service purchased pursuant to this section shall count toward vesting. 
(5) ?No payment shall be required for the first 160 hours of FMLA leave time in any calendar year, 
no request for credit shall be required and such time shall count toward vesting. 
(6) ?Purchase of credited service for leave without pay pursuant to FMLA in excess of 160 hours 
during the 12-month period ending each December 31 is an option that a member may or may 
not elect to exercise. 
(Code 1993, § 63-125; Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 1-19-2000; Ord. No. 1434, § 7, 5-1-2002; Ord. No. 
1756, § 7, 6-1-2005) 


Sec. 54-144. - Military service prior to employment. 
    The years or fractional parts of years that a police officer serves or has served on active duty in the 
military service of the armed forces of the United States, the United States Merchant Marine or the United 
States Coast Guard, voluntarily or involuntarily, and honorably or under honorable conditions, prior to first 
and initial employment with the city police department, shall be added to his years of credited service, 
provided that: 
(1) ?The member contributes to the fund the sum that he would have contributed, based on his 
salary and the member contribution rate in effect at the time that the credited service is 
requested, had he been a member of the system for the years or fractional parts of years for 
which he is requesting credit plus amounts actuarially determined such that the crediting of 
service does not result in any cost to the fund plus payment of costs for all professional services 
rendered to the board in connection with the purchase of years of credited service. 
(2) ?Multiple requests may be made by the member at any time prior to retirement. 
(3) ?Payment by the member of the required amount shall be made within three months of his 
request for credit, but not later than his retirement date in any event, and shall be made in one 
lump sum payment, upon receipt of which, credited service shall be given. 
(4) ?There shall be no maximum purchase of credited service under this section. 
(5) ?Credited service purchased pursuant to this section shall count for all purposes, except vesting 
and eligibility for not-in-line-of-duty disability benefits. 
(Code 1993, § 63-126; Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 1-19-2000; Ord. No. 1434, § 8, 5-1-2002; Ord. No. 
1756, § 8, 6-1-2005) 


Sec. 54-145. - Prior police service. 
    Unless otherwise prohibited by law, and except as provided for in section 54-119, the years or 
fractional parts of years that a member previously served as a police officer with the city during a period 
of previous employment and for which period accumulated contributions were withdrawn from the fund or 
the years and fractional parts of years that a member served as a police officer for any other municipal, 
county, state or federal law enforcement department in the United States and for which credited service is 
not otherwise due shall be added to his years of credited service, provided that: 
(1) ?The member contributes to the fund the sum that he would have contributed, based on his 
salary and the member contribution rate in effect at the time that the credited service is 
requested, had he been a member of the system for the years or fractional parts of years for 
which he is requesting credit plus amounts actuarially determined such that the crediting of 
service does not result in any cost to the fund plus payment of costs for all professional services 
rendered to the board in connection with the purchase of years of credited service. 
(2) ?Multiple requests may be made by the member at any time prior to retirement. 
(3) ?Payment by the member of the required amount shall be made within three months of his 
request for credit, but not later than his retirement date in any event, and shall be made in one 
lump sum payment, upon receipt of which, credited service shall be given. 
(4) ?There shall be no maximum credit under this section, and all years of credited service added 
pursuant to this section for prior service with the city shall count for all purposes, including 
vesting. There shall be no maximum purchase of credited service under this section for the 
purchase of other police service, and such credited service shall count for all purposes, except 
vesting and eligibility for not-in-line-of-duty disability benefits. 
(5) ?In no event, however, may credited service be purchased pursuant to this section for prior 
service with any other municipal, county, state or federal law enforcement department, if such 
prior service forms or will form the basis of a retirement benefit or pension from another 
retirement system or plan as set forth in section 54-133, State and federal limitations on pension 
benefits. 
(Code 1993, § 63-127; Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 1-19-2000; Ord. No. 1434, § 9, 5-1-2002; Ord. No. 
1756, § 9, 6-1-2005) 


Sec. 54-146. - Deferred retirement option plan. 
(a) ?Definitions. As used in this section, the following definitions apply: 
    DROP means the City of Apopka police officers' deferred retirement option plan. 
    DROP account means the account established for each DROP participant under subsection (c) of 
this section. 
(b) ?Participation. 
(1) ?Eligibility to participate. In lieu of terminating his employment as a police officer, any member 
who is eligible for normal retirement under the system may elect to defer receipt of such service 
retirement pension and to participate in the DROP. 
(2) ?Election to participate. A member's election to participate in the DROP must be made in writing 
in a time and manner determined by the board and shall be effective on the first day of the first 
calendar month which is at least 15 business days after it is received by the board. 
(3) ?Period of participation. A member who elects to participate in the DROP under subsection 
(b)(2) of this section shall participate in the DROP for a period not to exceed 96 months, 
beginning at the time his election to participate in the DROP first becomes effective. An election 
to participate in the DROP shall constitute an irrevocable election to resign from the service of 
the city not later than the date provided for in the previous sentence. A member may participate 
only once. Any person who is currently in the DROP on the effective date of the ordinance 
extending the permissible DROP period provided for in this subsection may extend his DROP 
participation as provided herein. Any retiree who has retired under normal retirement and who 
has not previously participated in the DROP and who is re-employed by the city as a police 
officer may elect to enter the DROP as provided herein. 
(4) ?Termination of participation. 
a. ?A member's participation in the DROP shall cease by: 
1. ?Continuation of his employment as a police officer at the end of his period of 
participation in the DROP as determined under subsection (b)(3) of this section; or 
2. ?Termination of his employment as a police officer. 
b. ?Upon the member's termination of participation in the DROP, pursuant to subsection 
(b)(4)a of this section, all amounts provided for in subsection (c)(2) of this section, including 
monthly benefits and investment earnings or losses, shall cease to be transferred from the 
system to his DROP account. Any amounts remaining in his DROP account shall be paid 
to him in accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of this section when he 
terminates his employment as a police officer. 
c. ?A member who elects to terminate his participation in the DROP under this subsection 
(b)(4) shall not be permitted to again become a participant in the DROP. 
(5) ?Effect of DROP participation on the system. 
a. ?A member's credited service and his accrued benefit under the system shall be determined 
on the date his election to participate in the DROP first becomes effective. The member 
shall not accrue any additional credited service or any additional benefits under the system 
(except for any additional benefits provided under any cost-of-living adjustment in the 
system) while he is a participant in the DROP. After a member commences participation, 
he shall not be permitted to again contribute to the system nor shall he be eligible for 
disability or pre-retirement death benefits. 
b. ?No amounts shall be paid to a member from the system while the member is a participant 
in the DROP. Unless otherwise specified in the system, if a member's participation in the 
DROP is terminated other than by terminating his employment as a police officer, no 
amounts shall be paid to him from the system until he terminates his employment as a 
police officer. Unless otherwise specified in the system, amounts transferred from the 
system to the member's DROP account shall be paid directly to the member only on the 
termination of his employment as a police officer. 
(c) ?Funding. 
(1) ?Establishment of DROP account. A DROP account shall be established for each member 
participating in the DROP. A member's DROP account shall consist of amounts transferred to 
the DROP under subsection (c)(2) of this section, and earnings on those amounts. 
(2) ?Transfers from retirement system. 
a. ?As of the first day of each month of a member's period of participation in the DROP, the 
monthly retirement benefit he would have received under the system had he terminated his 
employment as a police officer and elected to receive monthly benefit payments 
thereunder shall be transferred to his DROP account, except as otherwise provided for in 
subsection (b)(4)b of this section. A member's period of participation in the DROP shall be 
determined in accordance with the provisions of subsections (b)(3) and (b)(4) of this 
section, but in no event shall it continue past the date he terminates his employment as a 
police officer. 
b. ?Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b)(4)b. of this section, a member's DROP 
account under this subsection (c)(2) shall be debited or credited with earnings after each 
fiscal year quarter. The average daily balance in a member's DROP account shall be 
credited or debited at a rate equal to the actual net rate of investment return realized by the 
system for that quarter. The term "net investment return," for the purpose of this 
subsection, is the total return of the assets in which the member's DROP account is 
invested by the board, net of brokerage commissions, transaction costs and management 
fees. 
c. ?A member's DROP account shall only be credited or debited with earnings and monthly 
benefits while the member is a participant in the DROP. A member's final DROP account 
value for distribution to the member upon termination of participation in the DROP shall be 
the value of the account at the end of the quarter immediately preceding termination of 
participation plus any monthly periodic additions made to the DROP account subsequent to 
the end of the previous quarter and prior to distribution. If a member is employed by the 
city police department after participating in the DROP for the permissible period of DROP 
participation, then beginning with the member's first month of employment following the 
permissible period of DROP participation, the member's DROP account will no longer be 
credited or debited with earnings, nor will monthly benefits be transferred to the DROP 
account. All such non-transferred amounts shall be forfeited and continue to be forfeited 
while the member is employed by the police department. A member employed by the 
police department after the permissible period of DROP participation will still not be eligible 
for pre-retirement death or disability benefits, nor will he accrue additional credited service. 
(d) ?Distribution of DROP accounts on termination of employment. 
(1) ?Eligibility for benefits. A member shall receive the balance in his DROP account in accordance 
with the provisions of this subsection (d) upon his termination of employment as a police officer. 
Except as provided in subsection (d)(5) of this section, no amounts shall be paid to a member 
from the DROP prior to his termination of employment as a police officer. 
(2) ?Form of distribution. 
a. ?Unless the member elects otherwise, distribution of his DROP account shall be made in a 
cash lump sum. A member may elect, in such time and manner as the board shall 
prescribe, to receive an optional form of benefit described below: 
1. ?Until the value of the member's DROP account is completely depleted, payments in 
approximately equal quarterly or annual installments over a period, designated by the 
member, not to exceed the life expectancy of the last survivor of the member and his 
beneficiary. In the event that the member dies before all installments have been paid, 
the remaining balance in his DROP account shall be paid in an immediate cash lump 
sum to his beneficiary, or if none is designated, then to the member's estate. 
2. ?The purchase of a non-forfeitable fixed annuity payable in such form as the member 
may elect. Elections under this subsection (d)(2)a.2. shall be in writing and shall be 
made in such time or manner as the board shall determine. 
b. ?Notwithstanding the preceding, if a member dies before his benefits commence, his DROP 
account shall be paid to his beneficiary in such optional form as his beneficiary may select. 
If no beneficiary designation is made, the DROP account shall be distributed to the 
member's estate. 
(3) ?Date of payment of distribution. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (d), distribution 
of a member's DROP account shall be made as soon as administratively practicable following 
the member's termination of employment. Distribution of the amount in a member's DROP 
account will not be made unless the member completes a written request for distribution and a 
written election on forms designated by the board to either receive a cash lump sum or a 
rollover of the lump sum amount. 
(4) ?Proof of death and right of beneficiary or other person. The board may require and rely upon 
such proof of death and such evidence of the right of any beneficiary or other person to receive 
the value of a deceased member's DROP account as the board may deem proper, and its 
determination of the right of that beneficiary or other person to receive payment shall be 
conclusive. 
(5) ?Distribution limitation. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection (d), all 
distributions from the DROP shall conform to the minimum distribution of benefit provisions as 
provided for herein. 
(6) ?Direct rollover of certain distributions. This subsection applies to distributions made on or after 
January 1, 2002. Notwithstanding any provision of the DROP to the contrary, a distributee may 
elect to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid in a direct rollover as otherwise 
provided under the system in section 54-142. 
(7) ?Age 70½ required distribution. In no event shall the provisions of subsection (d) of this section 
operate so as to allow the distribution of a member's DROP account to be later than the April 1 
following the later of the calendar year in which he terminates his employment as a police officer 
or he attains age 70½. In the event a member is required to receive payment while in service 
under the provisions of this subsection, he shall receive one lump sum payment on or before his 
required beginning date equal to his entire DROP account balance and annual lump sum 
payments thereafter of amounts credited to his DROP account during each calendar year. Upon 
the member's subsequent termination of employment, payment of his DROP account shall be 
made in accordance with the provisions of subsection (d)(2) of this section. 
(8) ?Distribution limitation. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection (d), all 
distributions from the DROP shall conform to the regulations issued under section 401(a)(9) of 
the Internal Revenue Code, including the incidental death benefit provisions of section 
401(a)(9)(G) of the Internal Revenue Code. Further, such regulations shall override any DROP 
provision that is inconsistent with section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(9) ?Direct rollover of certain distributions. This subsection applies to distributions made on or after 
January 1, 1993. Notwithstanding any provision of the DROP to the contrary that would 
otherwise limit a distributee's election under this subsection, a distributee may elect, at the time 
and in the manner prescribed by the board, to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution 
paid directly by the DROP to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct 
rollover as otherwise provided under the system in section 54-142, herein incorporated by 
reference. 
(e) ?Administration of DROP. 
(1) ?Board administers the DROP. The general administration of the DROP, the responsibility for 
carrying out the provisions of the DROP, and the responsibility of overseeing the investment of 
the DROP's assets shall be placed in the board. The members of the board may appoint from 
their number such subcommittees with such powers as they shall determine; may adopt such 
administrative procedures and regulations as they deem desirable for the conduct of their 
affairs; may authorize one or more of their number or any agent to execute or deliver any 
instrument or make any payment on their behalf; may retain counsel, employ agents and 
provide for such clerical, accounting, actuarial and consulting services as they may require in 
carrying out the provisions of the DROP; and may allocate among themselves or delegate to 
other persons all or such portion of their duties under the DROP, other than those granted to 
them as trustees under any trust agreement adopted for use in implementing the DROP, as 
they, in their sole discretion, shall decide. A trustee shall not vote on any question relating 
exclusively to himself. 
(2) ?Individual accounts, records and reports. The board shall maintain, or cause to be maintained, 
records showing the operation and condition of the DROP, including records showing the 
individual balances in each member's DROP account, and the board shall keep or cause to be 
kept in convenient form such data as may be necessary for the valuation of the assets and 
liabilities of the DROP. The board shall prepare or cause to be prepared and distributed to 
members participating in the DROP and other individuals or filed with the appropriate 
governmental agencies, as the case may be, all necessary descriptions, reports, information 
returns, and data required to be distributed or filed for the DROP pursuant to the Internal 
Revenue Code, the applicable portions of the Act and any other applicable laws. 
(3) ?Establishment of rules. Subject to the limitations of the DROP, the board from time to time shall 
establish rules for the administration of the DROP and the transaction of its business. The board 
shall have discretionary authority to construe and interpret the DROP (including, but not limited 
to, determination of an individual's eligibility for DROP participation, the right and amount of any 
benefit payable under the DROP and the date on which any individual ceases to be a 
participant in the DROP). The determination of the board as to the interpretation of the DROP or 
its determination of any disputed questions shall be conclusive and final to the extent permitted 
by applicable law. The board shall also oversee the investment of the DROP'S assets. 
(4) ?Limitation of liability. 
a. ?The trustees shall not incur any liability individually or on behalf of any other individuals for 
any act or failure to act, made in good faith in relation to the DROP or the funds of the 
DROP. 
b. ?Neither the board nor any trustee of the board shall be responsible for any reports 
furnished by any expert retained or employed by the board, but they shall be entitled to rely 
thereon as well as on certificates furnished by an accountant or an actuary, and on all 
opinions of counsel. The board shall be fully protected with respect to any action taken or 
suffered by it in good faith in reliance upon such expert, accountant, actuary or counsel, 
and all actions taken or suffered in such reliance shall be conclusive upon any person with 
any interest in the DROP. 
(5) ?Expenses. To compensate the system for the expenses of administering and operating the 
DROP, each member's DROP account shall be charged an annual administrative fee, which 
shall be reviewed and subject to increase or decrease annually. The initial expense charge of 
0.75 percent of the account balance shall be deducted from the member's DROP account after 
each fiscal year quarter at the rate of 0.1875 percent of the account's average daily balance 
during that quarter. 
(f) ?General provisions. 
(1) ?Amendment of DROP. The DROP may be amended by an ordinance of the city at any time 
and from time to time, and retroactively, if deemed necessary or appropriate, to amend in whole 
or in part any or all of the provisions of the DROP. However, except as otherwise provided by 
law, no amendment shall make it possible for any part of the DROP's funds to be used for, or 
diverted to, purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of persons entitled to benefits under 
the DROP. No amendment shall be made which has the effect of decreasing the balance of the 
DROP account of any member. 
(2) ?Facility of payment. If the board shall find that a member or other person entitled to a benefit 
under the DROP is unable to care for his affairs because of illness or accident or is a minor, the 
board may direct that any benefit due him, unless claim shall have been made for the benefit by 
a duly appointed legal representative, be paid to his spouse, a child, a parent or other blood 
relative, or to a person with whom he resides. Any payment so made shall be a complete 
discharge of the liabilities of the DROP for that benefit. 
(3) ?Information. Each member, beneficiary or other person entitled to a benefit, before any benefit 
shall be payable to him or on his account under the DROP, shall file with the board the 
information that it shall require to establish his rights and benefits under the DROP. 
(4) ?Prevention of escheat. If the board cannot ascertain the whereabouts of any person to whom a 
payment is due under the DROP, the board may, no earlier than three years from the date such 
payment is due, mail a notice of such due and owing payment to the last-known address of 
such person, as shown on the records of the board or the city. If such person has not made 
written claim therefor within three months of the date of the mailing, the board may, if it so elects 
and upon receiving advice from counsel to the DROP, direct that such payment and all 
remaining payments otherwise due such person be canceled on the records of the DROP. Upon 
such cancellation, the DROP shall have no further liability therefor except that, in the event such 
person or his beneficiary later notifies the board of his whereabouts and requests the payment 
or payments due to him under the DROP, the amount so applied shall be paid to him in 
accordance with the provisions of the DROP. 
(5) ?Written elections; notification. 
a. ?Any elections, notifications or designations made by a member pursuant to the provisions 
of the DROP shall be made in writing and filed with the board in a time and manner 
determined by the board under rules uniformly applicable to all employees similarly 
situated. The board reserves the right to change from time to time the manner for making 
notifications, elections or designations by members under the DROP if it determines after 
due deliberation that such action is justified in that it improves the administration of the 
DROP. In the event of a conflict between the provisions for making an election, notification 
or designation set forth in the DROP and such new administrative procedures, those new 
administrative procedures shall prevail. 
b. ?Each member or retiree who has a DROP account shall be responsible for furnishing the 
board with his current address and any subsequent changes in his address. Any notice 
required to be given to a member or retiree hereunder shall be deemed given if directed to 
him at the last such address given to the board and mailed by registered or certified United 
States mail. If any check mailed by registered or certified United States mail to such 
address is returned, mailing of checks will be suspended until such time as the member or 
retiree notifies the board of his address. 
(6) ?Benefits not guaranteed. All benefits payable to a member from the DROP shall be paid only 
from the assets of the member's DROP account and neither the city nor the board shall have 
any duty or liability to furnish the DROP with any funds, securities or other assets except to the 
extent required by any applicable law. 
(7) ?Construction. 
a. ?The DROP shall be construed, regulated and administered under the laws of the state, 
except where other applicable law controls. 
b. ?The titles and headings of the subsections in this section are for convenience only. In the 
case of ambiguity or inconsistency, the text, rather than the titles or headings, shall control. 
(8) ?Forfeiture of retirement benefits. Nothing in this section shall be construed to remove DROP 
participants from the application of any forfeiture provisions applicable to the system. DROP 
participants shall be subject to forfeiture of all retirement benefits, including DROP benefits. 
(9) ?Effect of DROP participation on employment. Participation in the DROP is not a guarantee of 
employment and DROP participants shall be subject to the same employment standards and 
policies that are applicable to employees who are not DROP participants. 
(Code 1993, § 63-128; Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 1-19-2000; Ord. No. 1434, § 10, 5-1-2002; Ord. No. 
1632, § 1, 2-4-2004; Ord. No. 1810, § 5, 2-15-2006) 


Sec. 54-147. - Re-employment after retirement. 
(a) ?Any retiree who is retired under this system, except for disability retirement as previously provided 
for, may be re-employed by any public or private employer, except the city, and may receive 
compensation from that employment without limiting or restricting in any way the retirement benefits 
payable under this system. Re-employment by the city shall be subject to the limitations set forth in 
this section. 
(b) ?After normal retirement. Any retiree who is retired under normal retirement pursuant to this system 
and who is re-employed as an employee after that retirement, and, by virtue of that re-employment, 
is eligible to participate in this system, shall, upon being re-employed, discontinue receipt of benefits. 
Upon re-employment, the retiree shall be deemed to be fully vested and the additional credited 
service accrued during the subsequent employment period shall be used in computing a second 
benefit amount attributable to the subsequent employment period, which benefit amount shall be 
added to the benefit determined upon the initial retirement to determine the total benefit payable 
upon final retirement. Calculations of benefits upon retirement shall be based upon the benefit 
accrual rate, average final compensation, and credited service as of that date, and the retirement 
benefit amount for any subsequent employment period shall be based upon the benefit accrual rate, 
average final compensation (based only on the subsequent employment period), and credited 
service as of the date of subsequent retirement. The amount of any death or disability benefit 
received as a result of a subsequent period of employment shall be reduced by the amount of 
accrued benefit eligible to be paid for a prior period of employment. The optional form of benefit and 
any joint pensioner selected upon initial retirement shall not be subject to change upon subsequent 
retirement except as otherwise provided herein, but the member may select a different optional form 
and joint pensioner applicable to the subsequent retirement benefit. 
(c) ?Any retiree who is retired under normal retirement pursuant to this system and who is re-employed 
by the city after that retirement, and, by virtue of that re-employment, is ineligible to participate in this 
system, shall, during the period of such re-employment, continue to receive retirement benefits 
previously earned. 
(d) ?After early retirement. Any retiree who is retired under early retirement pursuant to this system and 
who subsequently becomes an employee of the city in any capacity shall discontinue receipt of 
benefits from the system. If by virtue of that re-employment, the retiree is eligible to participate in this 
system, the retiree shall be deemed to be fully vested, and the additional credited service accrued 
during the subsequent employment period shall be used in computing a second benefit amount 
attributable to the subsequent employment period, which benefit amount shall be added to the 
benefit determined upon the initial retirement to determine the total benefit payable upon final 
retirement. Calculations of benefits upon retirement shall be based upon the benefit accrual rate, 
average final compensation, credited service and early retirement reduction factor as of that date, 
and the retirement benefit amount for any subsequent employment period shall be based upon the 
benefit accrual rate, average final compensation (based only on the subsequent employment period), 
and credited service as of the date of subsequent retirement. The amount of any death or disability 
benefit received as a result of a subsequent period of employment shall be reduced by the amount of 
accrued benefit eligible to be paid for a prior period of employment. The optional form of benefit and 
any joint pensioner selected upon initial retirement shall not be subject to change upon subsequent 
retirement except as otherwise provided herein, but the member may select a different optional form 
and joint pensioner applicable to the subsequent retirement benefit. Retirement pursuant to an early 
retirement incentive program shall be deemed early retirement for purposes of this section if the 
member was permitted to retire prior to the customary retirement date provided for in the system at 
the time of retirement. 
(e) ?Re-employment of terminated vested persons. Re-employed terminated vested persons shall not be 
subject to the provisions of this section until such time as they begin to actually receive benefits. 
Upon receipt of benefits, terminated vested persons shall be treated as normal or early retirees for 
purposes of applying the provisions of this section, and their status as early or normal retirees shall 
be determined by the date they elect to begin to receive their benefit. 
(f) ?DROP participants. Members or retirees who are or were in the deferred retirement option plan shall 
have the options provided for in this section for re-employment, or, if the DROP retiree has not 
terminated DROP participation, continued employment, as if the retiree was a retiree under normal 
retirement. Upon re-employment or continued employment following DROP participation, a DROP 
participant shall receive a distribution of his DROP account in accordance with the DROP. 
(Code 1993, § 63-129; Ord. No. 2023, § 4, 4-16-2008) 


Sec. 54-148. - Purchase of permissive credited service. 
    A member may, within six months of retirement from the plan, elect to purchase an increased benefit 
multiplier that would provide a monthly retirement benefit that is actuarially equivalent to the member 
purchasing additional years, or fractions of years, of credited service. An eligible member may purchase 
permissive service credit in the form of an incrementally higher benefit multiplier level for the participant's 
credited service that is the actuarial equivalent of up to five years of additional credited service, under the 
following terms and conditions: 
(1) ?The member contributes to the plan the full actuarial cost of the higher benefit level purchased 
hereunder such that the increase in benefit multiplier results in no cost to the plan. As part of the 
application for the purchase of this type of permissive service credit, the member shall 
contribute to the plan the cost of such purchased permissive service credit. The permissive 
service credit purchase under this section shall not be recognized or credited by the plan until 
the member has entered the DROP or retired. 
(2) ?Requests may be made by the member within six months of retirement from the plan. Payment 
by the member of the required contribution shall be made no later than the retirement date and 
shall be made in one lump sum payment, upon receipt of which, permissive service credit shall 
be recognized and credited. The term "retirement," for the purposes of this section only, is the 
date of commencement of the employee's monthly retirement benefit under this plan, or any 
other city plan or DROP, at the member's normal or early retirement date and not the 
employee's separation date. 
(3) ?To the extent permitted by law, including relevant Internal Revenue Code provisions, as 
amended from time to time, in lieu or in addition to employee contributions, the plan will accept 
inter-plan transfers (rollovers) as provided in section 54-142 to fund the purchase of the 
permissive service credit comprised of a higher benefit level provided herein. 
(4) ?Permissive service credit purchased pursuant to this section shall not count toward vesting or 
eligibility for not-in-line-of-duty disability benefits. 
(Code 1993, § 63-130; Ord. No. 2332, § III, 10-16-2013) 


Chapter 58 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Arrangement for disposal of solid waste, F.S. § 166.021(6); Florida litter law, F.S. 
§ 403.413; solid waste management, F.S. § 403.702 et seq.; local government solid waste 
responsibilities, F.S. § 403.706. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 58-1. - Individual collection by industrial waste producers; hauling of waste over city streets by 
collectors from outside city. 
(a) ?The producers of industrial wastes or the owners of premises upon which industrial waste is 
produced who personally collect, convey and dispose of industrial waste as provided in section 58-
23(1) shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the utilities director, and vehicles used by such 
producers shall be approved by the director. Collectors of refuse from outside the city who transport 
refuse over the streets of the city shall use water-tight containers for transportation of such refuse 
provided with tight covers, and the containers shall be so constructed and maintained so as to 
prevent offensive odors from escaping therefrom and to prevent refuse from being blown, dropped or 
spilled. 
(b) ?The director shall have the authority to make such other reasonable regulations concerning 
individual collection and disposal and relating to the hauling of refuse over city streets by outside 
collectors as he shall find necessary, subject to the right of appeal as set forth in section 58-22(b). 
(Code 1983, § 23-27(a), (b); Code 1993, § 66-1) 


Secs. 58-2—58-20. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL REFUSE COLLECTION SERVICES 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 58-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ashes means the residue from the burning of wood, charcoal, coal, coke or other combustible 
materials. 
    Bear management area means an area within the city in which there is a high incidence rate of 
human-bear interactions recorded by the state fish and wildlife conservation commission (FWC), 
occurring at a level that poses a potential threat to the health, safety, and welfare to the citizens, 
employees and visitors of the city and is designated as such by the director. 
    Bear-resistant household garbage container means a city-approved residential household garbage 
container with a locking mechanism that prevents access to the contents by bears. 
    Bulky waste means those items whose large size or weight precludes or complicates their handling 
by normal collection and disposal methods. 
    City-approved household trash and recyclable container means, for the purposes of this article, the 
city-owned household trash and recycle containers that are provided to customers being served by the 
city's automated solid waste collection system. 
    Commercial container means a front-end-loading container approved and provided by the city, which 
is used to store large volumes of solid waste from commercial establishments and emptied by mechanical 
means. 
    Construction and demolition debris. 
(1) ?The term "construction and demolition debris" means discarded materials generally considered 
to be not water soluble and nonhazardous in nature, including, but not limited to, steel, glass, 
brick, concrete, asphalt roofing material, pipe, gypsum wallboard, and lumber, from the 
construction or destruction of a structure as part of a construction or demolition project, or from 
the renovation or maintenance of a structure, and including rocks, soils, tree remains, trees, and 
other vegetative matter which normally results from land clearing or land development 
operations for a construction project, including such debris from construction of structures at a 
site remote from the construction or demolition project site. Mixing of construction and 
demolition debris with other types of solid waste, including material from a construction or 
demolition site which is not from the actual construction or destruction of a structure, will cause 
the resulting mixture to be classified as other than construction and demolition debris. If the 
demolition project is from a structure where hazardous wastes are or were managed, the debris 
will be considered hazardous waste and will not be considered construction and demolition 
debris as defined in this article, unless tested and the results show otherwise. 
(2) ?The term "construction and demolition debris" also includes: 
a. ?Clean cardboard, paper, plastic, wood, and metal scraps from a construction project; 
b. ?Except as provided in F.S. § 403.707(9)(j), yard trash and unpainted, non-treated wood 
scraps and wood pallets from sources other than construction or demolition projects; 
c. ?Scrap from manufacturing facilities which is the type of material generally used in 
construction projects and which would meet the definition of construction and demolition 
debris if it were generated as part of a construction or demolition project. This includes 
debris from the construction of manufactured homes and scrap shingles, wallboard, siding 
concrete, and similar materials from industrial or commercial facilities; and 
d. ?De minimis amounts of other nonhazardous wastes that are generated at construction or 
destruction projects, provided such amounts are consistent with best management 
practices of the industry. 
(3) ?Regulated asbestos-containing materials, as defined in 40 CFR 61.141, are excluded from the 
construction and demolition debris definition. 
    Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, 
cooking and consumption of food. 
    Household trash means the combination of refuse and rubbish that is normally generated from an 
occupied residence. 
    Industrial waste means building material waste resulting from erecting, removing, repairing or razing 
buildings; offal and floor sweepings from stockyards, livery fee or sale stables; offal and floor sweepings 
from poultry houses and meat markets; ashes from steam boilers; or other trash or matter originating in a 
business or industrial establishment not intended for use or sale. 
    Public services director and director mean the public services director for the city or his designee. 
    " R" sticker program means a program established to provide maximum recycling opportunity for 
those wanting an additional recycling container, by using a city-issued "R" sticker that is adhered to the lid 
of the existing household trash container. Containers using the "R" sticker containing recycling materials 
are placed curbside on the regularly scheduled recycling day. 
    Recyclable materials means those materials which are capable of being recycled, such as metal, 
glass, plastics, newspaper, cardboard and box board. The term "recyclable materials," as described here, 
is not solid waste. 
    Recycling means any process by which solid waste, or materials which would otherwise become 
solid waste, are collected, separated or processed, and reused or returned to use in the form of raw 
materials or products. 
    Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body wastes, including 
garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals or discarded materials of whatever kind, whether 
combustible or not, which tend to decay or putrefy. 
    Rubbish means nonputrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, consisting of both combustible and 
noncombustible wastes such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, 
crockery and similar materials. 
    Secured structure means a structure in which refuse is stored in such a manner as to minimize the 
attraction of bears and to serve as a bear resistant barrier during the interim between refuse discard, 
collection and disposal. A screened enclosure does not qualify as a secured structure. 
    Solid waste means sludge unregulated under the Federal Clean Water Act or Clean Air Act; sludge 
from a waste treatment works, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; or garbage, 
rubbish, refuse, special waste, or other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semi-solid, or contained 
gaseous material resulting from domestic, industrial, commercial, mining, agricultural, or governmental 
operations. For the purposes of this article, this term "solid waste" does not include infectious/medical 
waste or hazardous waste as defined in F.A.C. 62-730 or recovered materials. Recovered materials, as 
defined in section 58-160, are not solid waste. 
    Special wastes means solid wastes that can require special handling and management, including, 
but not limited to, white goods, mattresses, and furniture. 
    White goods includes inoperative and discarded refrigerators, ranges, water heaters, freezers, and 
other similar domestic and commercial large appliances. 
    Yard waste means compostable materials including grass clippings, plant trimmings and other 
vegetative matter normally associated with yard maintenance. 
(Code 1993, § 66-36; Ord. No. 2169, § I, 5-19-2010; Ord. No. 2669 , § I(66-36), 8-15-2018) 


Sec. 58-22. - Authority of public services director. 
(a) ?All refuse and recyclable material accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed 
of by the city under the supervision of the public services director, except as otherwise provided 
within this article. The director shall have the authority to make regulations concerning the days of 
collection, types and location of waste containers and such other matters pertaining to the collection, 
conveyance and disposal as he shall find necessary, and to change and modify the regulations after 
notice published in a newspaper of general circulation at least 14 days in advance of the effective 
date of such change or modification. The notice shall indicate that persons aggrieved shall have the 
right to appeal to the city council as provided in subsection (b) of this section. Such regulations or 
modifications shall not be contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(b) ?Any person aggrieved by a regulation of or fee charged by the director shall have the right of appeal 
to the city council, which shall have the authority to confirm, modify or revoke any such regulation or 
fee. 
(c) ?Bear management program. 
(1) ?A bear management program is hereby established, which provides for a container 
replacement program to reduce the human-bear interactions, which will be implemented within 
the city limits, applying additional restrictions within the bear management area as designated 
by the public services director, following consultation with the state fish and wildlife conservation 
commission (FWC). 
(2) ?Within the bear management area, responsible parties are required to comply with the 
following best management practices when the failure to do so creates, or would reasonably be 
expected to create, a lure or enticement for bears: 
a. ?Bird feeders. Bird and hummingbird feeders are allowed; however, feeders must be 
suspended on a cable or other device so that they are inaccessible to bears, and the area 
below the feeders must be kept free from the accumulation of seed debris. 
b. ?Pet food. Pet food or food bowls may not be left out overnight or unattended, unless kept in 
a secured enclosed kennel with a roof. If possible, pets are to be fed indoors. Pet food 
must be stored in a secured structure or other means that prevents access by bears. A 
screened enclosure does not qualify as a secured structure. 
(Code 1993, § 66-37; Ord. No. 2169, § I, 5-19-2010; Ord. No. 2669 , § I(66-37), 8-15-2018) 


Sec. 58-23. - Authorized collectors. 
    All refuse and recyclable material accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed 
of by the city or its designated agents, licensees, franchisees or contract representatives. It shall be 
unlawful for any unauthorized person to remove any refuse from an approved container, or to remove 
recyclable materials from an approved recyclable material container. Any person found guilty of violating 
this provision shall be punished as provided in section 1-14. No other person shall collect, convey over 
any of the streets or alleys of the city, or dispose of any refuse accumulated in the city, except as follows: 
(1) ?This article shall not prohibit the producers of industrial wastes, or the owners of premises upon 
which industrial wastes have accumulated, from personally collecting, conveying and disposing 
of industrial wastes if such service is not provided by the city, subject, however, to the rules and 
regulations of the director. 
(2) ?This article shall not prohibit collectors of refuse which has been collected outside the city limits 
from hauling such refuse over city streets, provided such collectors comply with the provisions 
of this article and with any other governing law or ordinance of the city. 
(3) ?The city has the right to refuse garbage or rubbish disposal service of any unusual or extremely 
bulky item or to require the owner or producer of waste to reduce it to such size and weight as 
can be handled with city equipment. 
(Code 1993, § 66-38; Ord. No. 2169, § I, 5-19-2010) 


Sec. 58-24. - Placement of materials for collection. 
(a) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit or cause to be placed or deposited upon any 
of the streets, sidewalks, parkways, thoroughfares, public parks or other public places of the city any 
tree trunks or limbs, or any trash, debris, paper, litter or rubbish or ashes or other discarded matter of 
whatever kind, except as specifically provided in this article. 
(b) ?Any sweepings, leaves, debris and trash resulting from ordinary trimming, care and upkeep of 
lawns, yards, shrubs, trees and hedges may be deposited for collection in an easily accessible 
location as near the street right-of-way as practicable, on the property of the owner, tenant or person 
in possession thereof or on the parkway immediately in front of and contiguous to his property, in a 
container as specified in this article. Tree trunks and limbs resulting from ordinary trimming, care and 
upkeep may be deposited for collection and shall not exceed four inches in diameter and four feet in 
length and shall be tied in bundles not exceeding 30 pounds in weight. Any or all of the matter 
permitted under this subsection is to be placed upon the parkways immediately in front of and 
contiguous to the property owned or occupied by the person depositing the material. If placed in front 
of property owned by others, the written consent of the other owner, tenant or person in possession 
of such property must be obtained. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to permit the 
placing of tree trunks or limbs resulting from the falling or removal of large trees or large numbers of 
trees or from the clearing of lots or other areas. 
(c) ?Larger tree trunks and limbs which cannot be accumulated under subsection (b) of this section may 
be treated under subsection 58-23(3). 
(d) ?The matter permitted to be placed in parkways under subsection (b) of this section shall be neatly 
placed, and, wherever possible, such matter shall be placed so as to allow convenient passage of 
persons and conveyances lawfully in such parkways. 
(e) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb or to scatter or spread about or cause to be disturbed 
or scattered or spread about any of the matter described in subsection (b) of this section. 
(f) ?For the purposes of this section, a parkway is defined as that portion of the street right-of-way 
paralleling any public thoroughfare between the curbline and the abutting property line. 
(Code 1993, § 66-39; Ord. No. 2169, § I, 5-19-2010) 


Sec. 58-25. - Special collection problems. 
(a) ?Disabled service. A resident who certifies that all occupants of the residence over the age of 18 are 
physically incapable of placing the city-approved garbage and recycling containers at the curb for 
collection may request pickup at an alternate location which is agreeable to the resident and the 
public services director. Verification from a medical doctor must be included with the certification. 
This service is not available for yard trash or bulky pickups. 
(b) ?Material from premises where infectious disease is present. The removal of wearing apparel, 
bedding or other refuse from homes or other places where highly infectious or contagious diseases 
have prevailed should be performed under the supervision and direction of the county health 
department. Such refuse shall not be placed in containers for regular collection. 
(c) ?Flammable or explosive materials. Highly flammable or explosive materials shall not be placed in 
containers for regular collection, but shall be disposed of as directed by the city fire chief at the 
expense of the owner or possessor thereof. 
(d) ?Construction debris. Materials caused by construction or repairs of buildings will not be removed by 
the city and it shall be the responsibility of the contractor or owner to remove same. 
(e) ?Electronics. Electronics such as televisions, computers, monitors and other similar electronic items 
are not to be placed for regular collection, but shall be disposed of by the owner or possessor at the 
appropriate facility. 
(f) ?Tires. Tires are not to be placed for regular collection, but shall be disposed of by the owner or 
possessor at the appropriate facility. 
(g) ?Noncompliant pickup. For any violation of this chapter regarding any pickup of solid waste or 
material referenced in this chapter, including, but not limited to, early placement, mixing garbage with 
yard trash or recycling, unauthorized accumulation or scattering of solid waste or other material, the 
public services director shall have the authority to assess an administrative charge for the actual cost 
of labor, vehicles and other materials necessary to properly transport the solid waste or other 
materials away from the customer's residential or commercial premises. For any and all successive 
noncompliant pickups during any 12-month period, the public services director, in addition to the 
administrative charge, shall have the authority to assess an administrative fee, up to and including 
$100.00, commensurate with the reasonably estimated other costs associated with addressing the 
violations. 
(Code 1993, § 66-40; Ord. No. 2169, § I, 5-19-2010; Ord. No. 2669 , § I(66-40), 8-15-2018) 


Sec. 58-26. - Ownership of refuse and recyclable material. 
    Ownership of refuse or recyclable material set out for collection or deposited on the city disposal site 
shall be vested in the city. 
(Code 1993, § 66-41; Ord. No. 2169, § I, 5-19-2010) 


Sec. 58-27. - Commercial containers. 
(a) ?The location of all commercial containers shall provide access for collection vehicles and shall be 
free of overhead obstructions such as telephone wires, etc., for a minimum height of 20 feet. All 
locations must be approved by the director. 
(b) ?The owner is responsible for maintenance of the commercial container enclosure, including gates, 
hinges, painting, etc. The area shall be kept free of litter, debris, etc. 
(c) ?The petitioner's responsibility to demonstrate compliance with the provisions of this section shall be 
required prior to receiving approval of either a preliminary site development plan, final building 
inspection request or certificate of occupancy. 
(d) ?All new commercial container locations shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of the 
city Land Development Code, as set out in part III of this volume. 
(e) ?The owner assumes all risk, and shall indemnify, defend and save harmless the city from and 
against all loss, damage, cost or expense arising in any manner on account of the enclosure. 
(Code 1993, § 66-42; Ord. No. 2169, § I, 5-19-2010) 


Sec. 58-28. - Transportation. 
    It is unlawful for any person to transport any solid waste or recovered material over any city road 
unless the solid waste or recovered material is securely tied or covered when necessary so as to prevent 
leakage or spillage. It is unlawful for any person to allow solid waste or recovered materials to spill, blow 
or drop from any vehicle on any road. 
(Code 1993, § 66-43; Ord. No. 2169, § I, 5-19-2010) 


Secs. 58-29—58-59. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - RESIDENTIAL ESTABLISHMENTS 


Sec. 58-60. - Applicability of division. 
    The provisions of this division shall apply to residential establishments. As used in this article, the 
term "residential establishments" shall describe those single-family and multifamily residences not 
engaged or licensed as a business, except for multi-unit dwellings which the director may deem 
necessary to list as commercial for accounting purposes. Multifamily residential units furnished city-owned 
containers may be charged at the residential rate under the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1993, § 66-61; Ord. No. 2169, § I, 5-19-2010) 


Sec. 58-61. - Frequency of collection. 
    Household trash accumulated by residences shall be collected twice each week and recyclable 
material shall be collected every other Wednesday, or otherwise as may be deemed necessary by the 
director. Solid waste collection will take place on all holidays except Christmas Day and Thanksgiving 
Day. 
(Code 1993, § 66-62; Ord. No. 2169, § I, 5-19-2010) 


Sec. 58-62. - Containers. 
(a) ?All household trash and recyclable material shall be placed in a city-approved household trash 
container or city-approved recycling container. Household trash must be bagged prior to being 
placed in the container to prevent wind-blown litter. 
(b) ?All yard waste, including clippings, leaves and grass, shall be placed in plastic bags and/or reusable 
plastic garbage cans with handles. Yard waste is limited to 15 30-gallon plastic bags; 15 bundles of 
tied clippings not to exceed four feet in length or four inches in diameter; 15 cans with a maximum 
capacity of 30 gallons; or a combination thereof, not to exceed four cubic yards. The weight of each 
bag, can or bundle, may not exceed 30 pounds. 
(c) ?Ashes shall be cold before being placed in a secure container and placed in the city-approved 
household trash container for collection. 
(d) ?All recyclable material shall be separated from non-recyclable material and placed in the city-
approved, city-provided recyclable container or household trash container marked with a city-
provided "R" sticker that identifies its use for recyclable material. 
(e) ?The city-provided household waste and recycle containers are the property of the city. Any willful 
misuse or destruction of said containers may result in a fine, to be set by the city, or a 
discontinuation of service. 
(Code 1993, § 66-63; Ord. No. 2169, § I, 5-19-2010) 


Sec. 58-63. - Storage of refuse; unlawful deposit or accumulation of waste. 
(a) ?No person shall place any refuse or recyclable material in any street, alley or other public place or 
upon any private property, whether owned by such person or not, within the city, except in proper 
containers for collection or other type containers under express approval granted by the director. No 
person shall throw or deposit any refuse in any lake, stream or other body of water. 
(b) ?Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse or rubbish on any premises is hereby declared to be a 
nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any existing accumulation of refuse or rubbish within 
such period as may be fixed in a written or printed notice by the city's code enforcement division 
posted on the premises or delivered to the owner-occupant of the premises shall be deemed a 
violation of this article. 
(c) ?No person shall cast, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the city any refuse upon any street, 
sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other public place or into any occupied premises within the city, or 
in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, 
alley, sewer, parkway or other public place or into any occupied premises within the city. 
(Code 1993, § 66-64; Ord. No. 2169, § I, 5-19-2010) 


Sec. 58-64. - Preparation of materials for collection. 
(a) ?Household trash. All household trash, before being placed in the city-approved household trash 
container, shall have drained from it all free liquids and be placed in a plastic bag. 
(b) ?Yard waste. Leaves, grass cuttings and other small cuttings and trimmings shall be placed in plastic 
bags and/or reusable plastic garbage cans with handles. Large clippings shall be tied in bundles not 
to exceed four feet in length, and four inches in diameter. Yard waste is limited to 15 30-gallon 
plastic bags; 15 cans with a maximum capacity of 30 gallons each; 15 bundles; or a combination 
thereof, not to exceed four cubic yards. The weight of each bag, can or bundle may not exceed 30 
pounds. 
(c) ?Separation of recyclable material. Those residents who voluntarily participate in the recycling 
program shall separate recyclable material from other garbage or rubbish and place the recyclable 
material in the city-approved recycling container provided by the city. 
(d) ?Bulky waste. Items of bulky waste such as furniture, mattresses, refrigerators or other white goods 
capable of becoming hazardous to persons shall be prepared and placed upon the parkway so that 
the hazard is removed. For example, refrigerators or other appliances having fastening devices or 
latches, other than magnetic or friction types, shall be prepared by removing the hinges or latches so 
that the door may be easily opened by light pressure from the inside. 
(e) ?Maintenance of containers and materials placed for collection. It shall be the responsibility of the 
owner or occupant to maintain the containers, bundles, bags or piles placed upon the parkway prior 
to collection. 
(f) ?Authority to make seasonal amendments to section. The director shall have the authority to make 
seasonal amendments to the provisions of this section if, in his opinion, such amendments would be 
for the public health, welfare or safety of the citizens of the city. Such amendments shall be 
promulgated pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of section 58-22. 
(g) ?Recycling. All recyclable material shall be placed in the city-approved recycling container furnished 
by the city to the residential user; if more recyclable storage is needed, the city will provide, at no 
cost, a sticker with the letter "R" that may be placed on the city-approved household trash container 
identifying its use for recyclable material. Material shall be placed in the designated city-approved 
recycling container with the lid completely closed, and shall not be bagged. Materials placed for 
recycling shall only include items designated by the city. Mixing of nondesignated items, garbage or 
yard trash with recycling will be subject to refusal by the solid waste collector and may incur costs 
and fees in accordance with the provisions of section 58-25(g). The recycling container must be free 
of garbage, and recyclable items in the recycling container must be sufficiently free of food waste, so 
it does not attract bears. 
(Code 1993, § 66-65; Ord. No. 2169, § I, 5-19-2010; Ord. No. 2669 , § I(66-65), 8-15-2018) 


Sec. 58-65. - Placement of materials for collection. 
(a) ?All containers, bags of yard waste or bundles shall be placed upon the parkway no earlier than 5:00 
p.m. of the day before scheduled collection, and no later than 7:00 a.m. on the day of the scheduled 
collection for residential curbside service. City-approved containers and customer-owned yard waste 
containers must be removed or rolled back from the city right-of-way no later than 7:00 p.m. on day 
of collection. Containers, when not placed for pickup, are to be placed out of view of roadway and 
pedestrian traffic. Containers that are not removed by 7:00 p.m. on the day of scheduled collection 
may be assessed a roll-back fee. 
(b) ?Residences receiving backyard collection of garbage will utilize a collection point designated by the 
director, placing containers as specified in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c) ?Additional restrictions within bear management areas. Garbage containers containing household 
garbage must be maintained in a secured structure, inaccessible to bears, such as a garage or 
bearproof enclosure. The containers must be placed at the curb or the point designated by the public 
services director for collection, no earlier than 5:00 a.m. and not later than 7:00 a.m. on collection 
day. As an alternative, residents may use a city-approved bear-resistant household garbage 
container in place of the standard garbage container, in which case the additional restrictions in this 
section may be avoided. 
(Code 1993, § 66-66; Ord. No. 2169, § I, 5-19-2010; Ord. No. 2669 , § I(66-66), 8-15-2018) 


Sec. 58-66. - Maximum quantity collected on single day; collection of bulky waste. 
(a) ?A maximum limit of two city-approved household trash containers of 95-gallon capacity will be 
collected on a single collection day, unless otherwise approved by the director. 
(b) ?A maximum weekly limit for the collection of bulky waste, yard waste or a combination thereof is four 
cubic yards per residence. 
(Code 1993, § 66-67; Ord. No. 2169, § I, 5-19-2010) 


Sec. 58-67. - Fee schedule; residential. 
(a) ?Single-family units. Any single-family living unit with kitchen facilities shall be charged a minimum 
monthly fee for curbside collection as follows: 
RESIDENTIAL FEE SCHEDULE 
Nu
mb
er 
of 
Ho
use
hol
d  
Tra
sh 
Con
tain
ers 
Min
imu
m
Mo
nthl
y 
Fee 
1 
$17
.00 
2 
$25
.00 
 
(b) ?Multifamily dwellings; mobile home parks. The following minimum monthly fees shall be charged as 
service is available, unless computed at nonresidential rates, whether service is used or not: 
(1) ?Apartment house: $17.00 per apartment. 
(2) ?Condominium, townhouse, etc.: $17.00 per condominium, townhouse, etc. 
(3) ?Mobile home park: $17.00 per residential unit for each water bill (minimum or otherwise) 
charged. 
(c) ?Containers. Each residence shall be issued one city-approved household trash container and one 
city-approved recycling container. An additional container shall be available upon request and 
payment of a $60.00 fee per container. Director approval is required for requests of more than two 
household trash containers. 
(d) ?Rate adjustments. Rates for residential sanitation services may be adjusted annually, effective each 
October 1, consistent with the Refuse Rate Index (RRI), the Consumer Price Index (CPI), or three 
percent, whichever is less. Any rate adjustments shall be established by the city council as part of its 
approval of the annual budget. The city council shall have the authority to set a rate adjustment that 
differs from the RRI or CPI; however, any rate adjustment that exceeds three percent must be 
adopted by ordinance. 
(e) ?Senior citizen discount and/or permanently disabled. Anyone who is over 65 years of age or 
permanently disabled satisfying the requirements set by city council resolution, and having on file an 
application at the city utility billing division prior to May 19, 2010 for a $5.30 per month reduction in 
fees will continue to receive the discounted rate. No new discounted or reduced rates will be 
provided after May 19, 2010. 
(f) ?Backyard service. The occupant must request backyard service, and shall pay to the city the sum of 
$28.58 for such service. Rates shall not be reduced for six months after backyard service is initiated. 
Backyard service may be discontinued if the director determines backyard pickup would cause 
undue problems for the sanitation division crews. 
(g) ?Bulky waste/yard waste/white goods. This fee shall include materials that are too large for normal 
collection. Each residential dwelling receiving curbside collection services may receive a bulky 
waste, yard waste (or a combination thereof) pickup of up to four cubic yards per week at no 
additional cost. Individual collections in excess of this criteria shall incur a fee of $10.00 for every 
additional cubic yard. Non-bundled yard waste will be charged at a rate of $10.00 for the first four 
cubic yards and $10.00 for every additional cubic yard thereafter. An additional $10.00 per item 
charge for extraordinary handling, which includes Freon-containing items such as refrigerators and 
air conditioners, is required. 
(h) ?Deposit. For each customer requesting service under this division, a utility deposit of $30.00 shall 
be paid unless otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(i) ?Deposit for newly annexed property. The city will waive the deposit requirement for any residential 
customer who begins receiving city service within 24 months of annexing into the city and who 
maintains a good payment history with the city. 
(j) ?Container return. City-approved containers that have been collected due to non-payment will be 
assessed a $20.00 return fee. Containers will be returned the same day if past-due balance and 
return fees are paid prior to 12:00 noon. Payments received after 12:00 noon will result in the 
containers being returned on the next city business day. 
(k) ?Roll-back. City-approved and city-provided containers, as well as customer-owned yard waste 
containers, that are not removed by 7:00 p.m. on the day of scheduled collection, may be assessed 
a $20.00 roll-back fee for the removal of said containers from city rights-of-way. 
(l) ?Disabled service. There are no additional charges, if the requirements of section 58-25(a) are 
satisfied. 
(Code 1993, § 66-68; Ord. No. 2169, § I, 5-19-2010; Ord. No. 2550, § 1, 10-7-2015; Ord. No. 
2669 , § I(66-68), 8-15-2018) 


Sec. 58-68. - Billing; applicability of fees to vacant premises. 
(a) ?The charges for the fees provided in this section shall be added as a separate item on the city 
utilities bill provided to each sanitation customer located within the city limits. 
(b) ?The garbage and refuse collection fees shall be applicable until water services are disconnected by 
the city or until written notice of vacancy has been furnished to the city's utility billing division. Any 
city resident requesting discontinuation of sanitation service must complete and sign a sanitation 
agreement provided by the utility billing division. This agreement enables a resident to continue 
water and sewer services while the residence is unoccupied and have sanitation charges reduced to 
$12.00 per month or to $8.00 for those qualified under subsection 58-67(e). Services must be 
discontinued for a minimum of 30 days. Failure to notify the city of re-occupancy could result in the 
full sanitation charges being billed retroactively from the date of discontinuance. If water is 
discontinued on the first or any day up to the 15th day in a billing month, then customers shall only 
be billed for one-half of a month's garbage and refuse collection fees. 
(c) ?The fact that any place of abode or any place of business is occupied shall be prima facie evidence 
that garbage is being produced and accumulated upon such premises and that fees for the collection 
and disposal thereof are due the city. 
(Code 1993, § 66-69; Ord. No. 2169, § I, 5-19-2010) 


Secs. 58-69—58-94. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 3. - COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS 


Sec. 58-95. - Applicability of division. 
    The provisions of this division shall apply to municipal refuse collection from commercial 
establishments. As used in this article, the term "commercial establishments" shall include lodges, 
churches, schools, motels, hotels, manufacturers, retail and wholesale establishments, general offices 
and all other places where garbage or trash may accumulate and which are not described in this article 
as residential. For administration purposes, multifamily residential property may be classified as 
commercial by the director. 
(Code 1993, § 66-86; Ord. No. 2169, § I, 5-19-2010) 


Sec. 58-96. - Frequency of collection. 
    Hotels, restaurants and all other businesses and institutions shall enter into an agreement with the 
director for the frequency of collection. Where necessary to protect the public health, the director shall 
have the authority to require that more frequent collections be made. 
(Code 1993, § 66-87; Ord. No. 2169, § I, 5-19-2010) 


Sec. 58-97. - Furnishing of containers. 
    Where deemed necessary by the director, the city will furnish a container to the user, subject to his 
compliance with the rules and regulations governing use of city-owned containers. Where deemed 
necessary by the director, due to volume, weight or acid content of refuse, the user may be required to 
furnish the container. Replacement containers shall be as follows: 
(1) ?If a commercial customer desires to change his current container for reasons other than the 
container is no longer able to contain the garbage (bottom of container has rusted out), the 
commercial customer shall pay the full cost of a replacement container. 
(2) ?If a container has been placed at a business location less than 12 months and the container is 
no longer able to contain garbage due to the type of materials (e.g., fertilizer, chemicals, grease, 
etc.) placed in the container at a business location, the commercial customer shall pay the full 
cost of a replacement container. 
(Code 1993, § 66-88; Ord. No. 2169, § I, 5-19-2010) 


Sec. 58-98. - Storage of refuse; unlawful deposit or accumulation of waste. 
(a) ?No person shall place any refuse in any street, alley or other public place or upon any private 
property, whether owned by such person or not, within the city, except in proper containers for 
collection, or in metal or plastic containers or other type containers under express approval granted 
by the director. No person shall throw or deposit any refuse in any lake, stream or other body of 
water. No merchant or storekeeper shall sweep his place of business or store into the street, but the 
sweepings shall be gathered into a receptacle and placed at a location approved by the director as 
provided in this article. 
(b) ?Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse or rubbish on any premises is hereby declared to be a 
nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any existing accumulation of refuse or rubbish within 
such period as may be fixed in a written or printed notice of the city's code enforcement posted on 
the premises or delivered to the owner or occupant of the premises shall be deemed a violation of 
this article. 
(c) ?No person shall cast, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the city any refuse upon any street, 
sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other public place or into any occupied premises within the city, or 
in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, 
alley, sewer, parkway or other public place or into any occupied premises within the city. 
(Code 1993, § 66-89; Ord. No. 2169, § I, 5-19-2010) 


Sec. 58-99. - Preparation of materials for collection. 
(a) ?Garbage. All garbage, before being placed in approved containers for collection, shall have drained 
from it all free liquids and may be wrapped in paper. 
(b) ?Rubbish. All rubbish shall be drained of liquid before being deposited for collection. All cans and 
bottles which have contained food or foodstuffs shall be thoroughly rinsed and drained before being 
deposited for collection. All paperboard boxes and wood boxes shall be broken down before being 
placed in the container for collection. 
(c) ?Ashes. Ash containers shall be made of metal. Ashes must be cold before being placed in the 
container for collection. 
(d) ?Industrial wastes. Industrial wastes shall be sorted, held, kept and consolidated by the owner 
thereof, or the owner of the premises, subject to the rules and regulations of the director. 
(e) ?White goods. White goods capable of becoming hazardous to persons shall be prepared and placed 
for pickup so that the hazard is removed. For example, refrigerators or other appliances having 
fastening devices or latches, other than magnetic or friction types, shall be prepared by removing the 
hinges or latches so that the door may be easily opened by light pressure from the inside. 
(f) ?Yard waste. Leaves, grass cuttings and other small cuttings and trimmings shall be placed in plastic 
bags and/or reusable plastic garbage cans with handles. Large clippings shall be tied in bundles not 
to exceed four feet in length, and four inches in diameter. The weight of each bag, can or bundle 
may not exceed 30 pounds. 
(g) ?Authority to make seasonal amendments to section. The director shall have the authority to make 
seasonal amendments to the provisions of this section if, in his opinion, such amendments would be 
for the public health, welfare or safety of the citizens of the city. Such amendments shall be 
promulgated pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of section 58-22. 
(h) ?Additional restrictions within bear management areas. Commercial garbage collection customers 
which are located within designated bear management areas are required to report any incidence of 
a bear accessing or attempting to access refuse containers on the customer's property to the city 
public services department within 48 hours. 
(Code 1993, § 66-90; Ord. No. 2169, § I, 5-19-2010; Ord. No. 2669 , § I(66-90), 8-15-2018) 


Sec. 58-100. - Location of containers. 
    The location of containers serviced by the city or its designated agents, licensees, contract 
representatives or franchisees shall be designated by the director. Once the container location has been 
established, no change of location is permissible without the approval of the director. 
(Code 1993, § 66-91; Ord. No. 2169, § I, 5-19-2010) 


Sec. 58-101. - Unauthorized use of containers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of refuse or industrial waste in any commercial refuse 
container unless such person has contracted with the city for use of the refuse container or the person 
has been given authority to use the refuse container by the person who has contracted with the city for 
the use of the refuse container. Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be punished as 
provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1993, § 66-92; Ord. No. 2169, § I, 5-19-2010) 


Sec. 58-102. - Trespass in containers. 
(a) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or be inside of any commercial refuse container furnished 
by the city. For purposes of this section, it shall be prima facie evidence that a refuse container is a 
commercial refuse container furnished by the city if it bears one or more of the following sets of 
words on its exterior surface: 
(1) ?"City of Apopka;" 
(2) ?"Tow away zone: Cars blocking this container will be removed at owners' expense;" 
(3) ?"Fifty dollar ($50.00) fine for unauthorized use;" or 
(4) ?"Fifty dollar ($50.00) fine for dumping household garbage in this container." 
(b) ?No arrest shall be made for trespass in refuse containers if at the time of the suspected violation the 
person demonstrates that he is an employee of the city sanitation division acting within the course 
and scope of the duties of his employment. 
(Code 1993, § 66-93; Ord. No. 2169, § I, 5-19-2010) 


Sec. 58-103. - Fee schedule; nonresidential. 
(a) ?Fees; curbside pickups. Nonresidential curbside pickup may be provided at the discretion of the 
director. It is limited to those locations where normal access of sanitation division vehicles is 
restricted and weekly demand does not exceed two cubic yards of refuse per week. The following 
schedule shall be the minimum fees for nonresidential curbside pickup: 
NONRESIDENTIAL CURBSIDE PICKUP  
(TWO WEEKLY PICKUPS) 
Nu
mb
er 
of 
Con
tain
ers 
Min
imu
m 
Mo
nthl
y 
Fee 
1 
$26
.00 
2 
$53
.00 
Gre
ate
r 
tha
n 
two 
$26
.00 
per 
con
tain
er 
 
(b) ?Containers. Each business that receives curbside service shall be issued one city-approved refuse 
container and one city-approved recycling container. Additional containers shall be available upon 
request and payment of a $60.00 fee, per container. 
(c) ?Extra pickups; containers two cubic yards or larger. If additional pickups are required for containers 
two cubic yards or larger, at times other than the customer's original pickup schedule, the minimum 
charge per occurrence shall be: 
(1) ?Two-cubic-yard container: $30.00; 
(2) ?Four-cubic-yard container: $40.00; 
(3) ?Six-cubic-yard container: $50.00; and 
(4) ?Eight-cubic-yard container: $60.00. 
This service will be provided if scheduled with the public services department before 11:00 a.m. on 
regular business days. This charge will also apply to any container that could not be serviced due to 
circumstances beyond the city's control, e.g., a vehicle blocking the container, incorrect materials in a 
container, excessive debris around containers, etc. 
(d) ?Eight-cubic-yard containers. The following schedule shall be used for establishing fees for each 
eight-cubic-yard container: 
EIGHT-CUBIC-YARD CONTAINERS 
Nu
mb
er 
of 
We
ekly  
Pick
ups 
Min
imu
m 
Mo
nthl
y 
Fee 
1 
$13
1.6
0 
2 
$26
3.2
1 
3 
$39
4.8
1 
4 
$52
6.4
2 
5 
$65
8.0
2 
6 
$78
9.6
2 
7 
$92
1.2
3 
 
(e) ?Six-cubic-yard containers. The following schedule shall be used for establishing fees for each six-
cubic-yard container: 
SIX-CUBIC-YARD CONTAINERS 
Nu
mb
er 
of 
We
ekly  
Pick
ups 
Min
imu
m 
Mo
nthl
y 
Fee 
1 
$11
4.3
6 
2 
$22
8.7
3 
3 
$34
3.0
9 
4 
$45
7.4
5 
5 
$57
1.8
1 
6 
$68
6.1
8 
7 
$80
0.5
4 
 
(f) ?Four-cubic-yard containers. The following schedule shall be used for establishing fees for each four-
cubic-yard container: 
FOUR-CUBIC-YARD CONTAINERS 
Nu
mb
er 
of 
We
ekly  
Pick
ups 
Min
imu
m 
Mo
nthl
y 
Fee 
1 
$78
.61 
2 
$15
7.2
2 
3 
$23
5.8
3 
4 
$31
4.4
4 
5 
$39
3.0
5 
6 
$47
1.6
6 
7 
$55
0.2
7 
 
(g) ?Two-cubic-yard containers. The following schedule shall be used for establishing fees for each two-
cubic-yard container: 
TWO-CUBIC-YARD CONTAINERS 
Nu
mb
er 
of 
We
ekly  
Pick
ups 
Min
imu
m 
Mo
nthl
y 
Fee 
1 
$53
.19 
2 
$10
6.3
8 
3 
$15
5.5
7 
4 
$21
2.7
6 
5 
$26
5.9
5 
6 
$31
9.1
4 
7 
$37
2.3
3 
 
(h) ?Rate adjustments. Rates for commercial sanitation services may be adjusted annually, effective 
each October 1, consistent with the Refuse Rate Index (RRI), the Consumer Price Index (CPI), or 
three percent, whichever is less. Any rate adjustments shall be established by the city council as part 
of its approval of the annual budget. The city council shall have the authority to set a rate adjustment 
that differs from the RRI or CPI; however, any rate adjustment that exceeds three percent must be 
adopted by ordinance. 
(i) ?Compacted refuse. Compacted commercial refuse will be billed for at a rate three times the normal 
rate for that size of container. 
(j) ?Sharing of containers. If more than one commercial establishment wishes to share a container, it will 
be allowed; provided, however, that the parties agree in writing to share the total cost of the required 
service. Each party shall pay a minimum of $16.00 per month. This written agreement shall be 
initiated by the parties, and a copy of the written agreement shall be presented to the city utility billing 
division or public services department to initiate service. 
(k) ?Additional container services. 
(1) ?Install lock: ..... $50.00. 
(2) ?Replace lock: ..... ?10.00 
(3) ?Steam clean container: ..... ?55.00 
(4) ?Container rental for special events: $130.00 for one pickup. 
(5) ?Extra pickups: See subsection (c) of this section. 
(l) ?Consolidation of fees for multiple-customer site. Commercial sites where there are a large number of 
individual stores bound together by association or lease, such as malls, shopping centers or the 
downtown shopping area, shall pay for the number and placement of refuse containers in total rather 
than on an individual basis. 
(m) ?Bulky waste/yard waste/white goods. The fee for bulky and yard waste over and above the number 
of pickups per week that the business is currently paying for shall be a minimum fee of $30.00 for up 
to four cubic yards and $15.00 for each additional cubic yard. The fee for white goods shall be a 
minimum $30.00 for the first two items and an additional $10.00 for each item thereafter. An 
additional $10.00 per item charge for extraordinary handling, which includes Freon-containing items 
such as refrigerators and air conditioners, is required. Arrangements for pickup shall be made 
through the public services department two business days in advance. 
(n) ?Deposit. For each customer requesting service under this division, a utility deposit equivalent to two 
months of garbage service shall be paid by each customer residing in the city, unless otherwise 
provided in this chapter. 
(o) ?Deposit for newly annexed property. The city will waive the deposit requirement for any commercial 
customer who begins receiving city service within 24 months of annexing into the city and who 
maintains a good payment history with the city. 
(p) ?Container return. City-approved containers that have been collected due to non-payment will be 
assessed a $30.00 return fee. Containers will be returned the same day if past-due balance and 
return fees are paid prior to 12:00 noon. Payments received after 12:00 noon will result in the 
containers being returned on the next city business day. 
(Code 1993, § 66-94; Ord. No. 2169, § I, 5-19-2010) 


Sec. 58-104. - Billing; applicability of fees to vacant premises. 
(a) ?The charges for the fees provided in this division shall be added as a separate item on the city 
utilities bill of each water customer located within the city limits where water is officially in service. 
Bulky waste fees, when such waste is scheduled for pickup, are added to the city utilities bill. 
(b) ?The garbage and refuse collection fees shall be applicable until water services are disconnected by 
the city or until written notice of vacancy has been furnished to the city utility billing division. If water 
is discontinued on the first or any day up to the 15th day in a billing month, then customers shall only 
be billed for one-half of a month's garbage and refuse collection fees. 
(c) ?The fact that any place of abode or any place of business is occupied shall be prima facie evidence 
that garbage is being produced and accumulated upon such premises, and that fees for the 
collection and disposal thereof are due the city. 
(Code 1993, § 66-95; Ord. No. 2169, § I, 5-19-2010) 


Secs. 58-105—58-121. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - PRIVATE REFUSE COLLECTION SERVICES 


Sec. 58-122. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Containers means either open-top or scow-type containers used only for nonputrescible materials, or 
enclosed containers such as the kind typically used with compaction devices, of ten cubic yards' capacity 
or larger. 
    Department head means the person designated by the mayor. 
    Franchisee means the person proposing to provide the service under a franchise. 
    Garbage, industrial wastes, refuse and rubbish have the same definitions as provided in section 58-
21. 
    Service encompasses the use of roll-on/roll-off containers as used with mechanical pickup devices or 
compaction devices, or both. 
(Code 1993, § 66-126; Ord. No. 734, § I(1), 11-4-1992) 


Sec. 58-123. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Violations of this article shall be prosecuted in the manner provided by section 1-14. 
(Code 1993, § 66-127; Ord. No. 734, § II, 11-4-1992) 


Sec. 58-124. - Additional remedies. 
    All remedies provided in this article shall be deemed cumulative and additional and not in lieu of or 
exclusive of each other, or of any other remedy available to the city, at law or in equity. If the city shall 
prevail in any action arising under this article, the franchisee shall pay the city's costs and any and all 
attorney fees thereafter charged to the city. 
(Code 1993, § 66-128; Ord. No. 734, § I(11), 11-4-1992) 


Sec. 58-125. - Warranty regarding conflict of interest. 
    A franchisee under this article represents and warrants to the city that no appointed or elected city 
official, officer, employee or agent has any interest, either directly or indirectly, in the business of the 
franchisee to be conducted under this article. 
(Code 1993, § 66-129; Ord. No. 734, § I(16), 11-4-1992) 


Sec. 58-126. - Effective area of franchise. 
    A franchise granted under this article shall be effective within and upon: 
(1) ?The city's corporate limits as they may from time to time exist. 
(2) ?All governmental facilities located within the city's corporate limits. 
(Code 1993, § 66-130; Ord. No. 734, § I(14), 11-4-1992) 


Sec. 58-127. - Compliance with franchise. 
    If a franchisee under this article shall at any time fail to comply with any of the provisions of the 
franchise, unless such failure is beyond the franchisee's control because of matters deemed to be an act 
of God, the city, after written notice to the franchisee, may revoke the franchise and render it void and of 
no further effect. 
(Code 1993, § 66-131; Ord. No. 734, § I(17), 11-4-1992) 


Sec. 58-128. - Amendment of franchise; authority to prescribe additional regulations. 
    The city reserves the right to amend the franchise granted under this article at any time and in any 
manner that the city deems necessary for the health, safety or welfare of the public. The city also 
reserves the right to prescribe, from time to time, reasonable rules and regulations further governing the 
franchisee's operations under this article, including, but not limited to, hours and frequency of container 
pickup. These rules may be issued through the department head or his designee, and they need not be 
memorialized in an ordinance revision or further formal action by the city council, the city council's 
approval of the ordinance from which this article is derived being an approval that the regulations should 
be so issued. 
(Code 1993, § 66-132; Ord. No. 734, § I(18), 11-4-1992) 


Sec. 58-129. - Service of notices. 
    All notices required in this article to be given by the city to a franchisee, except where specifically 
provided otherwise, may be effected either by hand-delivery to any franchisee employee, or by United 
States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the franchisee at its last-known business address. All notices 
required to be given to the city shall be given to both the department head and the city clerk either by 
hand-delivery or by United States certified mail, postage prepaid, addressed to: Solid Waste, City of 
Apopka, P.O. Box 1229, Apopka, Florida 32704-1229, and City Clerk, City of Apopka, P.O. Box 1229, 
Apopka, Florida 32704-1229. 
(Code 1993, § 66-133; Ord. No. 734, § I(10), 11-4-1992) 


Sec. 58-130. - Authority of franchisee; service contracts. 
(a) ?A franchisee under this article shall be empowered and authorized to provide roll-off service. The 
franchisee will either furnish all necessary trucks and other equipment to perform such services, or 
will contract with other persons duly licensed by the city for the furnishing of trucks and equipment; 
provided, however, that at all times the trucks and equipment shall comply with the requirements 
provided in this article for trucks and equipment owned and operated by the franchisee. 
(b) ?The franchisee may contract to provide services with any person within the city if such person has 
first requested the service. Such contracts must be approved by the department head or his 
designee prior to or within ten calendar days of the placement of the containers for service. For each 
container placed for service without a contract having been submitted to the department head by 
such date, an inspection and administration late fee of $50.00 shall be paid by the franchisee to the 
city. The contract shall not exceed the term of the franchise. Further, all contracts must specify the 
container delivery date at the service site. The franchisee agrees to provide the solid waste division 
with the location of its containers, and the names and addresses of and numbers of pickups to be 
made for each of the persons contracting for service; and the franchisee also recognizes that any 
contract between the franchisee and such persons has no effect whatsoever upon the city's decision 
to grant the franchise or any renewal decision made thereafter. If the department head disapproves a 
contract and the subject container remains in service more than 48 hours after telephone or written 
notice by the city to the franchisee to remove the container, or if any container should remain in 
service at any location more than 48 hours after telephone or written notice from the city to the 
franchisee to remove the container, then, in either or both cases, the franchisee shall pay the city 
$50.00 per day until the container is removed. 
(c) ?The franchisee shall provide the equipment and frequency of service as needed by the persons 
contracting for service and as approved by the department head. 
(d) ?The franchisee shall dispose of waste only at landfills approved by the appropriate local, state and 
federal governmental agencies. 
(e) ?All lease or purchase arrangements for compaction equipment and for maintenance or service 
charges for the containers agreed upon between the franchisee and the persons contracting for 
service shall be set forth in the contracts between the franchisee and such persons, and approved by 
the department head pursuant to this section. Further, the contracts between the franchisee and 
such persons shall not include a franchise or city fee. The franchisee shall give the city prior written 
notice of any material changes in the contracts between the franchisee and such persons, including, 
but not limited to, changes in the schedule of pickups, types of containers, contract terms and so 
forth. 
(Code 1993, § 66-134; Ord. No. 734, § I(2), 11-4-1992) 


Sec. 58-131. - Franchise fees; billing; records and reports. 
(a) ?Pickup fee. A franchisee under this article shall pay the city a charge of $25.00 for each container 
pickup. The charge shall be paid monthly, and shall be based upon the number of container pickups 
by the franchisee from the persons contracting for service during the preceding month, whether or 
not the franchisee bills such persons for the pull. It is hereby understood that, for the privilege of 
doing business within the city limits, the city levies a fee of $25.00 per pull on the franchisee, not on 
the persons contracting for service. 
(b) ?Required records; annual report. 
(1) ?The franchisee shall furnish the department head with an original and one copy of an annual 
report on or before the 45th day following the end of the franchisee's fiscal year. The report date 
shall be submitted to the department head on the date of the franchisee's acceptance of the 
franchise, and the report shall be prepared by an independent certified public accountant in 
accordance with generally accepted auditing standards. The report shall reflect the accuracy of 
the franchisee's payments to the city as defined in this article, and shall include, but not be 
limited to, and shall ensure, the following: 
a. ?That all city accounts are properly coded to reflect charges accrued to the city. 
b. ?That the number of city-related container pickups is correctly reported to the city. 
c. ?That all city payments are correctly computed and remitted to the city on a timely basis, or 
the interest payment provision of subsection (e) of this section shall apply. 
(2) ?In addition to the annual report, the city auditors shall have the right to audit the franchisee's 
city franchise books and records, and, in the city's discretion, all other related books and 
records. 
(3) ?During the term of the franchise or its renewal, the franchisee shall make its city franchise 
books and records, and, in the city's discretion, all other related books and records, including, 
but not limited to, dump tickets, customer invoices and customer transaction files, available to 
the city at all reasonable times. Failure to furnish the city with the report, or to maintain complete 
and accurate city franchise and all other related books and records, or to make such books and 
records available to the city, shall be considered a material breach of the franchise, and the city 
shall be entitled to terminate the franchise and to collect any damages resulting therefrom. The 
franchisee must keep all franchise and all other related books and records on file for not less 
than three years from the termination of the franchise by either party, or the termination of the 
two-year franchise term, whichever is later. 
(c) ?Billing; right to discontinue service. The franchisee shall have the sole responsibility for the billing 
and collection of all charges described in this section. Billings shall be monthly, and payable on or 
before the 15th day of the succeeding month. If bills are not paid within this time, the franchisee shall 
have the right, provided that the franchisee may otherwise legally do so, to discontinue all services 
for non-payment, after giving the city 15 days' prior written notice that such services will be 
discontinued, and after receiving written approval from the department head to so discontinue the 
services. 
(d) ?Dump tickets. The franchisee shall ensure that all dump tickets are completed at the landfill site and 
contain the following information: 
(1) ?Customer name and service site location; or 
(2) ?Customer account number. 
(e) ?Administrative fee; monthly statement; late payment penalty. 
(1) ?The franchisee shall pay the city a fee of $80.00 per month for administrative and inspection 
costs and expenses incurred by the city in connection with the franchise. This fee shall be 
payable monthly from all franchisees to the city, beginning 30 days after the effective date of the 
franchise and continuing for the duration of the franchise. This fee shall be credited monthly 
against the franchise pickup fee. 
(2) ?All statements of fees and charges by the franchisee for pulls during the month shall be 
submitted to the department head on or before the 25th day following the end of the 
franchisee's fiscal month. These statements shall specify the previous month's account 
activities as specified in this section, and shall include the account names, the account 
numbers, the number of container pickups during the month, and the names of all discontinued 
accounts. Failure to submit any of the fees and charges specified or referred to in this section 
on or before the 25th day of each month as required shall result in a penalty at the rate of ten 
percent of the monthly obligation outstanding. In addition to any monthly obligation outstanding 
and any penalty attached thereto, the franchisee shall pay interest of one percent per month (12 
percent per year) on the total unpaid balance. Failure to submit any statements, addenda or 
fees and charges shall be considered a material breach of this article, and shall allow the city to 
terminate the franchise as further defined in section 58-138. 
(Code 1993, § 66-135; Ord. No. 734, § I(3), 11-4-1992; Ord. No. 1090, § 2, 7-2-1997; Ord. No. 
1599, § I, 9-17-2003) 


Sec. 58-132. - Term of franchise. 
(a) ?The term of a franchise under this article shall be for three years. An acceptance of the provisions, 
conditions and stipulations of the franchise shall be in writing, contain the franchisee's local address, 
and be filed with the city clerk within 15 days of the adoption of the franchise. The city reserves the 
right to review, from time to time, each franchisee's agreement to ensure compliance. 
(b) ?The term may be extended for an additional two years, at the sole option of the city, by written 
notice to the franchisee not less than 30 days prior to the expiration of the current term. 
(Code 1993, § 66-136; Ord. No. 734, § I(4), 11-4-1992; Ord. No. 1090, § 3, 7-2-1997) 


Sec. 58-133. - Failure to provide adequate service. 
(a) ?If a franchisee under this article fails to provide adequate services to the persons contracting for 
service by reason of any breach of contract or negligent failure to adequately perform the duties and 
obligations set out in this article, as determined solely by the city, the city may, at its sole option, after 
written notice, terminate the franchise. 
(b) ?If other franchisees default or otherwise fail to provide adequate services, in the sole determination 
of the city, the city may, at the franchisee's request, or at the request of the city, grant permission to 
another franchisee to provide the services or temporary services, or both of these things, if the 
franchisee may reasonably do so given the franchisee's equipment and schedule, and provided that 
a reasonable price can be determined by the franchisee, the city and the persons contracting for 
services for the services' undertaking and completion. 
(c) ?If the franchisee sells or transfers its business or substantially all of its assets, the franchisee shall 
give the city at least 15 days' prior written notice of such sale or transfer. 
(Code 1993, § 66-137; Ord. No. 734, § I(5), (6), 11-4-1992) 


Sec. 58-134. - Liability of franchisee; indemnification of city; insurance. 
(a) ?The privileges granted by this article are granted upon the express condition that the franchisee 
shall be liable for all damages or injury to persons or property caused by its neglect or 
mismanagement, or by the actions of any of its employees while engaged in the services, during the 
life of the franchise. Should the city be sued therefrom, the franchisee shall be notified of and have 
the duty to defend such suit; provided, however, that the city has the sole option to defend itself or to 
hire independent counsel and thereafter to tax all such defense costs and fees to the franchisee. The 
franchisee specifically agrees to pay any such judgment rendered against the city in any such case, 
and to reimburse the city, in full, for all costs and fees on appeal. 
(b) ?The attorneys chosen by the franchisee to represent the city in any suit concerning matters included 
within this section shall be approved by the city, unless the city chooses to represent itself as 
provided in subsection (a) of this section. The franchisee shall indemnify and hold harmless the city 
and its agents, elected or appointed officials, officers and employees from any and all liability, claims, 
demands, damages, expenses, fees, penalties, suits, proceedings, actions and costs of actions, 
including costs and attorney fees, and costs and attorney fees on appeal, of any kind or nature, 
arising or growing out of or in any way connected with the franchisee's activities permitted under the 
franchise. 
(c) ?The franchisee further agrees to purchase and maintain in good standing an insurance policy in the 
following type and amount: 
(1) ?Comprehensive general liability: 
a. ?Bodily injury coverage shall be for not less than $1,000,000.00 for each occurrence and not 
less than $1,000,000.00 aggregate. Property damage coverage shall be not less than 
$500,000.00 for each occurrence and $500,000.00 aggregate; or 
b. ?Bodily injury and property damage coverage shall be in a combined single limit of not less 
than $1,000,000.00 for each occurrence and $1,000,000.00 aggregate. 
(2) ?Business automobile liability coverage shall be for not less than $500,000.00 per occurrence. 
The city shall be named as an additional insured under the policy. The policy must provide that the city 
shall be given 30 days' written notice prior to cancellation or modification, and a copy of the policy, or a 
certificate of insurance, shall be filed with the city clerk's office on or before the effective date of the 
franchise and on or before the effective date of each policy renewal period. 
(Code 1993, § 66-138; Ord. No. 734, § I(7), 11-4-1992) 


Sec. 58-135. - Compliance with other regulations. 
(a) ?A franchisee under this article shall, at its sole expense, procure from all local, state and federal 
governmental and agency authorities having jurisdiction over the operations of the franchisee all 
licenses, certificates, permits or other authorizations which may be necessary for the conduct of the 
franchisee's operations. The franchisee shall pay all taxes and license, certification, permit and 
examination fees, and all excises which may be assessed, levied, exacted or imposed upon its 
property, operations or gross receipts, or all or any combination of these things, upon the franchise 
and the rights and privileges granted in this article, and shall make all applications, reports and 
returns required in connection therewith to all respective governmental and agency authorities. 
(b) ?The franchisee and its employees shall observe and comply with all present and future federal, 
state and local laws, rules, regulations, requirements, ordinances, orders and mandatory guidelines 
which may pertain or apply to the services rendered under this article. 
(Code 1993, § 66-139; Ord. No. 734, § I(8), 11-4-1992) 


Sec. 58-136. - Vehicles and equipment. 
(a) ?A franchisee under this article agrees that it shall procure and maintain sufficient equipment, or that 
it shall arrange on a contractual basis with other persons owning or leasing equipment in compliance 
with the requirements of the franchise, to ensure that the franchisee shall at all times be in a position 
to properly maintain its schedules and to otherwise perform all duties, responsibilities, and conditions 
required of it under this article. Should the franchisee purchase or lease equipment or trucks from 
other persons, then the franchisee shall submit to the department head a list noting the type and 
number of equipment and trucks purchased or leased, the duration of the lease, and the names of 
the persons leasing equipment or trucks to the franchisee. 
(b) ?All trucks utilized by the franchisee, and all containers owned or leased by the franchisee, shall be 
prominently identified on both the left and right sides with the franchisee's name in letters not less 
than six inches in height, and the franchisee's business telephone number in numbers not less than 
three inches in height, either painted on or attached by signs to the trucks and containers. The 
franchisee shall give each of its trucks an identification number that shall be visible and legible at all 
times, and that shall appear on the bumper in numbers not less than four inches in height. 
(c) ?All of the franchisee's trucks, containers and equipment shall conform to the city safety and 
sanitation requirements for refuse collection vehicles, including, but not limited to, the requirement for 
proper vehicle registration and license tags, and the equipment and trucks must be approved by the 
department head. The franchisee specifically agrees that the department head shall have the right to 
inspect the trucks or the equipment, or both, at all reasonable times, and after having endeavored to 
give reasonable written or oral notice that such an inspection shall take place. The department head 
shall notify the franchisee in writing of any defects in the trucks or equipment, and the franchisee 
shall have two city business days from the receipt of the notice to correct the defects. If the defects 
are not corrected to the department head's satisfaction within the period, the franchisee shall pay the 
city $100.00 for each truck or each piece of equipment whose defects are not corrected within the 
period. The franchisee shall pay the city $100.00 for every seven calendar days after the period in 
which the defects are not corrected. 
(Code 1993, § 66-140; Ord. No. 734, § I(12), 11-4-1992) 


Sec. 58-137. - Transfer of franchise. 
    A franchise granted under this article shall not be assignable by the franchisee without the prior 
written consent of the city. If the franchisee attempts to assign, transfer or delegate its rights and duties in 
violation of this section without the city's consent, then the city may terminate the franchise, and any such 
assignment shall be null, void and of no legal effect whatsoever. 
(Code 1993, § 66-141; Ord. No. 734, § I(13), 11-4-1992) 


Sec. 58-138. - Termination of franchise. 
(a) ?A franchise granted under this article may be terminated: 
(1) ?By the city, at its convenience, upon 30 days' prior written notice to the franchisee; 
(2) ?By the franchisee, following 30 days' prior written notice to the city; or 
(3) ?By the mutual agreement of the parties. 
(b) ?If any of the privileges granted in this article are terminated pursuant to this section, any liability of 
the franchisee to the city accruing thereby, and any liability of the franchisee to the city arising out of 
any act or event occurring prior to the termination, shall immediately become due and payable to the 
city, without further notice. 
(Code 1993, § 66-142; Ord. No. 734, § I(9), 11-4-1992) 


Secs. 58-139—58-159. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - PRIVATE RECOVERED MATERIALS RECYCLING COLLECTION SERVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Recycling, F.S. § 403.7032. 


Sec. 58-160. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial establishment includes a property or properties zoned or used for commercial or 
industrial uses, or used by an entity exempt from taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue 
Code, and excludes property or properties zoned or used for single-family residential or multifamily 
residential uses. 
    Customer means a person who uses the solid waste or recovered materials collection service of a 
recovered materials dealer or the appropriate city agency. 
    Department head means the person (or representative) designated by the mayor. 
    Garbage, industrial wastes, refuse and rubbish shall have the same definitions as in section 58-21. 
    Hauler means a person, corporation or other entity engaged in the collection and delivery of 
commercial recovered materials. 
    Recovered material means metal, paper, glass, plastic, textile or rubber materials that have known 
recycling potential, can be feasibly recycled and have been diverted and source-separated or have been 
removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use or reuse as raw materials, whether or not the materials 
require subsequent processing or separation from each other, but does not include materials destined for 
any use that constitutes disposal. The term "recovered materials," as described, is not solid waste. 
    Recovered materials program means an operation which provides for the separation, gathering, 
storage, collection, transportation, processing and marketing of recyclable material. 
    Recovered materials service means business activities related to the buying, selling, trading, 
marketing, transferring, separation, collection or processing of recovered material. Such service shall 
include the proper handling and disposal of any portion of collected recovered material deemed 
unsuitable or unmarketable. 
(Code 1993, § 66-160; Ord. No. 803, § 1(1), 2-16-1994) 


Sec. 58-161. - Collection of commercial recovered materials. 
(a) ?There is hereby established a mandatory commercial recycling program within the city. 
(b) ?Those commercial establishments within the city shall separate the recovered materials from other 
solid waste and place such recyclable material in the container furnished by their agents. The 
recovered materials shall be source-separated. 
(Code 1993, § 66-161; Ord. No. 803, § 1(2), 2-16-1994; Ord. No. 894, 11-15-1995; Ord. No. 
1176, § XI, 5-20-1998) 


Sec. 58-162. - Ownership of recovered material; penalty for violation. 
    Containers for collecting recovered materials shall be placed in a manner and location designated by 
the city's solid waste superintendent. Such location shall be in conformance with the city's current 
dumpster enclosure regulations. Recovered materials placed by any person in the prescribed manner in a 
designated collection area are considered property of the collection agent. No person shall be permitted 
to collect or pick up, or cause to be collected or picked up, any recovered material properly placed in a 
designated collection area without first obtaining the written consent of the generator's authorized 
collection agent. Any violation of this provision shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 per 
violation. 
(Code 1993, § 66-162; Ord. No. 803, § 1(3), 2-16-1994) 


Sec. 58-163. - Franchises/contracts. 
    The city may enter into contracts or grant non-exclusive franchises to persons, firms, corporations or 
other entities for the collection, handling, transportation, processing, conveyance or recycling of materials 
which originate at commercial establishments within the city. 
(Code 1993, § 66-163; Ord. No. 803, § 1(4), 2-16-1994) 


Sec. 58-164. - Registration. 
(a) ?Who may engage in such business; penalty for violation. Only those persons, firms, corporations or 
entities certified by the state and properly registered with the city as a recovered materials dealer 
may engage in the collection, handling, transportation, processing, conveyance or recycling of 
recovered materials which originate from commercial establishments within the city. Any violations of 
this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 per violation. 
(b) ?Required. Prior to engaging in the business of collection of recovered material generated at 
commercial premises, the hauler shall register with the city. The written registration must be 
completed and submitted to the director for approval at least ten calendar days prior to the proposed 
commencement of recovered materials service. After meeting the following requirements, the 
commercial hauler shall be empowered and authorized to provide commercial recovered materials 
service within the city: 
(1) ?Registration information. Each hauler shall provide the following information: company name, 
owner or operator of the dealer, any general or limited partners, corporate officers and directors, 
and the permanent place of business. The hauler shall notify the city of any changes to this 
registration information and shall update said information at least annually. 
(2) ?Certification required. 
a. ?Each hauler shall provide evidence that the company has been certified as a recovered 
materials dealer by the state department of environmental protection. 
b. ?Each hauler shall provide certification that recovered materials will be processed at a 
recovered materials facility as defined by state statutes. 
c. ?Each hauler shall certify that it will provide the city with a monthly report as required by 
section 58-166. 
(3) ?Insurance required. Each hauler shall provide evidence that it has and maintains in good 
standing an insurance policy in the type and amount described below: 
a. ?Workman's compensation within statutory requirements. 
b. ?Comprehensive general liability: 
1. ?Bodily injury coverage shall be for not less than $1,000,000.00 for each occurrence 
and not less than $1,000,000.00 aggregate; 
2. ?Property damage coverage shall be not less than $500,000.00 each occurrence and 
$500,000.00 aggregate; or 
3. ?Bodily injury and property damage coverage shall be in a combined single limit of not 
less than $1,000,000.00 each occurrence and $1,000,000.00 aggregate. 
c. ?Business automobile liability shall be for not less than $500,000.00 per occurrence. 
The city shall be named as an additional insured under the policy. The policy must provide that 
the city shall be given 30 days' written notice prior to cancellation or modification and a copy of 
the policy (or a certificate of insurance) shall be filed with the city clerk's office on or before the 
effective date of this franchise and on or before the effective date of each policy renewal period. 
(4) ?Fees required. To cover the city's cost for operating its registration program, the following fees 
shall be required: 
a. ?Application fee. Each application for a commercial recycling registration shall be 
accompanied by a fee of $50.00. 
b. ?Registration fee. Each and every hauler shall pay, in addition to the initial application fee, 
an annual registration fee of $50.00. 
(Code 1993, § 66-164; Ord. No. 803, § 1(5), 2-16-1994; Ord. No. 894, 11-15-1995) 


Sec. 58-165. - Reduction of city solid waste collection services. 
    Those commercial establishments that contract with a private hauler for collection of recovered 
materials may request a reduction in their city solid waste collection services. All such requests shall be in 
writing and shall include a request for an effective date; such date must be at least ten days from the date 
the request is submitted. Upon receipt of such written request, the solid waste supervisor shall make a 
determination as to the appropriate service level required for the city to maintain adequate service for the 
collection of solid waste other than the source-separated recovered material. Conversion to a curbside 
commercial customer is the minimum service level the solid waste supervisor is authorized to allow, 
provided the area is being served by residential equipment. The solid waste supervisor shall notify the 
utility billing division of any reduction in service level and the corresponding effective date within seven 
days of receipt of the service reduction request. The effective date for reduced service shall be within ten 
days of the date the request is received unless a later effective date is so requested by the commercial 
establishment. 
(Code 1993, § 66-165; Ord. No. 803, § 1(6), 2-16-1994; Ord. No. 1176, § XII, 5-20-1998; Ord. 
No. 1599, § I, 9-17-2003) 


Sec. 58-166. - Reporting requirements. 
    Each hauler shall provide the following information by the tenth of each month for the preceding 
month's services: types and amounts of materials collected, recycled and reused; approximate 
percentage of materials recycled, stored and delivered to a recycling facility; and locations where any 
recovered materials were disposed as solid waste. 
(Code 1993, § 66-166; Ord. No. 803, § 1(7), 2-16-1994) 


Sec. 58-167. - Licenses. 
    The hauler shall, at its sole expense, procure from all local, state and federal governmental and 
agency authorities having jurisdiction over the operations of the hauler all licenses, certificates, permits or 
other authorizations which may be necessary for the conduct of the hauler's operations. The hauler shall 
pay all taxes and licenses; certification, permit and examination fees; all excises which may be assessed, 
levied, exacted or imposed upon its property, operations, gross receipts, or all or any combination of 
these things; and upon this registration and the rights and privileges granted herein, shall make all 
applications, reports and returns required in connection therewith to all respective governmental and 
agency authorities. The hauler and its employees shall observe and comply with all present and future 
federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations, requirements, ordinances, orders and mandatory 
guidelines which may pertain or apply to the services rendered hereto. 
(Code 1993, § 66-167; Ord. No. 803, § 1(8), 2-16-1994) 


Sec. 58-168. - Equipment. 
(a) ?The hauler agrees that it shall procure and maintain sufficient equipment, or that it shall arrange on 
a contractual basis with other persons owning or leasing equipment in compliance with the 
requirements of this article, to ensure that the hauler shall at all times be in a position to properly 
maintain its schedules and to otherwise perform all duties, responsibilities and conditions required of 
it under this article. Should the hauler purchase or lease equipment or trucks from other persons, 
then the hauler shall submit to the department head a list noting the types and number of equipment 
and trucks purchased or leased, the duration of the lease and the names of the persons leasing 
equipment or trucks to the hauler. 
(b) ?All trucks utilized by the hauler, and all containers owned or leased by the hauler, shall be 
prominently identified on both the left and right sides with the hauler's name in letters not less than 
six inches in height, and the hauler's business telephone number, in numbers not less than three 
inches in height, either painted on or attached by signs to the affected truck and containers. The 
hauler shall give each of its trucks an identification number that shall be visible and legible at all 
times, and that shall appear on the bumper, in numbers not less than four inches in height. 
(c) ?All of the hauler's trucks, containers and equipment shall conform to the city safety and sanitation 
requirements for refuse collection vehicles, including, but not limited to, proper vehicle registration 
and license tags, and the equipment and trucks must be approved by the department head. The 
hauler specifically agrees that the department head shall have the right to inspect the trucks or the 
equipment, or both of these things, at all reasonable times and after having endeavored to give 
reasonable written or oral notice that such an inspection shall take place. The department head shall 
notify the hauler in writing of any defect in the trucks or equipment and the hauler shall have two city 
business days (period) from the receipt of the notice to correct the defect. If the defect is not 
corrected to the department head's satisfaction within the period, the hauler shall pay the city 
$100.00 for each truck or each piece of equipment whose defect is not corrected within the period. 
The hauler shall pay the city $100.00 for every seven calendar days after the period in which the 
defect is not corrected. 
(Code 1993, § 66-168; Ord. No. 803, § 1(9), 2-16-1994) 


Sec. 58-169. - Warranty of hauler. 
    The hauler represents and warrants to the city that no appointed or elected city official, officer, 
employee or agent has any interest, either directly or indirectly, in the business of the hauler to be 
conducted herein. 
(Code 1993, § 66-169; Ord. No. 803, § 1(11), 2-16-1994) 


Sec. 58-170. - Noncompliance. 
    If the hauler shall at any time fail to comply with any of the provisions of this article or other 
applicable laws, rules or regulations (unless such failure is beyond the hauler's control because of matters 
deemed by the attorney to be an act of God), the city, after written notice to the hauler, may revoke this 
registration and render it void and of no further effect. 
(Code 1993, § 66-170; Ord. No. 803, § 1(12), 2-16-1994) 


Sec. 58-171. - Amendment. 
    The city reserves the right to amend this article at any time and in any manner that the city deems 
necessary for the health, safety or welfare of the public. The city also reserves the right to prescribe, from 
time to time, reasonable rules and regulations (rules) further governing the hauler's operations herein, 
including, but not limited to, hours, frequency of container pickup and state department of environmental 
protection certification requirements. These rules may be issued through the department head or his 
designee and they need not be memorialized in an ordinance revision or further, formal action by the city 
council, the city council's approval of this article being an approval that the regulations should be so 
issued. 
(Code 1993, § 66-171; Ord. No. 803, § 1(13), 2-16-1994) 


Secs. 58-172—58-195. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE V. - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Resource and recovery management, F.S. § 403.702 et seq.; local government 
solid waste responsibility, F.S. § 403.706. 


Sec. 58-196. - Title. 
    This article shall be referred to as the "Solid Waste Management Ordinance." 
(Code 1993, § 66-172; Ord. No. 1571, § I, 2-19-2003) 


Sec. 58-197. - Intent and applicability. 
    The intent of this article is to establish standards for the construction, operation and closure of solid 
waste management facilities to minimize their threat to public health and the environment, and to protect 
the city's natural resources. This article shall apply to all private contractors, private citizens, and any 
person or group proposing to initiate or continue operation of a solid waste management facility in the 
areas of the city which are in the boundaries of the municipality. 
(Code 1993, § 66-173; Ord. No. 1571, § I, 2-19-2003) 


Sec. 58-198. - Definitions. 
    This article adopts by reference the definitions contained in F.A.C. 62-701.200, unless defined 
below, in which case, the definition included in this section governs. The following definitions apply for the 
purposes of this article only: 
    Applicant means any person, group, contractor, corporation, business association, or other entity 
applying for a permit for a solid waste management facility. 
    CFR means the United States Code of Federal Regulations. Citations to specific sections and 
chapters of the CFR include amendments or replacements of these sections. 
    Class I waste means waste acceptable at a Class I solid waste management facility, as defined 
herein. 
    Class II waste means waste acceptable at a Class II solid waste management facility, as defined 
herein. 
    Class III waste means combinations of yard waste and construction and demolition debris along with 
other debris such as paper, cardboard, asbestos, cloth, cut tires, furniture, glass, plastic and other like 
matter which may be defined by FDEP to constitute Class III wastes. Mixing of Class III wastes with other 
types of solid waste will cause the material to be classified as other than Class III waste. 
    Closure means the cessation of operation of a solid waste management facility and the act of 
securing such a site so that it will not pose any threat to human health or the environment. This shall 
include long-term monitoring, maintenance and financial responsibility. 
    Composting facility means a solid waste management facility where solid waste is processed using 
composting technology. Processing may include physical turning, wind-rowing, serration or other 
mechanical handling of organic matter. Simple exposure of solid waste with little or no mechanical 
handling that results in natural decay is not considered composting. 
    Construction and demolition debris means materials generally considered to be not water soluble 
and nonhazardous in nature, including, but not limited to, steel, glass, brick, concrete, asphalt roofing 
material, pipe, gypsum wallboard, and lumber, from the construction or destruction of a structure as part 
of a construction or demolition project, or from the renovation or maintenance of a structure. If the 
demolition project is from a structure where hazardous materials or hazardous wastes are or were 
managed, the debris will be considered hazardous waste and will not be considered construction and 
demolition debris as defined in this article unless tested and the results show otherwise. The term 
"construction and demolition debris" includes rocks, soils, tree remains, trees, and other vegetative matter 
which normally results from land clearing or land development operations for a construction project. 
Regulated asbestos-containing materials, as defined in 40 CFR 61.141, are excluded from the 
construction and demolition debris definition. Mixing of construction and demolition debris with other types 
of solid waste, including material which is not from the actual construction or destruction of a structure, 
including manufactured home waste and pallets, will cause the waste to be classified as other than 
construction and demolition debris. 
    Cover means a layer of compacted earth or other suitable material as approved by the department 
used to enclose a volume of solid waste. 
    DRC means the development review committee of the city. 
    Department means the city community development department. 
    Director means the individual retained by the city council as head of the city community development 
department. The term "director," within this article, may be either the director or his designated 
representative. 
    F.A.C. means the Florida Administrative Code, Annotated Official Compilation of Rules and 
Regulations of the State of Florida, published by the secretary of state. Citations to specific sections and 
chapters of the F.A.C. include amendments or replacements of these sections. 
    FDEP means the State of Florida department of environmental protection. 
    Infectious/medical waste. 
(1) ?The term "infectious/medical waste" means any waste generated in the diagnosis, treatment, or 
immunization of human beings or animals, in research pertaining thereto, or in the production or 
testing of biologicals listed in subsections a. through g. of this definition. 
a. ?Cultures and stocks of infectious agents and associated biologicals, including cultures from 
medical and pathological laboratories; cultures and stocks of infectious agents from 
research and industrial laboratories; waste from the production of biologicals; discarded 
live and attenuated vaccines; and culture dishes and devices used to transfer, inoculate, 
and mix cultures. 
b. ?Human pathological waste, including tissues, organs, and body parts and body fluids that 
are removed during surgery or autopsy, or other medical procedures, and specimens of 
body fluids and their containers. 
c. ?Human blood and blood products including: 
1. ?Liquid waste human blood; 
2. ?Products of blood; 
3. ?Items saturated and/or dripping with human blood; or 
4. ?Items that were saturated and/or dripping with human blood that are now caked with 
dried human blood; including serum, plasma, and other blood components, and their 
containers, which were used or intended for use in either patient care, testing and 
laboratory analysis or the development of pharmaceuticals. Intravenous bags are also 
included in this category. 
d. ?Sharps that have been used in animal or human patient care or treatment or in medical, 
research, or industrial laboratories, including hypodermic needles, syringes (with or without 
the attached needle), Pasteur pipettes, scalpel blades, blood vials, needles with attached 
tubing and culture dishes (regardless of the presence of infectious agents). Also included 
are other types of broken or unbroken glassware that have been in contact with infectious 
agents, such as used slides and cover slips. 
e. ?Animal waste, including contaminated animal carcasses, body parts, and bedding of 
animals known to have been exposed to infectious agents during research (including 
research in veterinary hospitals), production of biologicals or testing of pharmaceuticals. 
f. ?Isolation wastes including biological waste and discarded materials contaminated with 
blood, excretions, exudates, or secretions from humans isolated to protect others from 
certain highly communicable diseases, or isolated animals known to be infected with highly 
communicable diseases. 
g. ?Unused sharps, including the following unused, discarded sharps; hypodermic needles, 
suture needles, syringes and scalpel blades. 
(2) ?The term "infectious/medical waste" does not include: 
a. ?Hazardous waste identified or listed under the regulations in 40 CFR 261; 
b. ?Household waste, as defined in 40 CFR 261.4(b)(1); 
c. ?Ash from incineration of medical/infectious waste, once the incineration process has been 
completed; 
d. ?Human corpses, remains, and anatomical parts that are intended for interment or 
cremation; and 
e. ?Domestic sewage materials identified in 40 CFR 261(a)(1). 
    Landfill. 
(1) ?The term "landfill" means any solid waste management facility which is the final resting or 
disposal place for solid waste, or is the site of solid waste storage, the majority (more than 50 
percent) of which, the owner or operator cannot clearly demonstrate has been recycled within 
the last 180 days. The following sites are not included in this definition: 
a. ?A land spreading site; 
b. ?An injection well; 
c. ?A surface impoundment; or 
d. ?An excavation and fill operation, properly permitted per section 5.04.00 of the Apopka Land 
Development Code and otherwise in compliance with application regulations. 
(2) ?Landfills shall be classified into four different classes, based on the amounts and types of 
wastes received. There are varying requirements throughout this article, depending upon class 
of landfills. The classifications of landfills are as follows: 
a. ?Class I landfills are those which receive an average of 20 tons or more of solid waste per 
day, as defined herein. 
b. ?Class II landfills are those which receive an average of less than 20 tons of solid waste per 
day, as defined herein. 
c. ?Class III landfills are those which receive only Class III waste, as defined herein, regardless 
of the amount. 
d. ?Construction and demolition debris landfills are those which receive only construction and 
demolition debris, as defined herein, regardless of the amount. 
    Lined landfill means a landfill constructed with a liner made of synthetic materials, low-permeability 
soils or a combination of these materials, which has been permitted by the city, and which meets the 
landfill design criteria specified herein. 
    Recycling means any process by which solid waste, or material that would otherwise become solid 
waste, is collected, separated, or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or 
products. 
    Site means the lot or parcel of property whereon a solid waste management facility is located or 
proposed to be located. 
    Solid waste means garbage, refuse, yard waste, construction and demolition debris, Grade I 
domestic wastewater sludge or Grade II domestic wastewater sludge, or other discarded material, 
including solid, liquid, semi-solid or contained gaseous material resulting from domestic, industrial, 
commercial, mining, agricultural or governmental operations. The term "solid waste" does not include 
infectious/medical waste, as defined herein, or hazardous waste, as defined in F.A.C. ch. 62-730. 
    Yard waste means vegetative matter resulting from landscaping maintenance operations, and 
includes materials such as tree and shrub trimmings, grass clippings, palm fronds, trees and tree stumps 
and other vegetation that has likely been exposed to fertilizers, pesticides or herbicides. 
(Code 1993, § 66-174; Ord. No. 1571, § I, 2-19-2003; Ord. No. 1627, § I, 1-7-2004) 


Sec. 58-199. - Permit procedures. 
(a) ?Operations and excavation/fill permits, generally. 
(1) ?Permits required. It shall be unlawful to operate a solid waste management facility in those 
areas of the city without a valid city permit, which permit shall not be issued without the review 
and recommendations of the city development review committee (DRC) and a special exception 
allowing the solid waste management facility being recommended by the city land development 
review board. The applicant shall also obtain a permit from the state department of 
environmental protection (FDEP) for the construction or operation of a solid waste management 
facility prior to initiating operations, and shall keep said FDEP permit in force. 
(2) ?Activities governed by other ordinances. The applications for excavation permits and fill permits 
for Type I or Type II material shall be made at the city engineer's office, community 
development department, pursuant to the requirements of the building code and the Land 
Development Code (part III of this volume) and not this article. Should any excavation become 
or intend to become a landfill, as defined by section 58-198, then the operation shall comply 
with any and all requirements of and obtain permit through this article. Setbacks and depths of 
excavation as required by this article shall control over a solid waste landfill operation. 
(b) ?Applications for solid waste management facilities and ancillary operations shall be made at the 
director's office, community development department, according to the provisions of this article. The 
following types of solid waste management facilities shall submit an application pursuant to the 
requirements of this article: 
(1) ?Class I landfills; 
(2) ?Class II landfills; 
(3) ?Class III landfills; 
(4) ?Construction and demolition debris landfills; 
(5) ?Composting facilities (excluding those located at permitted landfills); 
(6) ?Used oil recycling facilities; 
(7) ?Waste tire processing facilities; 
(8) ?Infectious/medical waste treatment or storage facilities; 
(9) ?Incinerators, if the facility is also storing or disposing of solid waste on the site; 
(10) ?Solid waste transfer stations; 
(11) ?Any other facility that the city council may consider to meet the definition of the term "solid 
waste management facility" and/or may present any threat to human health or the environment. 
All applications shall be submitted on a form approved by the city council and shall be signed and sealed 
by a professional engineer registered in the state. Application forms shall state the owner's name, firm 
performing work, source of materials, estimated yearly fill quantity, and disposal capacity of the site (for 
solid waste disposal facilities), owner's consent (if the application is made by a person other than the 
property owner), proposed haul route, and whether the solid waste management facility will be for private 
or public use. All supporting documentation required in this article shall accompany application forms. 
(c) ?No permit shall be issued until the application fees (which shall be established by the city council by 
separate resolution) have been paid and financial responsibility documentation (as detailed in 
section 58-201(1)w) has been reviewed and approved by the city. 
(d) ?Permits shall be valid for a maximum period of five years from the date of approval of the permit 
application or renewal. 
(e) ?Application for renewal of a permit, with required supporting documentation, shall be submitted at 
least 90 days in advance of the expiration date of the existing permit. It is the permittee's 
responsibility to ensure renewal applications are submitted in accordance with this requirement. 
Requests for further information from the city shall be responded to in a diligent fashion and within 
the period of time established by the city at the time of the request. The director shall make a 
determination when the application is deemed complete and shall inform the applicant in writing. 
During and after the 90-day period following the submittal of a completed application, the 
applicant/operator has the right to continue operations if final action has not been taken by the city, 
until such time as the city takes final action, provided the permit has been extended by the city, in 
writing, and that such completed application is submitted prior to the expiration of the existing permit. 
(f) ?Permits shall be displayed in a prominent place at the solid waste management facility at all times. 
(g) ?Permits may be transferred only upon approval of the city council and payment of a service charge 
as prescribed by the city council. The term "transferred" includes, but is not limited to, change of 
ownership, the current permit holder being acquired by a parent company, or any type of legal 
acquisition. 
(h) ?Permit review and approval procedure. 
(1) ?Once the director has given written notice to the applicant that the application is complete, the 
director shall review the application and notify the applicant of apparent deficiencies in the 
application and additional information needed within 30 days of receipt of the completed 
application. All city comments and questions relative to the permit application shall be signed 
and sealed by the professional engineer registered in the state responsible for the review. 
Diligent responses to the city's request for additional information or corrections of deficiencies 
shall be provided within the period of time established by the city at the time of the request. 
Within 30 days after receipt of such additional information, the city shall review it and may 
request only that information needed to clarify such additional information or to answer new 
questions raised by or related to such additional information. Failure to respond within the 
established time or not diligently addressing the requests of the city will cause the application to 
be denied. 
(2) ?The director shall submit his recommendations and the recommendations of the DRC and land 
development review board to the city council for approval or denial of the permit. A public 
hearing by the city council to consider the permit shall be held within 90 days after receipt of a 
completed application or after receipt of the last item of timely requested additional material, 
whichever occurs last. 
(3) ?The city council may approve or deny the permit application and may include any conditions of 
approval necessary to ensure compliance with the regulations contained in this article or any 
other applicable regulations. The city council shall determine whether the proposed facility will 
serve the public interest and provide a needed service to the citizens of the city and/or projected 
service area, considering the recommendations of the director, DRC, and land development 
review board, and also based on the following: 
a. ?Capacity of existing permitted solid waste management facilities; 
b. ?Capacity of the proposed solid waste management facility; 
c. ?Quantity of solid waste generated in the city and projected service area requiring disposal 
or management; 
d. ?Potential sites best suited to serve the city and projected service area; 
e. ?Need for disposal or other kinds of waste management capacity; and 
f. ?The city council policies. 
If the city council determines that the facility would not serve the public interest and would not 
provide a needed service to the citizens of the city or surrounding area, the city council may 
deny the permit. The city council may also approve or deny the permit application based on its 
consideration of the appropriateness of the type and method of disposal or management of the 
solid waste, including the potential for adverse groundwater, surface water, air pollution, noise, 
odor, nuisance, and health risks, consistency of the proposed facility with the city 
comprehensive plan, any refuse disposal facilities plans in effect, city capital improvement 
programs, city policies, rules, regulations and ordinances in effect or pending at the time of 
initial application. 
(4) ?Any applicant may seek review of a city council decision on a permit application by certiorari 
filed in the circuit court in and for the county. 
(i) ?Waivers. Upon written application, which may be included with permit applications, the city council 
may grant waivers from the regulations contained in this article. The applicant for any waiver shall 
demonstrate and city council shall consider any one or more of the following factors with respect to 
any application for waiver: 
(1) ?Location of real property; 
(2) ?Distance of the proposed solid waste management facility from improvements on adjoining real 
property; 
(3) ?Effect of the proposed waiver on adjoining property; 
(4) ?Current physical conditions on the real property whereon the solid waste management facility is 
proposed to be located; 
(5) ?Any special conditions applicable to the real property whereon the solid waste management 
facility is proposed to be located; and 
(6) ?Whether the waiver would nullify the intent and the purpose of this article. 
(j) ?Adoption of rules, regulations and fees. 
(1) ?The city council may from time to time, by resolution, adopt such rules, regulations, and 
policies as it deems necessary to implement and enforce this article. Such rules may include, 
without limitation, requirements for letters of credit or other security to ensure proper 
performance of permitted activities. 
(2) ?The city council may from time to time, by resolution, establish fees to be applicable to all 
permits or other regulatory activities authorized by this article. 
(3) ?The city council may, by resolution, establish designated areas within the city, where solid 
waste management facilities may be located. 
(k) ?Ancillary operations. All ancillary operations shall be described in the permit application. Actual or 
potential impacts from the ancillary operation on air quality, water quality, and abutting property 
owners (especially in regard to noise level, odors and visual impacts) shall be described and 
compared to levels described by this Code, where applicable. Appropriate permits must be obtained 
from local, state and federal agencies for the ancillary operations. A demonstration of need for the 
operation must be submitted to the city. If a permittee intends to initiate any ancillary operations at a 
permitted site, plans or a description of the proposed operation must be submitted to the director for 
review. If the director determines the ancillary operations will create additional substantial impact on 
the surrounding area, the director shall forward the request to the city council for review and/or 
approval. 
(l) ?In the case of permit renewals or changes to existing permits, neither review by the DRC, review by 
the land development review board nor a public hearing shall be required unless the director 
determines that there has been a substantial deviation from the terms and conditions. Vertical and 
horizontal expansions of fill area or an increase in the quantity of fill (for solid waste disposal 
facilities), a need to remediate existing deficiencies, increases in the intensity of the land use of the 
site or a waiver request shall be among those circumstances considered to result in a substantial 
deviation. The applicant shall have ten days to appeal the director's finding of substantial deviation to 
city council and a hearing shall be held within 45 days of the appeal. A permit found to be a 
substantial deviation shall be required to be processed further in the same manner as an application 
for an original permit, which process is further described herein. 
(m) ?The city council may, by resolution, suspend issuance of new permits for a period of time if the city 
council determines that adequate capacity exists within the city for any type of solid waste 
management facility. 
(n) ?Permits will not be issued for a solid waste management facility operation within a permitted 
excavation site to anyone other than the operator of such excavation site. 
(Code 1993, § 66-175; Ord. No. 1571, § I, 2-19-2003; Ord. No. 1627, § I, 1-7-2004) 


Sec. 58-200. - Required submittals. 
    Six copies of the following documents and information shall be submitted for review as part of the 
permit application. All submittals must be signed and sealed by a professional state-registered engineer, 
geologist or land surveyor, as appropriate, and shall include the following: 
(1) ?Solid waste disposal facilities, Class I and Class II landfills. 
a. ?DRC review and recommendations. 
b. ?Land development review board special exception evaluation and recommendations. 
c. ?Application form described in section 58-199. 
d. ?Certified, current topographical survey. For the purposes of this article, a current survey 
shall mean a survey which has been certified within six months of the date of submittal of a 
completed application. The survey shall utilize a minimum of five-foot contour intervals to 
clearly show ground surface shape, shall extend 150 feet beyond the property line of the 
proposed facility and shall include all improvements within this area. A topographical 
survey shall be submitted annually to the director. This annual survey may cover only the 
area disturbed since the original survey if it is accompanied by a letter, sealed by a state-
registered land surveyor, certifying that areas not covered are the same topographically as 
shown on the survey submitted with the original application. 
e. ?Certified boundary survey and legal description. The boundary survey and legal description 
shall be updated at permit renewal if the site boundaries or legal description changes. 
f. ?Proof of ownership of the property. 
g. ?Engineering plans indicating the following: 
1. ?Liner and liner system design and specifications in accordance with section 58-201; 
2. ?Leachate collection and removal system design in accordance with section 58-201; 
3. ?Leachate treatment system design, or a contract with an off-site wastewater treatment 
plant to treat the leachate, with proof of capacity to treat such type of liquid waste; 
4. ?Proposed final grade at one-foot contour intervals; 
5. ?Design of ancillary facilities/operations; 
6. ?Stormwater management plan. The site stormwater management system shall follow 
the city subdivision regulations, with the following exceptions: full retention of on-site 
runoff resulting from the 100-year storm event is required. Furthermore, off-site runoff 
resulting from the 100-year storm event must be diverted around the site, fully 
retained on-site or bypassed through the site such that intermixing the on-site 
stormwater or groundwater will not occur. The discharge character of the diverted or 
bypassed flow shall be the same as the predevelopment character of the off-site 
runoff. Since the site shall have in place a six-foot perimeter fence which is 
maintained during operation and post-closure, slopes between 2H:1V and 5H:1V for 
dry ponds may be accepted. The operator shall re-establish the 5H:1V slopes within 
the original setbacks at the end of the post-closure period and shall include the 
necessary amount of money in the financial assurance for the city to re-establish such 
slopes. As an alternative to re-establishing the slopes; the stormwater management 
permit shall include as a condition, to maintain the fence for perpetuity after the post-
closure period. The stormwater management plan approved by the city and any 
modification must be the same as submitted to the water management district or 
applicable state agency; 
7. ?Zoning of property and adjacent properties; 
8. ?Landscape buffer plan; 
9. ?Reclamation plan; 
10. ?Setbacks and access control; 
11. ?Final closure plan; 
12. ?Description of proposed final use of landfill property; and 
13. ?Plans for long-term care of the site. 
h. ?Processing fee. 
i. ?Soil boring logs and reports indicating soil types present on the site. 
j. ?Hydrogeological assessment of the site and a proposed groundwater monitoring plan in 
accordance with section 58-201. 
k. ?Proposed fee schedule for use of the solid waste management facility by third parties. 
l. ?Proposed hours of operation. 
m. ?Proposed method of quantifying wastes. 
n. ?Proposed source of cover materials. 
o. ?A map or aerial photograph of the area showing land use and zoning within one mile of the 
boundaries of the site. This map or photograph (which shall be taken within one year of the 
permit application) shall be of sufficient scale to show all residences, industrial buildings, 
watercourses, roads and other details. These features shall be labeled on the map or 
photograph. The applicant shall show approximate locations of all possible potable water 
wells within one mile and shall indicate distances to the adjacent (excluding easements) 
potable water wells, residences and businesses, and shall indicate the number of 
residences, businesses, and all possible potable water wells within one mile of the 
boundaries of the site. 
p. ?Evidence of financial responsibility in accordance with section 58-201. 
q. ?Litter control plan. 
r. ?Waste stream quality control plan as described in section 58-201. 
s. ?Gas monitoring and control plan as specified in section 58-201. 
t. ?Demonstration of need for the proposed solid waste management facility. The source of the 
waste, quantity of waste anticipated to be received on a yearly basis, delivery method and 
ability of other permitted facilities in the area to manage the solid waste must be described. 
Demonstration of need must also be submitted in writing for any proposed operations 
ancillary to the solid waste disposal operations when applicable. 
u. ?Operations plan for the solid waste management facility and all ancillary operations, when 
applicable. 
v. ?A written description of how the facility will comply or will be in accordance with the state 
and city recycling goals and policies. 
w. ?A firefighting agreement signed by the solid waste management facility operator and the 
city fire chief, which covers the line of responsibility for fighting fires at the site. The 
agreement is to include methods to be used to extinguish flames that minimize the 
potential adverse impact on the environment, but still adequately address an emergency. 
The use of alternatives to water in landfills or other facilities that can produce leachate shall 
be considered to minimize the impact of the leachate on groundwater. 
(2) ?Solid waste disposal facilities, Class III and construction and demolition debris landfills. The 
same requirements included in section 58-201, if the applicant demonstrates, and the director 
agrees, that leachate control is not necessary. For construction and demolition debris facilities, 
leachate control is not required unless the city demonstrates that such control is needed for the 
protection of the citizens or the environment. That determination shall be based on such things 
as the types of waste, methods to control the types of waste disposed of, the proximity of 
groundwater and surface water, and the results of the hydrogeological and geological 
investigations submitted with the application. 
(3) ?Composting facilities (excludes facilities located at permitted landfills). 
a. ?The same requirements included in section 58-201. 
b. ?For composting facilities which process solid waste other than only yard waste or manure, 
a design of the receiving, storage and processing areas demonstrating the leachate 
migration controls and the requirements included in section 58-201 are in place, if the 
leachate will not be reused in the process. 
(4) ?Used oil recycling facilities and waste tire processing facilities. The same requirements 
included in section 58-201. 
(5) ?Infectious/medical waste treatment or storage facilities. 
a. ?The same requirements included in section 58-201. 
b. ?Detailed explanation of the process and the applicant's experience with the proposed 
system. 
c. ?Post-treatment waste management plan, including a letter of commitment to accept and be 
responsible for the proper disposal of the material from the solid waste disposal facility that 
will be used as the final disposal site. 
(6) ?Incinerators. 
a. ?The same requirements included in section 58-201. 
b. ?Detailed explanation of the process and the applicant's experience with the proposed 
system. 
c. ?If the facility will dispose solid waste on-site, it shall comply with all the requirements of 
Class I and Class II landfills. 
d. ?If the facility will dispose solid waste off-site, a post-treatment waste management plan 
including a letter of commitment to accept and be responsible for the proper disposal of the 
material from the solid waste disposal facility that will be used as the final disposal site for 
the refuse or the ashes generated by the process. 
(7) ?Transfer stations. The same requirements included in F.A.C. 62-701.801(2)(a) through 62-
701.801(6). 
(8) ?Any other facility that the city council may consider to meet the definition of the term "solid 
waste management facility" and/or may present any threat to human health or the environment. 
The city council shall determine, with the recommendations of the director, the requirements 
depending on the type of facility. 
(Code 1993, § 66-176; Ord. No. 1571, § I, 2-19-2003; Ord. No. 1627, § I, 1-7-2004) 


Sec. 58-201. - Technical requirements. 
    The minimum construction requirements for solid waste disposal facilities are those indicated in 
F.A.C. 62-701.400 et seq. Those requirements apply for Class I and Class II landfills as well as Class III 
sites when a liner and a leachate collection system are required. Construction and demolition debris 
landfills may not have to comply with the requirements in F.A.C. 62-701.400 et seq. if the director 
determines, using the information provided by the applicant, that the facility will not cause any leachate 
release that may contaminate the groundwater or any other situation that may need the use of a liner and 
leachate control system. F.A.C. 62-701.400(12) is excluded from this article. The bottom of the landfill 
shall be a minimum of five feet above the estimated seasonal high water table. Said five-foot layer shall 
be capable of impeding the flow of leachate from the site. Alternatives to the five-foot layer may be 
allowed as a waiver, providing that equivalent performance criteria are met. The applicant shall comply 
with section 58-200 to apply for this waiver. 
(1) ?The following requirements shall apply for solid waste disposal facilities: 
a. ?The solid waste management facility shall be open to the city for the purpose of inspection 
during normal working hours of the facility and at any other time when work is in progress. 
The city inspectors shall participate in applicable training courses conducted or sponsored 
by FDEP for its landfill inspectors. 
b. ?Any solid waste management facility operation that will exceed 90 days' duration shall abut 
a paved, public roadway, which will provide access to the property for which the permit is 
applied. Paved access shall be provided by the applicant prior to commencing operations 
for which a permit has been issued. Paving improvements shall be installed by the 
applicant in accordance with the city road construction standards. Solid waste 
management facility operations which will not exceed 90 days may utilize access by 
unpaved roads. The applicant shall continuously maintain such unpaved roads at the 
applicant's sole expense in a condition satisfactory to the city engineer. No permit for an 
operation not exceeding 90 days may be renewed or extended unless the applicant 
provides paved access. The proposed ingress to and egress from the site will be reviewed 
with the city community development department. The applicant may be required to 
construct improvements (such as the addition of turning lanes) to public roads used for site 
access if the city engineer or his designee determines that the proposed solid waste 
management facility will significantly impede the flow of traffic on the public roads used for 
site access. 
c. ?As each section is completed or upon completion of the operation as stipulated in the 
permit, the applicant shall be required to institute the approved plan of reclamation and 
closure. The operator shall submit a closure permit application 90 days before the 
projected closure date, which includes an update of the previously approved closure plan. 
This permit application shall be reviewed and approved by the director before 
commencement of the closure. All closure activities shall be performed in accordance with 
the requirements of F.A.C. ch. 62-701 and all the requirements herein. As a minimum, the 
plan shall include the placement of a minimum of two feet of compacted soil and the 
establishment of a dense stand of grass on all disturbed areas. The site is to be restored to 
a condition similar to the condition existing prior to the installation of the solid waste 
management facility. 
d. ?No permit shall be issued for any area determined by the city to constitute a conservation 
area, according to the standards established by the city comprehensive policy plan, 
ordinances, rules or resolutions, nor shall any permit be issued for any area determined to 
be environmentally sensitive, including, but not limited to, areas identified by the city 
comprehensive plan. 
e. ?Nothing herein shall be construed as regulating dredging or filling, as defined in F.S. § 
403.911. 
f. ?Issuance of a city permit does not relieve the permittee from the responsibility of obtaining 
and maintaining any/all other applicable federal, state, or local permits and renewals 
thereto required for the site. 
g. ?Permits may only be issued upon city council approval and only for sites zoned agricultural 
(A-1 and A-2, excluding any agricultural/residential zoning category) or heavy industrial (I-
4), which abuts only properties zoned agricultural (excluding any agricultural/residential 
zoning category) or heavy industrial. For the purposes of this article, "abutting, adjoining or 
adjacent property" shall be property which touches the boundary line of the site; provided, 
however, that the requirements contained in this subsection (1)g. shall not apply to any 
renewal or change to an existing permit, if such renewal or change has been determined 
by the director not to affect a substantial deviation. 
h. ?Setbacks for the landfill footprint from any boundary line of a site shall be as follows: 
1. ?Two hundred feet from the right-of-way of any arterial or collector highway; 
2. ?One hundred fifty feet from the right-of-way of any other public street, road or 
highway, or abutting property; 
3. ?A minimum of 250 feet from any off-site structure which is the subject of a certificate of 
occupancy. 
(i) ?Notwithstanding the forgoing, if the landfill site was formerly, or is currently, a 
properly permitted excavation site, waste may be placed in the excavation area, 
within the setbacks required by the subject excavation permit, up to the natural 
grade existing prior to the initiation of excavation. All above-grade waste must be 
placed according to setbacks listed in subsections (1)h.1. through 3. of this 
section. 
(ii) ?Setback area shall be landscaped to provide a visual buffer from adjacent 
properties. Landscaping shall be designed to minimize visual impacts of both the 
fill operation and the final closed landfill from surrounding properties and roads. 
At a minimum, landscaping shall include a dense stand of grass and shade trees 
as defined in article V of the City of Apopka Code Land Development Code. 
Trees shall be a minimum of ten feet tall, 15-gallon and 2½ inches caliper, six 
inches above the root ball. Tree spacing shall be 40 feet along any street and 60 
feet on other sides. Trees are permitted only in the setback areas. Well-
landscaped post-closure retention ponds are permitted in the setback. 
Structures, such as offices, scales, spare parts storage and similar facilities may 
be constructed within the setback if fully concealed with a visual opaque buffer or 
a berm in addition to the landscaping requirement included in article V of the 
Land Development Code. Maintenance facilities may be included if noise, odor 
and other nuisances are addressed to the city's satisfaction. 
4. ?The city council may grant waivers of the required setbacks pursuant to the 
procedures enumerated in section 58-199(i) and the following conditions: 
(i) ?The proposed reduction of the required setbacks shall not be less than or conflict 
with setback requirements imposed by the state department of environmental 
protection. 
(ii) ?Waiver requests shall be granted at the sole discretion of the city council and the 
burden shall be on the applicant to demonstrate compliance with section 58-
199(i) and the intent of this article. 
i. ?Slopes. Slope of the working face shall not exceed three to one horizontal to vertical. In 
order to prevent erosion, final slope shall not exceed four to one. Maximum working face lift 
height shall not exceed 20 feet for construction and demolition debris and Class III landfills. 
Maximum lift height for Class I and Class II landfills shall be as specified in F.A.C. ch. 62-
701. Alternative designs with final side slopes of a maximum of three to one may be 
proposed, provided adequate erosion control facilities are provided. 
j. ?Security and litter. 
1. ?Access to the sites shall be controlled via installation of a security chain link fence 
around the perimeter of the site which shall be a minimum of six feet high with locking 
gates. Gates shall be locked when the site is not open for business. Gates and fences 
shall be maintained at all times by the permittee. 
2. ?A scale house or gate attendant equipped with radio contact to other landfill 
employees shall be present at all times when the site is open for business. The scale 
house shall be positioned to allow observation of all incoming and exiting traffic. 
3. ?Warning signs at least three feet square shall be posted at each corner of the fence 
and not more than 500 feet apart along the fence line. Signs shall be positioned 
behind the fences and visible from off-site. On the sign shall be printed in letters of not 
less than five inches in height the words "No Trespassing" or other approved 
appropriate warnings. 
4. ?The permittee shall have a city-approved litter control plan which shall minimize litter 
from the site as well as litter from vehicles hauling materials on- and off-site. The 
permittee shall be responsible for cleanup of all litter from the permittee's operation or 
from vehicles going to and from the site. 
k. ?A waste stream quality control plan shall be submitted. This plan shall include or provide for 
the following, as a minimum: 
1. ?A procedure to ensure that only properly permitted wastes are accepted. Such 
procedures may include, or be a combination of, a manifest system, surcharges, 
contractual agreements with transporters, random load inspections or other 
acceptable means. 
2. ?A procedure for removal of waste not allowed by the subject permit to an approved 
disposal facility. This procedure must specify the means to be used for removal of 
unauthorized solid wastes or hazardous wastes illegally dumped at the site. The 
operator shall inform the city immediately of the presence of the hazardous waste in 
the facility and provide a written plan within five days advising the date of discovery 
and how the hazardous waste was properly disposed. If laboratory confirmation is 
needed, the laboratory results shall be provided to the city. Once waste is confirmed 
to be hazardous, it shall be properly managed within five days. All other unauthorized 
solid waste shall be removed from the site and shall be disposed of properly upon 
accumulation of 20 cubic yards (one dumpster), or such an amount as approved by 
the city engineer. 
3. ?An attendant must be present at the working face of the site at all times to inspect 
each load dumped at the site. The employee shall have the authority and 
responsibility to reject unauthorized loads, have unauthorized materials removed by 
the transporter and/or assess appropriate surcharges and have the unauthorized 
material removed by on-site personnel. A sign must be posted at the entrance to the 
site listing waste materials acceptable at the site. 
4. ?In addition to the inspection required in subsection (1)k.3. of this section, the facility 
operator shall be responsible for examining at least three random loads of solid waste 
delivered to the site each week. The selected loads shall be unloaded in a separate 
area and a trained operator shall perform a detailed inspection. The inspector shall 
examine the solid waste for any unauthorized material. In order to perform the 
mentioned detailed inspection, the operator must break apart and spread all the solid 
waste using the necessary equipment to allow for thorough inspection. If any 
unauthorized waste is identified during the inspection, the responsible inspector must 
have the authority to reload the solid waste into the customer's vehicle for removal 
from the site or to use the site personnel to perform the removal of the unauthorized 
waste as per subsection (1)k.2. of this section. The transporter and generator of the 
unauthorized solid waste must be notified to prevent future occurrences. The operator 
shall keep at the site a current logbook with the original inspector forms, which shall 
include the signature of the responsible inspector. 
l. ?For any ancillary operation in combination with disposal activities (such as composting, 
recycling, etc.), a separate operations procedure shall be submitted. Such procedure shall 
include methods for disposal of unacceptable or unprocessed waste from such alternative 
use. 
m. ?Vehicular access to and from the site shall be designated by the city council at the time of 
the permit approval. Unless specifically permitted by the city council, no vehicular travel to 
or from the site shall be allowed through a street, the primary purpose of which is to serve 
residential dwellings, in a platted residential subdivision; however, the city council may 
permit such travel when a residential subdivision street provides the only reasonable 
access or when such street is a collector or arterial street. In areas of restricted travel on 
city roads, the city shall post signs indicating restrictions. This provision shall be enforced 
as follows: 
1. ?Upon notification that a vehicle is accessing the site via any non-approved street, the 
city may send an inspector to the site of the alleged violation. Upon observing a 
vehicle on a non-approved street, the inspector shall issue a citation to the waste 
hauler in accordance with the city's code enforcement ordinance, which is codified in 
section 42-27 et seq. One copy of the citation shall be hand-delivered to the driver of 
the vehicle and one copy each shall be mailed to the waste hauling business 
operating the truck and to the permittee. The permittee shall send a notice to the 
waste hauling business, with a copy of the division, notifying it that if two additional 
citations are issued for violations of this section, whether such violations are caused 
by the same or different vehicles or drivers, the waste hauling business will no longer 
be permitted to deliver to the permittee's solid waste management facility. 
2. ?The second time a citation is issued to the same waste hauling business delivering to 
the same solid waste management facility, copies shall be distributed as in subsection 
(1)m.1. of this section, along with a letter to both the waste hauling business and the 
permittee notifying them that the accompanying citation is a second violation, and that 
a third violation will cause the waste hauling business to lose its right to use the 
specified solid waste management facility. 
3. ?The third time a citation is issued to the same waste hauling business delivering to the 
same solid waste management facility, copies shall be distributed as in subsection 
(1)m.1. of this section, along with a letter to both the waste hauling business and the 
permittee notifying them that the accompanying citation is a third violation, and that 
the waste hauling business may no longer use the specified solid waste management 
facility. Any further delivery to the solid waste management facility by the waste 
hauling business shall be a violation of the permittee's permit conditions. 
Administrative regulations to implement this section are to be enacted by the director or his 
designee. 
n. ?Within 180 days after completion of the closure operation, a certified topographic survey 
shall be submitted showing the finished grades. The city shall inspect the site within 30 
days to verify satisfactory compliance with the final grading plan and reclamation plan in 
conformance with this article and any special permit conditions. After satisfactory 
completion and inspection, a certificate of completion will be issued. 
o. ?Solid waste management operations shall not obstruct or materially interfere with natural 
watercourses, water management or control plans, road system or right-of-way, or cause 
flooding on adjacent properties. 
p. ?Hours of operations for the solid waste management facility shall be set by the city council, 
and in no case shall be earlier than 7:00 a.m., nor later than 7:00 p.m., unless properly 
waived by the city council. 
q. ?Solid waste cannot be placed in any natural or artificial body of water, including 
groundwater. 
r. ?The owner shall execute and record a notice that runs with the land which shall state that 
the land was used as a solid waste disposal site and that materials buried on the property 
may render the property unsuitable for conventional development. 
s. ?A truck scale is required at all solid waste disposal sites larger than ten acres. Accurate 
records of the amount of waste received in tons (for landfills with scales) or cubic yards (for 
landfills without scales) must be maintained and submitted to the city quarterly. Excavated 
volume, compaction ratio, volume of waste stream recycled and any other information 
needed to track landfill air-space shall be reported. For landfills without scales, the 
proposed method of quantifying waste shall be submitted to the city for review and 
approval prior to initiating disposal operation. If recycling or composting operations occur at 
the site, the quantity, method, and use of materials recycled shall be reported to the city 
monthly. A flat fee may be charged for small vehicles (pickup trucks, cars and vans). 
Quantities from vehicles charged a flat fee shall be estimated using an approved 
conversion rate. Truck scales shall be calibrated, as a minimum, every 12 months and the 
certificate of calibration shall be displayed at the scale house or gate house at all times. 
t. ?Waste handling and cover requirements. 
1. ?All solid waste at Class I and Class II landfills shall be spread in layers of 
approximately two feet in thickness and compacted to approximately one foot in 
thickness, or as thin a layer as practical before the next layer is applied. Solid waste at 
all Class III and construction and demolition debris sites shall be spread in layers and 
compacted at least once every week using suitable heavy equipment. Bulky materials 
that are not easily compacted should be worked into other materials as much as 
practical. The first layer of waste placed above the liner and leachate collection 
system (for those landfills with liner and leachate collection systems) shall be a 
minimum of four feet in compacted thickness and consist of selected wastes 
containing no large rigid objects that may damage the liner or leachate collection 
system. 
(i) ?Solid waste shall be formed into cells to construct horizontal lifts. The working 
face of the cell, and side grades above land surface, shall be at a slope no 
greater than three feet horizontal to one foot vertical rise. Lift depth should 
normally not exceed ten feet but may be deeper, up to 20 feet, depending on 
specific operations, daily volume of waste, width of the working face, and good 
safety practices. The working face shall be only wide enough to accommodate 
vehicles discharging waste, to minimize the exposed area and unnecessary use 
of cover material. 
(ii) ?Initial cover shall be applied and maintained at landfills in order to minimize any 
adverse environmental, safety, or health effects such as those resulting from 
birds, blowing litter, odors, disease vectors, or fires. The minimum frequency for 
applying cover shall be at the end of each working day for Class I and Class II 
landfills. However, for those areas where solid waste will be deposited on the 
working face within 18 hours, initial cover may consist of a temporary cover, such 
as a tarpaulin, which may be removed prior to deposition of additional waste. For 
Class III landfills, cover shall be applied at the end of each workweek. An 
intermediate cover in addition to the six-inch initial cover shall be applied and 
maintained within seven days of cell completion, if additional solid waste will not 
be deposited within 180 days of cell completion. The landfill operator may 
remove all or part of the intermediate cover before placing additional waste or 
installing a final cover. The minimum cover requirement for construction and 
demolition sites shall be at the time of the landfill closure. A more frequent cover 
may be required to cover odor or nuisance problems. 
(iii) ?Solid waste disposal units which have been filled to design dimensions (as 
approved by the city) shall receive final cover within 180 days after attaining final 
elevation or in accordance with the schedule included in the approved closure 
plan for the landfill. 
(iv) ?Uncontrolled and unauthorized scavenging shall not be permitted at any landfill 
site. The landfill operator may permit controlled salvaging for recycling. A litter 
policing operation shall be employed to keep litter from leaving the working area 
of the landfill. Litter outside the working area shall be picked up within 24 hours. 
(v) ?Erosion control measures shall be employed to correct any erosion which 
exposes waste or causes malfunction of the stormwater management system or 
reduces the cover below the required thickness. 
2. ?More frequent cover may be required if necessary to prevent health and 
environmental problems. In particular, the director shall consider the proximity to 
nearby residences, evidence of dumping of unauthorized wastes, unlawful fires, 
littering of nearby property, odor problems, the presence of vectors, and any other 
demonstrable potential or existing problems at such sites when making this 
determination. 
3. ?Final cover shall be designed to minimize infiltration. Landfills shall have a final cover 
designed to minimize infiltration and erosion, which shall include a barrier layer 
consisting of a low-permeability soil layer, a geo-membrane, or a combination of a 
geo-membrane with a low-permeability material. For lined Class I and Class II 
landfills, the barrier layer shall have a permeability which is substantially equivalent to, 
or less than, the permeability of the bottom liner system. If the landfill uses a geo-
membrane in the bottom liner system, the barrier layer shall also incorporate a geo-
membrane. 
(i) ?For unlined Class I and Class II landfills, the barrier layer shall have a 
permeability of one × 10 -7 cm/sec or less. For Class III, the barrier layer shall 
have a permeability of one × 10 -5 cm/sec or less. If the barrier layer consists only 
of soil, it shall be at least 18 inches thick after compaction, emplaced in six-inch-
thick compacted lifts, and shall have a final, 18-inch-thick layer of solid that will 
sustain a good stand of grass to control erosion placed on top of the barrier layer. 
(ii) ?For a construction and demolition debris landfill, the soil barrier layer shall be at 
least 18 inches thick after compaction, emplaced in six-inch-thick compacted lifts, 
and shall have a final, six-inch-thick layer of soil that will sustain a good stand of 
grass. 
(iii) ?If a geo-membrane is used in the barrier layer, it shall be a semi-crystalline 
thermoplastic at least 40 mils thick or a non-crystalline thermoplastic at least 30 
mils thick with a maximum water vapor transmission rate of 2.4 g/(m 2 per day), 
have chemical and physical resistance to materials it may come in contact with, 
and withstand exposure to the natural environmental stresses and forces 
throughout the installation, seaming process, and settlement of the waste during 
the closure and long-term care period. A protective soil layer at least 24 inches 
thick shall be put on top of the geo-membrane. Material specifications, 
installation methods, and compaction specifications shall be adequate to protect 
the barrier layer from root penetration, resist erosion, and remain stable on the 
final design slopes of the landfill. This layer shall include six inches of topsoil as 
defined by state department of transportation (FDOT) or soils that will develop a 
good stand of grass. In some cases, a drainage layer may be required between 
the cap (soil and geo-membrane layer) and the topsoil layer. The applicant may 
submit an alternate design of the final cover in the closure plan for review and 
approval by the director. 
u. ?Groundwater monitoring. Wastes shall be disposed of only in disposal sites where a 
groundwater monitoring plan, including a hydrogeological survey, has been completed. 
The hydrogeological survey shall include a foundation analysis to determine the structural 
integrity of the subgrade to support the loads and stresses imposed by the proposed 
landfill. Monitoring is intended to allow a predictive evaluation of the movement and 
composition of discharge from the site. Using part or all of the following listed subsections 
(1)u.1. through (1)u.4. of this section, the applicant shall provide the director with a plan 
containing findings, recommendations and plans for groundwater monitoring derived from 
site-specific information. The groundwater monitoring plan shall show the location of the 
proposed unaffected natural background and down-gradient monitor well and a water 
sampling and chemical analysis protocol which can determine background quality of the 
groundwater in the vicinity of the site and any deviations in the receiving quality of the 
groundwater in the down-gradient monitor well. 
1. ?The applicant shall submit for review and acceptance the FDEP-approved laboratory 
comprehensive quality assurance plan (CompQAP) with the permit application and 
shall keep a current copy on file with the city at all times. All the approved procedures 
for the field and sampling activities must be included in the CompQAP as per DER-
QA-001/92, and for approved analytical methods as per DR-QA001/90 and DER-
QA001/92, including all the quality control requirements for the field and laboratory 
activities. The CompQAP also must include the sample preservation methods and 
sample handling methods including chain-of-custody procedures. If the operator 
wishes to change laboratories at any time during the operation or post-closure 
phases, a new FDEP-approved CompQAP, including all the requirements indicated in 
this section, shall first be submitted to the city. 
2. ?A method for determining background or natural background quality of the 
groundwater must be presented as part of the groundwater monitoring plan as per 
F.A.C. 62-522.600. The following hydrogeological, physical and chemical data for the 
site is the type generally required for assessment of the monitoring plan: 
(i) ?Direction and rate of groundwater flow, and background groundwater quality; 
(ii) ?Porosity, horizontal and vertical permeability for the aquifer and the depth to, and 
lithology of, the first confining bed; 
(iii) ?Vertical permeability, thickness, extent of any confining beds and hydraulic 
interconnections; 
(iv) ?Topography, soil information and surface water drainage system surrounding 
the site. 
3. ?At a minimum, one background (up-gradient) well and two down-gradient wells will be 
required. More wells may be required due to site size or hydrogeological conditions. 
The required hydrogeological survey shall provide technical justification for the 
location, depths, and number of background and down-gradient wells. For new sites, 
wells must be installed prior to acceptance of waste. Installation of wells at existing 
sites must be initiated within 90 days of issuance of a permit renewal. The director 
shall recommend and the city council will determine the acceptability of the proposed 
groundwater monitoring plan including parameters to be monitored and frequency of 
monitoring at the time of permit issuance. At a minimum, the wells shall be analyzed 
semi-annually for all the parameters included in F.A.C. 62-701.510(8)(a). 
4. ?A report of each sampling event, prepared and sealed by a professional engineer or 
professional geologist, shall be submitted to the city. This report shall clearly indicate, 
but not be limited to, the findings, explanation of accedences, correlation between 
related parameters, discussion of erratic and/or poorly correlated data, recommended 
action, site sketch, groundwater contours with flow direction arrows, copies of the 
monitoring well evacuation and stabilization field data sheets, preservation of 
samples, types of containers, chain-of-custody records and laboratory reports with the 
signature of the person taking responsibility of the reported data. 
5. ?For initial permit application for landfill sites, the applicant shall perform a background 
evaluation of each well installed during the hydrogeological investigation of the site 
that will remain as part of the groundwater monitoring plan. The parameters for the 
background evaluation shall be the Florida Primary and Secondary Drinking Water 
parameters, and those listed in Appendix I and II of 40 CFR 258. During the first semi-
annual monitoring event, the applicant shall include the Florida Primary and 
Secondary Drinking Water parameters detected, during the background monitoring 
event, at or above the maximum contaminant level (MCL) as per F.A.C. ch. 62-550. 
For a permit renewal, the applicant shall monitor for the same parameters indicated 
for background determination during the last monitoring event performed before the 
permit renewal application. All related field and laboratory activities shall be performed 
by the laboratory, whose CompQAP has been submitted to the city with the permit 
application. If any of the parameters are detected in concentrations which, in the 
opinion of the director, are significantly above the background water quality or above 
the maximum concentration level, the operator of the landfill shall comply with the 
provisions of F.A.C. 62-701.510(7) and shall also monitor for the primary and 
secondary drinking water parameters during the first assessment monitoring event 
and will continue monitoring those over the MCL as part of the assessment 
monitoring. 
6. ?The facility operator shall inform the city of the next sampling, ten working days prior 
to the sampling, and be prepared to submit a split sample to the city's representative. 
The city shall have the authority to perform any sampling activities it deems 
appropriate in its sole discretion, at any of the monitoring wells, at any time during 
normal operating hours, without prior notice to the operator. Keys for the monitoring 
well locks shall be available at the site at all times. Violations of groundwater quality 
standards may result in revocation of the permit. 
v. ?Gas monitoring and control plan. The applicant shall present a gas control and monitoring 
plan for review. If applicable, the city council may require monitoring, collection, treatment, 
venting or flaring. Off-site emissions may result in revocation of the permit. 
w. ?Financial responsibility. 
1. ?The applicant shall estimate the city's total cost of closure and post-closure care of the 
landfill using a third party. The written estimate shall be for the time period in the 
landfill operation when the extent and manner of its operation make closing most 
expensive. The applicant shall submit the written cost estimates, together with all 
necessary justifications, to the director for review. Unless authorized by the city 
otherwise, the applicant shall establish financial assurance to the satisfaction of the 
director for the cost of closure and post-closure care using one of the following 
methods: 
(i) ?Providing a surety bond guaranteeing performance; 
(ii) ?Providing a letter of credit; 
(iii) ?Providing insurance; 
(iv) ?Acceptance of the financial assurance posted with FDEP, provided it is named 
as a beneficiary of said financial assistance. 
2. ?The mechanism used to demonstrate financial assurance must ensure that funds 
necessary to meet the costs of closure and long-term care are available whenever 
needed and that the funds are accessible to the city to allow the city to close or 
remediate the site in the event that the site is abandoned or operations at the site are 
halted because permits are denied or revoked. Regardless, the permittee is 
responsible for all costs to properly close the landfill and ancillary operations. If the 
city has elected to accept the FDEP's financial assurances as its own, in the event the 
state no longer requires or changes its financial assurance requirements for the 
applicant, the city may either adopt the state's standard and/or adopt its own standard. 
The applicant shall not be authorized to modify its current level of financial assurances 
without the prior written permission of the city, unless said modification increases the 
financial assurances. The city shall be named beneficiary of all financial assurances 
provided to the state or federal government by the applicant. 
x. ?All plans, reports and other supporting documents submitted with a permit application 
which is approved shall become part of the permit, and operation shall proceed in 
accordance with these documents. 
y. ?The city council reserves the right to require additional landscaping or increase setbacks if 
needed to ensure that the site is compatible with surrounding land uses. 
z. ?Final elevation at time of closure of the disposal site, including a minimum of two feet of 
final cover material, shall not exceed the original elevation of the site. The original elevation 
of the site shall mean the elevation prior to any excavation or fill activities which have 
occurred at the site. The city council may waive this requirement and allow solid waste to 
be placed to a greater elevation if the applicant affirmatively demonstrates that a public 
need for this disposal capacity exists and that the public will not be adversely impacted by 
the waiver. A waiver to this requirement must be specifically requested and will be 
considered in accordance with section 58-199(i) and the following conditions: 
1. ?The proposed increase of the final elevation shall not be greater than or conflict with 
any elevation restriction imposed by the state department of environmental protection. 
2. ?Waiver requests shall be granted at the sole discretion of the city council and the 
burden shall be on the applicant to demonstrate compliance with section 58-199(i) 
and the intent of this article. 
(2) ?The following requirements shall apply for solid waste management facilities other than Class I, 
Class II, Class III and construction and demolition debris landfills: 
a. ?The same requirements included in section 58-201. 
b. ?Shall comply with any other requirements included in F.A.C. chs. 62-701 through 62-722. 
c. ?Setback area shall be landscaped to provide a visual buffer from adjacent properties. 
Landscaping shall be designed to minimize visual impacts of both the operation and the 
final closed facility from surrounding properties and roads and shall be consistent with the 
City of Apopka Landscape Ordinance as codified in article V of the Apopka Land 
Development Code, part III of the Municipal Code, and described herein. 
d. ?A closure plan shall be submitted to the city for review and approval. 
e. ?A record of solid waste type and quantity managed at the facility shall be submitted to the 
city quarterly, including the amount and destination of treated, recycled or recovered 
materials leaving the site for reuse, used as raw material or disposed. 
(Code 1993, § 66-177; Ord. No. 1571, § I, 2-19-2003; Ord. No. 1627, § I, 1-7-2004; Ord. No. 
1756, § I, 6-1-2005) 


Sec. 58-202. - Revocation of permits; grounds; violations; penalties; revocations. 
(a) ?All permits issued under this article shall be revocable at any stage of the operation of the solid 
waste management facility upon the following grounds: 
(1) ?The permit was issued by a mistake of law or fact; 
(2) ?The permit is for an operation which violates the provision of this article; 
(3) ?The permit was issued upon negligent or intentional misrepresentation by the applicant; 
(4) ?The operation of the solid waste management facility violates any ordinance of the city; 
(5) ?The operation of the solid waste management facility is not being performed in accordance with 
the provisions of this article; 
(6) ?The operation of the solid waste management facility is not being performed in accordance with 
the terms and conditions of the city permit or any other permit for the solid waste management 
facility; 
(7) ?The permittee is not sufficiently funding the solid waste management facility operation, closure 
or post-closure. 
(b) ?The director may revoke any permit upon finding that one or more of the grounds stated in 
subsection (a) of this section exist. With respect to the violations described in subsections (a)(4), (5) 
and (6) of this section, the director shall deliver written notice to the permit holder which shall indicate 
a due date to correct the violations noted in the notice before revocation takes effect. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the director shall have the authority to revoke a permit and order that 
all operations pursuant thereto immediately cease and desist in the event that the director 
determines that continuing operation under the permit will result in an imminent threat to the public 
health, safety and welfare. Any permit holder adversely affected by revocation may appeal to the city 
council. Any appeal shall be filed in writing with the director within ten days after the date of permit 
revocation. The city council shall provide an appeal hearing during any regular session of the city 
council within 20 working days after receipt of written notice of appeal by a permit holder. 
(c) ?Violation, penalties and remedies. 
(1) ?Violation of this article shall be prosecuted according to general law. 
(2) ?The city may avail itself of any other legal or equitable remedy available to it, including, without 
limitation, injunctive relief or revocation of any permit involved, or requiring the permittee to 
begin closure of the site, including specifying use of mechanisms for funding closure and 
remediation of any contamination from the site. 
(3) ?Any person in violation of this article shall be liable for the costs incurred by the city in 
connection with the enforcement hereof, including, without limitation, attorney fees. Fees will be 
charged for re-inspections necessary to verify correction of a violation. 
(4) ?Subject to the provisions of section 58-201, the director or his designee will notify the operator 
of any violation to this article and will indicate a due date to correct the violation. If the operator 
fails to correct the violation by the due date, the site will be closed for business until the 
corrections are made to the city's satisfaction. The site will be declared abandoned 90 days 
after such closure if the operator fails to correct the violation. After the site has been declared 
abandoned, the financial assurances will be claimed and the city will close the site. 
(5) ?The city council may deny the renewal of a permit based on a history of repeated violations or 
noncompliance with this article. 
(Code 1993, § 66-178; Ord. No. 1571, § I, 2-19-2003) 


Sec. 58-203. - Liberal construction. 
    This article shall be liberally construed in order to carry out its purpose and to protect the 
environment and the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens and residents of the city. 
(Code 1993, § 66-179; Ord. No. 1571, § I, 2-19-2003) 


Sec. 58-204. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, 
the invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this article which can be given effect 
without the invalid provision or application, and to this end, the provisions of this article are declared 
severable. 
(Code 1993, § 66-180; Ord. No. 1571, § I, 2-19-2003) 


Sec. 58-205. - Exclusions. 
    Landfills owned and operated by the city shall be excluded from regulation under this article, but 
shall be regulated by the state department of environmental protection, or its successor state agency. 
(Code 1993, § 66-181; Ord. No. 1571, § I, 2-19-2003) 


Sec. 58-206. - Fees set by resolution. 
    The city council may from time to time, by resolution, establish fees to be applicable to all permits, 
re-inspections or other regulatory activities authorized by this article. 
(Code 1993, § 66-182; Ord. No. 1571, § I, 2-19-2003) 


Sec. 58-207. - Conflict. 
    In the event of conflict between any provision contained within this article and any state law or 
regulation, the more restrictive shall apply. 
(Code 1993, § 66-183; Ord. No. 1571, § I, 2-19-2003) 


Sec. 58-208. - Effective date. 
    This article shall become effective pursuant to general law. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a solid 
waste management facility properly permitted and in compliance with all permit conditions on the effective 
date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall not be required to comply with the regulations 
contained herein until the renewal date of any such permits, unless any such permit is the subject of a 
substantial deviation change to the existing permit. The owner/operator, at his option, may apply for 
modifications approved herein, immediately upon adoption of this article by the city. All decisions 
regarding the approval or disapproval of any application shall be solely within the legislative discretion of 
the city council. Said decision shall be formal, binding and non-appealable. 
(Code 1993, § 66-184; Ord. No. 1571, § I, 2-19-2003; Ord. No. 1627, § I, 1-7-2004) 


Secs. 58-209—58-220. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE VI. - SECONDARY METALS RECYCLERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Second-hand dealers and secondary metal recycle dealers, F.S. § 538.18 et 
seq.; regulation preempted to state, exception, F.S. § 538.28. 


Sec. 58-221. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ferrous metals means any metals containing significant quantities of iron or steel. 
    Fixed location means any site occupied by a secondary metals recycler as the owner of the site or as 
the lessee of the site under a lease or other rental agreement providing for occupation of the site by the 
secondary metals recycler for a total duration of not less than 364 days. 
    Money means a medium of exchange authorized or adopted by a domestic or foreign government as 
part of its currency. 
    Nonferrous metals means metals not containing significant quantities of iron or steel, including, 
without limitation, copper, brass, aluminum, bronze, lead, zinc, nickel, and alloys thereof, excluding 
precious metals. 
    Purchase transaction means a transaction in which a secondary metals recycler gives consideration 
for regulated metals property. 
    Regulated metals property means any item composed primarily of any nonferrous metals, but shall 
not include aluminum beverage containers, used beverage containers, or similar beverage containers, or 
coins. The term "regulated metals property" shall include stainless steel beer kegs and items made of 
ferrous metal obtained from any restricted regulated metals property. 
    Restricted regulated metals property means any regulated metals property listed in F.S. § 
538.26(5)(b), the sale of which is restricted as provided in F.S. § 538.26(5)(a). 
    Secondary metals recycler means any person who: 
(1) ?Is engaged, from a fixed location or otherwise, in the business of purchase transactions or 
gathering or obtaining ferrous or nonferrous metals that have served their original economic 
purpose, or is in the business of performing the manufacturing process by which ferrous metals 
or nonferrous metals are converted into raw material products consisting of prepared grades 
and having an existing or potential economic value; or 
(2) ?Has facilities for performing the manufacturing process by which ferrous metals or nonferrous 
metals are converted into raw material products consisting of prepared grades and having an 
existing or potential economic value, other than by the exclusive use of hand tools, by methods 
including, without limitation, processing, sorting, cutting, classifying, cleaning, baling, wrapping, 
shredding, shearing, or changing the physical form or chemical content thereof. 
    Seller means a person from whom regulated metal property is acquired. 
    Utility means any person, firm, corporation, association, or political subdivision, whether private, 
municipal, county, or cooperative, that is engaged in the sale, generation, provision, or delivery of gas, 
electricity, heat, water, oil, sewer service, telephone service, telegraph service, radio service, 
communications or telecommunication service. 
(Code 1993, § 66-119; Ord. No. 2206, § 2, 12-15-2010) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 538.18. 


Sec. 58-222. - Registration. 
    A person may not engage in business as a secondary metals recycler at any location without 
registering with the state department of revenue. 
State Law reference— Registration required, F.S. § 538.25. 


Sec. 58-223. - Recyclers; limitations on cash transactions. 
(a) ?A secondary metals recycler shall not enter into any cash transaction for purchase of regulated 
metals property that is in excess of $1,000.00 for the purchase of regulated metals property; or in 
any amount for the purchase of restricted regulated metals property. 
(b) ?Payment in excess of $1,000.00 by a secondary metals recycler for the purchase of regulated 
metals property shall be made by check issued to the seller of the metal and payable to the seller. 
(c) ?Payment for the purchase of restricted regulated metals property shall be made by check issued to 
the seller of the metal and payable to the seller or by electronic payment to the seller's bank account 
or the seller's employer's bank account. 
(d) ?Each check for payment shall be mailed by the secondary metals recycler directly to the current 
street address of the seller which is on file with the secondary metals recycler unless otherwise 
provided in this article. Payment shall not be mailed to a post office box. Electronic payments shall 
be sent to an account for which the seller is listed as an account holder or an employee or agent of 
the seller. 
(e) ?Each check or electronic payment shall be mailed or electronically transferred by the secondary 
metals recycler to the seller within three days of the purchase transaction unless otherwise provided 
in this section. 
(f) ?The secondary metals recycler may provide a check at the time of the purchase transaction, rather 
than mailing the check as required in subsection (c) of this section, if the seller is: 
(1) ?An organization, corporation, or association registered with the state as a charitable, 
philanthropic, religious, fraternal, civic, patriotic, social, or school-sponsored organization or 
association, or any nonprofit corporation or association; 
(2) ?A law enforcement officer acting in an official capacity; 
(3) ?A trustee in bankruptcy, executor, administrator, or receiver who has presented proof of such 
status to the secondary metals recycler; 
(4) ?A public official acting under judicial process or authority who has presented proof of such 
status to the secondary metals recycler; 
(5) ?A sheriff acting under the authority of a court's writ of execution, or by virtue of any process 
issued by a court, if proof thereof has been presented to the secondary metals recycler; or 
(6) ?A manufacturing, industrial, or other commercial vendor that generates regulated materials in 
the ordinary course of business. 
(Code 1993, § 66-120; Ord. No. 2206, § 2, 12-15-2010) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 539.235. 


Sec. 58-224. - Restrictions on certain purchases. 
(a) ?A secondary metals recycler shall not purchase any of the following items of regulated metals 
property without obtaining reasonable proof that the seller owns the property (such as by a receipt or 
bill of sale) or proof that the seller is an employee, agent or contractor of a governmental entity, utility 
company, cemetery, railroad, manufacturer, or other person, business, or entity owning the property 
and the seller is authorized to sell the item of regulated metals property on behalf of the person, 
business, or entity owning the property (a secondary metals recycler may retain on file an official 
document on the letterhead of the entity, indicating the seller is authorized to sell the item of 
regulated metals property; however, such letter must be dated within 90 days of the transaction): 
(1) ?A manhole cover. 
(2) ?An electric light pole or other utility structure and its fixtures, wires and hardware that are 
readily identifiable as connected to the utility structure. 
(3) ?A guard rail. 
(4) ?A street sign, traffic sign, or traffic signal and its fixtures and hardware. 
(5) ?Communication, transmission, distribution, and service wire from a utility, including copper or 
aluminum bus bars, connectors and grounding plates or grounding wire. 
(6) ?A funeral marker or funeral vase. 
(7) ?An historical marker. 
(8) ?Railroad equipment, including, but not limited to, a tie plate, signal house, control box, switch 
plate, E clip, or rail tie junction. 
(9) ?Any metal item that is observably marked upon reasonable inspection with any form of the 
name, initials, or logo of a governmental entity, utility company, cemetery, or railroad. 
(10) ?A copper, aluminum or aluminum-copper condensing or evaporator coil, including its tubing or 
rods, from a heating or air conditioning unit, excluding coils from window air conditioning or 
heating units and motor vehicle air conditioning or heating units. 
(11) ?An aluminum or stainless steel container or bottle designed to hold propane for fueling 
forklifts. 
(12) ?Stainless steel beer kegs. 
(13) ?A catalytic converter or any nonferrous part of a catalytic converter, unless purchased as part 
of a motor vehicle. 
(14) ?Metallic wire that was burned in whole or in part to remove insulation. 
(15) ?Brass or bronze commercial valves or fittings, referred to as fire department connection and 
control valves or FDC valves, that are commonly used on structures for access to water for the 
purpose of extinguishing fires. 
(16) ?Brass or bronze commercial potable water backflow preventer valves that are valves 
commonly used to prevent backflow of potable water into municipal domestic water service 
systems from commercial structures. 
(17) ?A shopping cart. 
(18) ?A brass water meter. 
(19) ?A storm grate. 
(20) ?A brass sprinkler head used in commercial agriculture. 
(21) ?More than two lead-acid batteries, or any part or component thereof, in a single purchase or 
from the same individual in a single day. 
(22) ?Copper piping or tubing. 
(b) ?When any seller engages in a purchase transaction or attempts to engage in a purchase transaction 
of any of the items listed above, the secondary metals recycler shall notify the city police department 
within 24 hours of the purchase transaction or attempted purchase transaction. Notification for a 
purchase transaction shall include all of the records required pursuant to F.S. § 538.19. Notification 
for an attempted purchase transaction shall include any information the secondary metals recycler is 
able to obtain identifying the individual who attempted the purchase transaction and the regulated 
metals property including, but not limited to, photographs, video, vehicle description, vehicle tag, 
physical description of the regulated metals property and the individual who attempted to sell the 
regulated metals property. 
(Code 1993, § 66-121; Ord. No. 2206, § 2, 12-15-2010) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 539.26(5). 


Sec. 58-225. - Certain purchases prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for a secondary metals recycler to do or allow any of the following acts: 
(1) ?Purchase regulated metals property, restricted regulated metals property, or ferrous metals 
before 7:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. 
(2) ?Purchase regulated metals property, restricted regulated metals property, or ferrous metals 
from any seller who presents such property for sale at the registered location of the secondary 
metals recycler when such property was not transported in a motor vehicle. 
(3) ?Purchase regulated metals property, restricted regulated metals property, or ferrous metals 
from any location other than a fixed location. 
(4) ?Purchase regulated metals property from a seller who: 
a. ?Uses a name other than his own name or the registered name of the seller's business; 
b. ?Is younger than 18 years of age; or 
c. ?Is visibly or apparently under the influence of drugs or alcohol. 
(5) ?Purchase any restricted regulated metals property listed in section 58-224, unless the 
secondary metals recycler obtains the proof required in that section. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 539.26(1)—(5). 


Sec. 58-226. - Transactions; records required. 
(a) ?A secondary metals recycler shall maintain a legible paper record of all purchase transactions to 
which such secondary metals recycler is a party. All secondary metals recyclers shall also maintain a 
legible electronic record, in the English language, of all purchase transactions to which such 
secondary metals recycler is a party. Such electronic format will be the Florida Integrated Network 
for Data Exchange and Retrieval (F.I.N.D.E.R.) software or such software as is otherwise designated 
in writing by the city police department. It shall be the responsibility of the individual secondary 
metals recycler, or any employee thereof, to obtain the most current data specifications of the 
designated electronic format. The electronic record of a purchase transaction shall be electronically 
transmitted to the appropriate city police department official no later than 10:00 a.m. of the business 
day following the date of the purchase transaction. The record transmitted to the appropriate police 
department official must not contain the price paid for the items. A secondary metals recycler who 
transmits such records electronically is not required to also deliver the original or paper copies of the 
transaction forms to the police department official. However, such official may, for purposes of a 
criminal investigation, request the secondary metals recycler to make available the original 
transaction form that was electronically transmitted. This original transaction form must include the 
price paid for the items. The secondary metals recycler shall make the form available to the 
appropriate police department official within 24 hours after receipt of the request. 
(b) ?The following information shall be maintained and transmitted to the city police department in the 
specified electronic data format described in subsection (a) of this section: 
(1) ?The name and address of the secondary metals recycler. 
(2) ?The name, initials, or other identification of the individual entering the information regarding the 
transaction. 
(3) ?The date and time of the transaction. 
(4) ?The weight, quantity, or volume and a description of the type of regulated metals property 
purchased in a purchase transaction including the make, model, and serial number of the 
regulated metals, if present. 
(5) ?The distinctive number from the personal identification card of the seller. 
(6) ?The amount of consideration given in a purchase transaction for the regulated metals property. 
(7) ?A signed statement from the person delivering the regulated metals property stating that he is 
the rightful owner of, or is entitled to sell, the regulated metals property being sold. If the 
purchase involves a stainless steel beer keg, the seller must provide written documentation 
from the manufacturer that the seller is the owner of the stainless steel beer keg or is an 
employee or agent of the manufacturer. 
(8) ?The distinctive number from the personal identification card of the person delivering the 
regulated metals property to the secondary metals recycler. 
(9) ?A description of the seller, including: 
a. ?Full name, current residential address, workplace, and home and work telephone numbers; 
b. ?Height, weight, date of birth, gender, hair color, eye color, and any other identifying marks; 
c. ?A vehicle description to include the make, model, and tag number of the vehicle and trailer 
of the seller of the regulated metals property; and 
d. ?Any other information required by the form approved by the state department of law 
enforcement as specified in F.S. § 538.19. 
(10) ?A photograph, videotape, or digital image of the regulated metals being sold. 
(11) ?A photograph, videotape, or similar likeness of the person receiving consideration, in which 
such person's facial features are clearly visible. 
(c) ?Such information shall be electronically transmitted for the previous day's business to the city police 
department by 10:00 a.m. on each day the secondary metals recycler is open for business. 
(d) ?A secondary metals recycler shall maintain or cause to be maintained the information required by 
this section for not less than five years from the date of the purchase transaction, except the amount 
of consideration for the purchase transaction. 
(e) ?A secondary metals recycler complies with the requirements of this section if it maintains an 
electronic database containing the information required by subsection (b) of this section as long as 
the electronic information required by subsection (b) of this section, along with an electronic oath of 
ownership with an electronic signature of the seller of the secondary metals being purchased by the 
secondary metals recyclers, and an electronic image of the seller's right thumbprint that has no 
smudges and smears, can be downloaded onto a paper form in the image of the form approved by 
the state department of law enforcement as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(f) ?A secondary metals recycler registered with the state department of revenue that purchases a motor 
vehicle from a licensed salvage motor vehicle dealer as defined in F.S. § 320.27 or another 
secondary metals recycler registered with the department and uses a mechanical crusher to convert 
the vehicle to scrap metal must obtain a signed statement from the seller stating that the seller has 
surrendered the vehicle's certificate of title to the state department of highway safety and motor 
vehicles as provided in F.S. § 319.30 or otherwise complied with the titling requirements provided by 
law for conversion of the vehicle to scrap metal. A secondary metals recycler is not liable for the 
seller's failure to comply with the titling requirements provided by law for conversion of a motor 
vehicle to scrap metal if the secondary metals recycler obtains and maintains the seller's signed 
statement. 
(g) ?If the purchase transaction involves the transfer of regulated metals property from a secondary 
metals recycler registered with the state to another secondary metals recycler registered with the 
state, the secondary metals recycler receiving the regulated metals property shall record the name 
and address of the secondary metals recycler seller in lieu of the requirements listed above. 
(Code 1993, § 66-122; Ord. No. 2206, § 2, 12-15-2010) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 538.19. 


Sec. 58-227. - Inspection of property and records. 
    During the usual and customary business hours of a secondary metals recycler, a law enforcement 
officer shall, after properly identifying himself as a law enforcement officer, have the right to inspect: 
(1) ?Any and all purchased regulated metals property in the possession of the secondary metals 
recycler; and 
(2) ?Any and all records required to be maintained under section 58-226. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 538.20. 


Sec. 58-228. - Required hold; notice. 
(a) ?Whenever a law enforcement officer has reasonable cause to believe that certain items of regulated 
metals property in the possession of a secondary metals recycler have been stolen, the law 
enforcement officer may issue a hold notice to the secondary metals recycler. 
(1) ?The hold notice shall be in writing, shall be delivered to the secondary metals recycler, shall 
specifically identify those items of regulated metals property that are believed to have been 
stolen and that are subject to the notice, and shall inform the secondary metals recycler of the 
information contained in this section. 
(2) ?Upon receipt of the notice issued in accordance with this section, the secondary metals 
recycler receiving the notice may not process or remove the items of regulated metals property 
identified in the notice, or any portion thereof, from the place of business of the secondary 
metals recycler for 15 calendar days after receipt of the notice by the secondary metals 
recycler, unless sooner released by a law enforcement officer. 
(b) ?No later than the expiration of the foregoing 15-day period, a law enforcement officer may issue a 
second hold notice to the secondary metals recycler, which shall be an extended hold notice. 
(1) ?The extended hold notice shall be in writing, shall be delivered to the secondary metals 
recycler, shall specifically identify those items of regulated metals property that are believed to 
have been stolen and that are subject to the extended hold notice, and shall inform the 
secondary metals recycler of the information contained in this section. 
(2) ?Upon receipt of the extended hold notice issued in accordance with this section, the secondary 
metals recycler receiving the extended hold notice may not process or remove the items of 
regulated metals property identified in the notice, or any portion thereof, from the place of 
business of the secondary metals recycler for 45 calendar days after receipt of the extended 
hold notice by the secondary metals recycler, unless sooner released by a law enforcement 
officer. 
(c) ?At the expiration of the hold period or, if extended in accordance with this section, at the expiration 
of the extended hold period, the hold is automatically released and the secondary metals recycler 
may dispose of the regulated metals property unless other disposition has been ordered by a court of 
competent jurisdiction. 


Sec. 58-229. - Exemptions. 
    This article shall not apply to purchases of regulated metals property from: 
(1) ?Organizations, corporations, or associations registered with the state as charitable, 
philanthropic, religious, fraternal, civic, patriotic, social, or school-sponsored organizations or 
associations, or from any nonprofit corporation or association; 
(2) ?A law enforcement officer acting in an official capacity; 
(3) ?A trustee in bankruptcy, executor, administrator, or receiver who has presented proof of such 
status to the secondary metals recycler; 
(4) ?Any public official acting under judicial process or authority who has presented proof of such 
status to the secondary metals recycler; 
(5) ?A sale on the execution, or by virtue of any process issued by a court, if proof thereof has been 
presented to the secondary metals recycler; or 
(6) ?A manufacturing, industrial, or other commercial vendor that generates regulated materials in 
the ordinary course of business. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 538.22. 


Sec. 58-230. - Stolen regulated metals property; petition for return. 
(a) ?If the secondary metals recycler contests the identification or ownership of the regulated metals 
property, the party other than the secondary metals recycler claiming ownership of any stolen goods 
in the possession of a secondary metals recycler may, provided that a timely report of the theft of the 
regulated metals property was made to the proper authorities, bring an action for replevin in the 
county or circuit court by petition in substantially the following form: 
Plaintiff A. B. sues defendant C. D., and alleges: 
(1) ?This is an action to recover possession of personal property in ___________ County, Florida. 
(2) ?The description of the property is: (list property) . To the best of the plaintiff's knowledge, 
information, and belief, the value of the property is $_____. 
(3) ?The plaintiff is the lawful owner of the property and can identify the property as belonging to the 
plaintiff in the following manner: (explain basis of identification) . 
(4) ?The plaintiff is entitled to the possession of the property under a security agreement dated 
________, (year) , a copy of which is attached. 
(5) ?To the plaintiff's best knowledge, information, and belief, the property is located at 
___________. 
(6) ?The property is wrongfully detained by the defendant. The defendant came into possession of 
the property by (describe method of possession) . To the plaintiff's best knowledge, information, 
and belief, the defendant detains the property because (give reasons) . 
(7) ?The property has not been taken under an execution or attachment against the plaintiff's 
property. 
(b) ?The filing fees shall be waived by the clerk of the court and the service fee shall be waived by the 
sheriff. The court may award the prevailing party reasonable attorney fees and costs. 
(c) ?Upon the filing of the petition, the court shall set a hearing to be held at the earliest possible time. 
Upon the receipt by a secondary metals recycler of a petition for return, the secondary metals 
recycler shall hold, and shall not process or otherwise alter, the regulated metals property at issue, 
or any portion thereof, until the court determines the respective interests of the parties. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 538.24. 


Sec. 58-231. - Penalty. 
    A violation shall be prosecuted in the manner provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1993, § 66-123; Ord. No. 2206, § 2, 12-15-2010) 


Chapter 62 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Supplemental and alternative method of making municipal improvements, F.S. 
ch. 170; municipal public works, F.S. ch. 180; uniform minimum standards, F.S. § 336.045; street system 
designated, F.S. § 334.03. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 62-1. - Obstruction of street or sidewalk. 
(a) ?No person, after notice to disperse, shall stand or gather upon any sidewalk in the city in such a way 
as to obstruct the passage of persons along such sidewalk. 
(b) ?No auctioneer or commission merchant shall obstruct any public street or sidewalk for the purpose 
of selling, vending, showing or disposing of his wares or merchandise or of delivering his wares or 
merchandise. No persons shall assemble for the purpose of bidding for such wares or merchandise 
so as to obstruct the free passage on the sidewalks or streets. The provisions of this subsection shall 
not be deemed to legalize any conduct which is prohibited elsewhere in this Code. 
(c) ?Any person who shall place any trash, lumber, wood, glass or other obstruction in any public street, 
lane, alley or way, or on any sidewalk, shall remove the obstruction within six hours after being 
notified to do so by the chief of police or any police officer. 
(Code 1983, § 21-1; Code 1993, § 70-1) 
State Law reference— Obstruction of streets, highways, etc., F.S. §§ 316.2045, 861.01—
861.06. 


Secs. 62-2—62-20. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - STREETS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Uniform minimum standards, F.S. § 336.045. 


Sec. 62-21. - Removal of street materials. 
    No person shall dig or scrape up and carry away gravel, dirt, rocks, bricks or sand from any street, 
lane or alley of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 21-2; Code 1993, § 70-36) 
State Law reference— Removal of injurious material, F.S. § 316.2044. 


Secs. 62-22—62-45. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - SIDEWALKS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Use of rights-of-way, F.S. § 337.408. 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 62-46. - Petition for construction. 
    All petitions for sidewalks, in addition to showing the proposed location, shall state the width and 
character of the walk desired, and the names and addresses of the owners of abutting properties, if 
known. They shall be signed by property owners along the street where the proposed sidewalk is to be 
laid. 
(Code 1983, § 21-41; Code 1993, § 70-61) 


Sec. 62-47. - Abandonment. 
    No sidewalks, once constructed, shall be permanently removed and abandoned without specific 
authorization from the city council. 
(Code 1983, § 21-42; Code 1993, § 70-62) 


Sec. 62-48. - Awnings. 
    All awnings erected within the city in front of both stores and residences shall be, at their lowest 
point, eight feet from the sidewalk. The pillars supporting such awnings shall be placed on the extreme 
outer edge of the sidewalk. 
(Code 1983, § 21-3; Code 1993, § 70-63) 


Sec. 62-49. - Vehicles on sidewalks; damaging sidewalks; use generally. 
    No vehicle of any type, either licensed for use on highways or unlicensed by the state department of 
highway safety and motor vehicles, including vehicles such as, but not limited to, tractors, large mowers, 
harrows, trailers, etc., shall park or drive on any city sidewalk. It shall be unlawful to use sidewalks in such 
a way as to damage sidewalks or to prohibit the intended uses of such sidewalks. 
(Code 1983, § 21-4; Code 1993, § 70-64) 
State Law reference— Driving vehicle upon sidewalk, F.S. § 316.1995. 


Secs. 62-50—62-71. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - REPLACEMENT AND REPAIR 


Sec. 62-72. - Generally. 
(a) ?Responsibility of abutting property owner. The owner of any real estate in the city which adjoins a 
right-of-way on which any sidewalk shall have been ordered repaired or entirely replaced shall be 
considered responsible for such repair or replacement, unless sufficient evidence is produced by the 
owner of the adjoining property to prove the disrepair was due to action attributable to someone else. 
Upon proper notice as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the adjoining property owner or 
other responsible party, as provided in this section, shall be required to repair or replace the sidewalk 
within a period of 45 days. 
(b) ?Service of notice. 
(1) ?Notice by the city engineer, or any other officer who may be designated by the city council 
under the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, may be made or given by any of the 
following methods: 
a. ?Notice shall be in writing and shall be served by personal delivery or by registered mail to 
the owner of such property, or to his agent. 
b. ?If there is no known address for the owner or his agent, then notice shall be published once 
a week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation that is published in 
the city, either as a display advertisement or as a legal advertisement. Such notice shall 
give either the street address or the section of the street abutting the right-of-way where 
the sidewalks or parkways are to be laid or repaired, and may give the legal description of 
the property abutting the portion of the right-of-way where the walks or parkways are to be 
laid or repaired, along with the name of the owner as is best known to the city. 
c. ?If there is no known address for the owner or his agent, then notice may be posted for a 
period of two weeks on the lot abutting the portion of the right-of-way where the walk or 
parkway is to be laid or repaired. 
(2) ?The name of the person to whom the property is assessed on the last confirmed tax roll of the 
county will be construed as being the present owner for all of the methods of notification 
described in this subsection, unless the city has specific knowledge otherwise. 
(c) ?Repair by city on failure to comply with notice; lien. If any person so owning property adjoining a 
right-of-way on which such sidewalk or parkway has been ordered laid or repaired in accordance 
with subsection (a) of this section, and who shall have received notice as provided in subsection (b) 
of this section, shall fail or refuse to construct or repair such sidewalk or parkway within a period of 
45 days, the city may construct or repair the sidewalk or parkway, or cause the sidewalk or parkway 
to be repaired or constructed, and shall thereupon be entitled to a lien upon such property for the 
reasonable expense of such repairs or construction, and such lien shall be superior to all other liens 
except for taxes. 
(Code 1983, § 21-36; Code 1993, § 70-81) 


Sec. 62-73. - Repair of damage caused by trees. 
    Sidewalks damaged by roots from a tree located in the city right-of-way, or by limbs falling from such 
tree or removal of such tree, shall be repaired by the city at no cost to the abutting property owner. 
Damage to a sidewalk caused by a tree located on private property will be considered action attributable 
to the property owner for the purposes of this division. 
(Code 1983, § 21-37; Code 1993, § 70-82) 


Sec. 62-74. - Repair of sidewalks installed prior to January 1, 1977. 
    The city will make any sidewalk repairs deemed necessary, at its expense, for sidewalks installed 
prior to January 1, 1977, to bring them to the city standards. Any sidewalks installed since January 1, 
1977, that are in disrepair shall be the responsibility of the adjoining property owner to repair, according to 
section 62-72. 
(Code 1983, § 21-38; Code 1993, § 70-83) 


Secs. 62-75—62-91. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - OUTDOOR PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 62-92. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Outdoor public assembly means any ceremony, show, exhibition, concert, pageant, rally, 
demonstration or assembly of any kind calculated to attract at any one time the attendance or attention of 
over 100 people, which is held in or on any public property, and any parade as defined in this section. 
    Parade means any procession, march or assembly wherein the participants proceed by foot, vehicle 
or otherwise in or upon any street, sidewalk, public right-of-way, bicycle path, public property or public 
parking facility within the city; provided, however, that the term "parade" shall not include a peaceful 
procession or picketing that is conducted off the street or roadway in conformance with all traffic laws, city 
ordinances and state statutes and not in a manner so as to obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1983, § 13-41; Code 1993, § 70-111) 


Sec. 62-93. - Penalty for violation of article; additional remedies. 
(a) ?Any person violating the provisions of any section of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished 
as provided in section 1-14. 
(b) ?Any person violating the provisions of any section of this article shall be subject to injunctive relief 
prohibiting such violation and mandating compliance with this article, as well as for all attorney fees 
and court costs incurred by the city in obtaining such relief. 
(Code 1983, § 13-46(d), (e); Code 1993, § 70-112) 


Sec. 62-94. - Compliance with article. 
(a) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to stage, present or conduct any assembly without first having 
obtained a permit therefor as provided in this article. 
(b) ?It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to participate in an assembly for which a permit has not 
been granted. 
(c) ?It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of or responsible for the conduct of a duly licensed 
assembly knowingly to fail to comply with any condition of the permit. 
(Code 1983, § 13-46(a)—(c); Code 1993, § 70-113) 


Sec. 62-95. - Police protection. 
(a) ?Generally. The chief of police shall determine whether and to what extent additional police 
protection reasonably will be necessary for an assembly for purposes of traffic control and public 
safety. The chief of police shall base this decision on the size, location, duration, time and date of the 
event, the expected sale or service of alcoholic beverages, the number of streets and intersections to 
be blocked, and the need to detour or preempt ordinary citizen travel and use of the streets and 
sidewalks. The content of the speech or event will not be a factor in determining the amount of police 
protection necessary. If possible, without disruption of ordinary police services or compromise to 
public safety, the event will be policed by regularly scheduled on-duty personnel. If additional police 
protection for the assembly is deemed necessary by the chief of police, he shall so inform the 
applicant for an outdoor assembly permit. The applicant then shall have the duty to secure the police 
protection deemed necessary by the chief of police at the sole expense of the applicant, who shall 
prepay the expenses of such protection. 
(b) ?Public issue speech. Persons exercising their First Amendment rights by engaging in events, 
parades or demonstrations conducted for the sole purpose of a public issue speech shall not be 
required to pay the costs of any police protection provided by the city at the assembly. 
(Code 1983, §§ 13-42, 13-43; Code 1993, § 70-114) 


Sec. 62-96. - Public conduct. 
(a) ?Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere with any duly 
licensed assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in such assembly. 
(b) ?Driving through parade. No driver of any vehicle, unless specifically permitted by an officer of the 
city police department, shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a duly licensed 
parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
(c) ?Parking on parade route or in area near assembly. The chief of police shall have the authority, when 
reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof 
constituting a part of the route of a parade or an area needed for the safe and efficient flow of traffic 
to or from an assembly. The chief of police shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for 
any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. 
(Code 1983, § 13-44; Code 1993, § 70-115) 


Sec. 62-97. - Discrimination. 
    It shall be unlawful for any permittee under this article, or any agent or employee of the permittee, 
either directly or indirectly to: 
(1) ?Discriminate against any natural person by refusing, withholding or denying to such person any 
of the services, advantages, facilities or privileges offered or available to any other person 
attending the assembly, or by setting different rates or charges therefor, or by placing or 
attempting to place any such natural person in a separate and segregated section or area at the 
assembly. 
(2) ?Publish, circulate, display, post or mail any written or printed communication or notice to the 
effect that any of the services, advantages, facilities or privileges of the assembly will be 
refused, withheld or denied to any natural person on account of the person's race, color, 
religion, national origin, ancestry or sex, or that the person's attendance and presence at the 
assembly is unwelcome or objectionable, or that the person will be prohibited from mingling with 
other persons at the assembly because of the person's race, color, religion, national origin, 
ancestry or sex. 
(3) ?Aid, abet, incite or coerce the doing of any act declared in this section to be unlawful, or to 
prevent or attempt to prevent any person from complying with the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1983, § 13-45; Code 1993, § 70-116) 


Secs. 62-98—62-122. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 


Sec. 62-123. - Required; exception. 
(a) ?No person shall advertise, engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any outdoor public assembly 
unless an outdoor public assembly permit shall first have been obtained from the city. 
(b) ?This section shall not apply to, nor shall a permit be required for, funeral processions. 
(Code 1983, § 13-57; Code 1993, § 70-136) 


Sec. 62-124. - Application. 
(a) ?Required. Any person seeking the issuance of an outdoor public assembly permit shall file an 
application with the city on forms provided by the city. 
(b) ?Filing period. 
(1) ?For single, nonrecurring outdoor public assemblies, an application for a permit shall be filed 
with the mayor's office not more than 180 days before and not less than ten calendar days 
before the date and time at which it is proposed to commence the assembly; provided, however, 
that the mayor shall waive the minimum ten-day filing period and accept an application filed 
within a shorter period if, after due consideration of the date, time, place and nature of the 
assembly, the anticipated number of participants, and the necessity for the amount of city 
services which will be required in connection therewith, the mayor determines that such waiver 
will not present a hazard to the public safety because of the reduced amount of time available 
within which to fully process the application. The application shall be signed by the applicant 
under oath. 
(2) ?For outdoor public assemblies which are to be held on a regular or recurring basis at the same 
location during a calendar year, an application for a permit covering all such assemblies during 
that calendar year may be filed with the mayor not more than 180 days before and not less than 
60 days before the date and time at which it is proposed to commence the first such assembly; 
provided, however, that the mayor may waive the minimum 60-day period after due 
consideration of the factors specified in subsection (b)(1) of this section. The application shall 
be signed by the applicant under oath. 
(c) ?Contents. The application for a permit shall set forth the following information, and such other 
information as may from time to time be reasonably required: 
(1) ?The name, place of residence, mailing address and telephone number of the person seeking to 
conduct the assembly. 
(2) ?If the assembly is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an organization, the names, 
addresses and telephone numbers of the headquarters of the organization and of the 
authorized and responsible heads of such organization. 
(3) ?The name, place of residence, mailing address and telephone number of the individual person 
who will be the assembly chairperson and who will be responsible for the conduct of the 
assembly. 
(4) ?The date when the assembly is to be conducted. 
(5) ?The type of assembly, including a description of the activities which will occur during the event. 
(6) ?The hours when such assembly will start and terminate. 
(7) ?A description of any and all recording equipment, sound amplification equipment, banners, 
signs or other attention-getting devices which will be utilized in connection with the assembly. 
(8) ?The approximate number of participants, not including spectators, who will participate in the 
assembly. 
(9) ?The approximate number of spectators who will be present at or near the assembly. 
(10) ?If the assembly is designed to be held by, on behalf of or for any person other than the 
applicant, a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the assembly, 
authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf, which shall be filed with the 
mayor. 
(11) ?The exact location of the assembly and, if the assembly is a parade, the location, by streets, 
of any marshaling areas for such parade. 
(12) ?A designation of any public facilities or equipment proposed to be utilized. 
(13) ?If the application is for a parade, the following information: 
a. ?The time at which units of the parade will begin to arrive at the marshaling areas, and the 
times at which all such units will be disbursed therefrom. 
b. ?The route to be traveled, including the starting point and the termination point. 
c. ?The approximate number of persons, animals, and vehicles which will constitute such 
parade, the types of animals and a description of the vehicles. 
d. ?A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the 
streets or sidewalks to be used. 
(14) ?Whether alcoholic beverages will be sold or served at the event. 
(Code 1983, § 13-58(a)—(c); Code 1993, § 70-137) 


Sec. 62-125. - Fees. 
(a) ?A nonrefundable fee of $50.00 to cover the administrative costs of processing the permit shall be 
paid to the city by the person applying for a permit under this division at the time of filing of the 
application. 
(b) ?If the application is for the use of any city property or if any city services shall be required for the 
assembly, the applicant shall pay, prior to the issuance of a permit, the charges therefor in 
accordance with a schedule of fees approved by the city council by resolution. 
(Code 1983, § 13-58(d); Code 1993, § 70-138) 


Sec. 62-126. - Indemnification of city. 
    The applicant for a permit under this division, and any other person on whose behalf the application 
is made, by filing a permit application, shall represent, stipulate, contract and agree that they will jointly 
and severally indemnify and hold the city harmless against liability, including court costs and attorney 
fees, and including attorney fees for an appeal, for any and all claims for damage to property or injury to 
or death of persons arising out of or resulting from the issuance of the permit or the conduct of the 
assembly or any of its participants. 
(Code 1983, § 13-58; Code 1993, § 70-139) 


Sec. 62-127. - Standards for issuance. 
    The mayor shall issue a permit as provided for under this division when, from a consideration of the 
application and from other information as may otherwise be obtained, it appears that: 
(1) ?The conduct of the assembly will not interrupt substantially the safe and orderly movement of 
other pedestrian or vehicular traffic in or contiguous to the route or location of the assembly. 
(2) ?The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at the assembly will not interfere unduly 
with proper fire and police protection of or ambulance service to areas contiguous to the 
assembly area or other areas of the city. 
(3) ?Adequate sanitary facilities and other required health facilities are or will be made available in 
or adjacent to the assembly area. 
(4) ?There are sufficient parking places near to the site of the assembly to accommodate the 
approximate number of automobiles reasonably expected to be driven to the assembly. 
(5) ?The applicant has secured the police protection, if any, required under section 62-95. 
(6) ?If the assembly is a parade, such parade is not to be held for the primary purpose of 
advertising any product, goods or event which is primarily for private profit, and the assembly 
itself is not primarily for profit; provided, however, the prohibition against advertising any 
product, goods or event shall not apply to signs identifying organizations or sponsors furnishing 
or sponsoring exhibits or structures used in the conduct of the assembly. 
(7) ?No assembly permit application for the same time and location has been received which has 
been or will be granted. 
(8) ?No assembly permit application for the same time but in another location has been received 
which has been or will be granted where the police resources required for that prior public 
assembly are so great that, in combination with the subsequent proposed application, the 
resulting deployment of police services would have an immediate and adverse effect upon the 
welfare and safety of persons and property. 
(9) ?No event is scheduled elsewhere in the city where the police resources required for that event 
are so great that the deployment of police services for the proposed assembly would have an 
immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of persons and property. 
(Code 1983, § 13-60; Code 1993, § 70-140) 


Sec. 62-128. - Action by mayor; notice of denial. 
    The mayor shall act promptly upon a timely filed application for a permit under this division, but in no 
event less than 48 hours prior to the event. If the mayor disapproves the application, he shall notify the 
applicant of his action either by personal delivery or certified mail within such time period, stating the 
reasons for his denial of the permit. 
(Code 1983, § 13-58(e); Code 1993, § 70-141) 


Sec. 62-129. - Appeal of denial. 
(a) ?Any applicant aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a permit under this division to 
the city council. The appeal shall be filed by the applicant within five days after receipt of the notice 
of denial by filing a written notice with the mayor with a copy to the city clerk. The city council shall 
consider the appeal at the next regularly scheduled meeting following receipt by the mayor of the 
notice of appeal, and shall direct the mayor forthwith to issue a permit unless good cause shall be 
made to appear for the denial of the issuance thereof on the grounds stated in this division. 
(b) ?If the city council rejects an applicant's appeal, the applicant may file an immediate request for 
review with a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1983, § 13-58(f); Code 1993, § 70-142) 


Sec. 62-130. - Alternate permit. 
    The mayor, in denying an application for a permit under this division, may, in the interest of traffic 
control and public safety, authorize the conduct of the assembly on a date, at a time, over a route or in a 
location different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept the alternative shall, 
within five days after notice of the action of the mayor, file a written notice of acceptance with the mayor. 
An alternate permit shall conform to the requirements of and shall have the effect of a permit under this 
article. 
(Code 1983, § 13-58(g); Code 1993, § 70-143) 


Sec. 62-131. - Contents. 
    Each permit issued under this division shall state the following information: 
(1) ?The nature of the assembly. 
(2) ?The date of the assembly. 
(3) ?The starting time and termination time of the assembly. 
(4) ?The location of the assembly or the portions of the streets, parks or other public facilities to be 
traversed or occupied by the assembly. 
(5) ?The approximate number of persons, animals and motor vehicles that will participate in the 
assembly. 
(6) ?The approximate number of spectators who will be present at or near the assembly. 
(7) ?Such other restrictions as the mayor shall find necessary or appropriate to the enforcement of 
this article. 
(Code 1983, § 13-59; Code 1993, § 70-144) 


Sec. 62-132. - Notice to city officials. 
(a) ?Immediately upon the issuance of a permit under this division, the mayor shall send a copy thereof 
to the following: 
(1) ?The chief of police. 
(2) ?The city clerk. 
(3) ?The public works director. 
(4) ?The chief of the fire department. 
(b) ?All such officials shall furnish their recommendations to the mayor regarding the application and the 
activity's proposed compliance with federal, state, city and county laws, codes, ordinances and 
regulations, and any other facts deemed pertinent by such department heads. 
(Code 1983, § 13-63; Code 1993, § 70-145) 


Sec. 62-133. - Duties of permittee; display. 
    A permittee under this division shall comply with all permit directions and conditions, and with all 
applicable laws and ordinances. The assembly chairperson or other person heading or leading such 
assembly shall carry the permit upon his person during the conduct of the assembly and shall display the 
permit upon demand to the mayor or any member of the police department. 
(Code 1983, § 13-61; Code 1993, § 70-146) 


Sec. 62-134. - Revocation. 
    The mayor or chief of police shall have the authority to revoke a permit issued under this division 
instantly upon violation of any one or more of the conditions or standards for issuance as set forth in this 
division, or when a public emergency arises where the police resources required for that emergency are 
so great that deployment of police services for the assembly would have an immediate and adverse effect 
upon the welfare and safety of persons or property. 
(Code 1983, § 13-62; Code 1993, § 70-147) 


Chapter 66 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Finance and taxation, F.S. § 166.201 et seq.; ad valorem taxation, F.S. ch. 192 et 
seq.; local business tax, F.S. ch. 205. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 66-1—66-18. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - INSURANCE PREMIUM TAX 


Sec. 66-19. - Tax on casualty insurance for benefit of municipal police officers' retirement trust fund. 
(a) ?There is hereby assessed, imposed and levied on every insurance company, corporation or other 
insurer engaging in or carrying on the business of casualty insurance, as shown by the records of the 
state office of insurance regulation of the financial services commission, an excise or license tax, in 
addition to any license tax or excise tax now levied by the city, which tax shall be in the amount of 
0.85 percent of the gross amount of receipts of premiums from policyholders on all premiums 
collected on casualty insurance policies covering property within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b) ?The license or excise tax levied in this section shall be due and payable annually on March 1 of 
each year. 
(Code 1983, § 12-2; Code 1993, § 74-36) 
State Law reference— Tax on casualty insurance authorized, F.S. § 185.08. 


Sec. 66-20. - Tax on property insurance for benefit of firefighters' pension fund. 
(a) ?There is hereby assessed, imposed and levied on every insurance company, corporation or other 
insurer engaging in or carrying on the business of property insurance, as shown by the records of the 
state office of insurance regulation of the financial services commission, an excise tax in addition to 
any license tax or excise tax levied by the city, which tax shall be in the amount of 1.85 percent of 
the gross amount of receipts of premiums from policyholders on all premiums collected on property 
insurance policies covering property within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b) ?The excise tax levied in this section shall be due and payable annually on March 1 of each year. 
(Code 1983, § 12-3; Code 1993, § 74-37) 
State Law reference— Municipal excise tax on property insurance premiums, F.S. § 175.101. 


Secs. 66-21—66-43. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC SERVICE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal finance and taxation, F.S. § 166.201 et seq.; public service tax, F.S. §§ 
166.231—166.235. 


Sec. 66-44. - Imposed. 
(a) ?There is hereby imposed and levied by the city a tax upon each and every purchase of electricity, 
metered natural gas, liquefied petroleum gas either metered or bottled, manufactured gas either 
metered or bottled, and water service within the corporate limits of the city, in the amount of ten 
percent of each payment received by the seller for such utility service or commodity. Such tax shall 
be paid by the purchaser to the seller, for the use of the city, at the time of paying the charge 
therefor, but not less often than monthly. 
(b) ?All terms in this article shall have the same meaning as those in F.S. §§ 166.231 and/or 203.012, as 
amended. 
(Code 1983, § 12-4(a); Code 1993, § 74-61(a), (c); Ord. No. 1225, § I, 10-20-1999) 


Sec. 66-45. - Collection. 
(a) ?It shall be the duty of every seller of electricity, metered natural gas, liquefied petroleum gas either 
metered or bottled, manufactured gas either metered or bottled, and water service within the city to 
collect from the purchaser, for the use of the city, the tax levied under the provisions of section 66-44 
at the time of collecting the selling price thereof, and to report and pay over, on or before the 15th 
day of each calendar month, unto the city, all such taxes levied and collected during the preceding 
calendar month. It shall be unlawful for any seller to collect for any such service without, at the same 
time, collecting the tax levied by this article. Any seller failing to collect such tax at the time of 
collecting for any such service shall be liable to the city for the amount of such tax; provided, 
however, that the seller shall not be liable for the payment of such tax upon uncollected bills. If any 
purchaser shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay for any such service, including the tax imposed by this 
article, the seller shall have the right and is hereby authorized and empowered to immediately 
discontinue further service to such purchaser until the amount is paid in full. 
(b) ?Interest will be assessed at a rate of one percent per month on any delinquent tax, from the date the 
tax was due until paid. A penalty of five percent per month of any delinquent tax will be assessed, 
except that in no event will the penalty for failure to file a return be less than $15.00. 
(Code 1983, § 12-4(b); Code 1993, § 74-62(a), (d); Ord. No. 1225, § I, 10-20-1999) 


Sec. 66-46. - Records. 
    Each and every seller of electricity, metered natural gas, liquefied petroleum gas either metered or 
bottled, manufactured gas either metered or bottled, and water service shall keep complete records 
showing all sales in the city of such commodities or services, which records shall show the price charged 
upon each sale, the date thereof and the date of payment. Such records shall be maintained and the city 
shall have the right to audit in conformance with state statutes. 
(Code 1983, § 12-4(c); Code 1993, § 74-63; Ord. No. 1225, § I, 10-20-1999) 
State Law reference— Administrative procedure, audits, rights, etc., F.S. § 166.234. 


Sec. 66-47. - Exemptions. 
    All federal, state, county and municipal governments, and their commissions and agencies, all public 
schools and public bodies exempted by law or court order shall be exempt from the payment of the taxes 
imposed and levied in this article. All purchases by any recognized church in the state for use exclusively 
for church purposes shall be exempt from such tax. 
(Code 1983, § 12-4(d); Code 1993, § 74-64) 
State Law reference— Mandatory exemptions, F.S. § 166.231(4)(b). 


Secs. 66-48—66-67. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - LOCAL COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Communications services tax simplification law, F.S. § 202.10 et seq.; authority 
to adopt communications services tax, F.S. § 202.19; option to increase local communications services 
tax, F.S. § 337.401(3)(c)1. 


Sec. 66-68. - Levied. 
(a) ?There is hereby imposed and levied by the city a tax on each and every purchase of 
communications service, as defined by F.S. § 202.11, which originates and terminates in this state, a 
tax of 6.12 percent of each payment received by the seller of such service, from the purchaser for 
the purchase of such service, at the time of paying the charge therefor, but not less than monthly, for 
such service provided within the city, or, if the location of the communications service provided 
cannot be determined, the total amount billed for such communications service to a telephone or 
telephone number, a communications number or device, or a customer's billing address located 
within the city. 
(b) ?All terms in this article shall have the same meaning as those in F.S. §§ 166.231 and/or F.S. §§ 
202.22 and 203.012, as amended. 
(Code 1983, § 12-4(b); Code 1993, § 74-61(a), (c); Ord. No. 1225, § I, 10-20-1999) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt communications services tax, F.S. § 202.19. 


Sec. 66-69. - Increasing the local communications services tax. 
(a) ?Intent. It is the intent of the city to make an election under F.S. § 337.401(3)(c)1. regarding the city 
decision on whether to require and collect permit fees from any providers of communications 
services that use or occupy municipal roads or rights-of-way for the provision of communications 
services. 
(b) ?Election not to require and collect permit fees. The city elects not to require and collect permit fees 
from any provider of communications services that uses or occupies municipal roads or rights-of-way 
for the provision of communications services. As provided in F.S. § 337.401(3)(c)1., this election 
shall take effect October 1, 2001. 
(c) ?Election to increase local communications services tax. Pursuant to section F.S. § 
337.401(3)(c)1.b., the city elects to increase its total rate for the local communications services tax 
as computed under F.S. § 202.20(1) and (2), by an amount of 0.12 percent, and this election shall 
take effect October 1, 2001. 
(d) ?Notice to the department of revenue. Notice of the above elections was provided to the state 
department of revenue by certified mail by July 16, 2001, as provided in F.S. § 337.401(3)(c). 
(Code 1993, § 75-1; Res. No. 2001-12, §§ 1—4, 6-20-2001) 
State Law reference— Use of right-of-way; F.S. § 337.401. 


Sec. 66-70. - Seller's credit for collecting tax. 
    For the purpose of compensating the seller of communications service, the seller may deduct one 
percent of the amount of the tax collected and due the city as compensation for the keeping of records, 
and collection and remitting of the tax. 
(Code 1983, § 12-4(b); Code 1993, § 74-62(c); Ord. No. 1225, § I, 10-20-1999) 
State Law reference— Credit for collecting tax, F.S. § 202.28. 


Secs. 66-71—66-98. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE V. - LOCAL BUSINESS TAXES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Local business taxes, F.S. § 205.013 et seq. 


Sec. 66-99. - Business tax receipt required. 
(a) ?No person shall engage in or manage, as a principal or agent, within the city, any profession, 
occupation or business for which a business tax receipt is required by this article unless and until he 
has procured such receipt from the community development department. 
(b) ?It is unlawful for any person to carry on or engage in any business, profession or occupation 
described in this article or designated in this article without having first paid the business taxes 
provided in this article, and having obtained and having lawfully in his possession a valid, unrevoked 
business tax receipt for the current fiscal year or shorter period specified, and having otherwise 
complied with the terms and provisions of this article. 
(c) ?An applicant for a business tax receipt shall submit a completed application and a $10.00 
nonrefundable fee to the community development department. The issuance by the community 
development department and receipt by the applicant of a business tax receipt shall in no case be 
deemed authority to conduct an occupation, business or profession in contravention of any other 
provision of this Code, or to establish or maintain any nuisance. 
(d) ?The business tax may be levied on: 
(1) ?Any person who maintains a permanent business location or branch office within the city, for 
the privilege of engaging in or managing any business within its jurisdiction. 
(2) ?Any person who maintains a permanent business location or branch office within the city, for 
the privilege of engaging in or managing any profession or occupation within its jurisdiction. 
(3) ?Any person who does not qualify under subsection (d)(1) or subsection (d)(2) of this section 
and who transacts any business or engages in any occupation or profession in interstate 
commerce, if the business tax is not prohibited by S. 8, Art. I of the United States Constitution. 
(Code 1993, § 74-86; Ord. No. 1955, § II, 8-1-2007) 
State Law reference— Levy, F.S. § 205.042. 


Sec. 66-100. - Separate business tax receipt required for each business classification. 
    Whenever any business, occupation or profession shall fall into more than one of the classifications 
contained in the schedule set forth in this article, such occupation, business or profession shall be 
required to comply with the requirements of this chapter and to pay the business tax imposed under or 
pertaining to each classification. 
(Code 1993, § 74-87; Ord. No. 1955, § II, 8-1-2007) 


Sec. 66-101. - Due date; penalty for late payment. 
(a) ?All business taxes required by this article shall be sold by the community development department 
beginning July 1 of each year, and the business tax shall be due and payable on or before 
September 30 of each year, and the business tax receipt shall expire on September 30 of the 
succeeding year. If September 30 falls on a holiday or weekend, the tax shall be due and payable on 
the following working day. Those business taxes not paid by September 30 shall be considered 
delinquent and subject to a delinquency penalty of ten percent for the month of October, plus an 
additional five percent penalty for each month of delinquency thereafter until paid. However, the total 
delinquency penalty shall not exceed 25 percent of the business tax for the delinquent 
establishment. 
(b) ?Any person engaging in or managing any business, occupation or profession without first obtaining 
the required business tax receipt, if required under this article, shall be subject to a penalty of 25 
percent of the tax determined to be due, in addition to any other penalty provided by law or 
ordinance. 
(c) ?Any person who engages in any business, occupation, or profession covered by this article, who 
does not pay the required business tax within 150 days after the initial notice of tax due, and who 
does not obtain the required receipt, is subject to civil actions and penalties, including court costs, 
reasonable attorney fees, additional administrative costs incurred as a result of collection efforts, and 
a penalty of $250.00. 
(Code 1993, § 74-88; Ord. No. 1955, § II, 8-1-2007) 
State Law reference— Due date, delinquency, penalty, F.S. § 205.053. 


Sec. 66-102. - Payment of delinquent tax prerequisite to renewal of business tax receipt; responsibility 
for payment of business tax. 
(a) ?Any person owing delinquent business taxes shall be required to pay such delinquent taxes before 
being issued a new business tax receipt. 
(b) ?It shall be the business owner's responsibility to pay all business taxes required by this article. 
(Code 1993, § 74-89; Ord. No. 1955, § II, 8-1-2007) 


Sec. 66-103. - Term of business tax receipt; transfer of business tax receipt. 
(a) ?No business tax receipt shall be issued for more than one year, and all receipts shall expire on 
September 30 of each year, except as otherwise provided by law. 
(b) ?Upon written request and presentation of the original tax receipt, the business name may be 
changed from one business name to another for the same owner, upon payment of a transfer fee of 
ten percent of the annual tax, but not less than $3.00 nor more than $25.00. 
(c) ?No transfers shall be authorized for changes in business classifications, or from mobile or home 
occupations to a commercial location. These requests must follow the procedure for opening a new 
business. 
(d) ?All business tax receipts may be transferred to a new owner when there is a bona fide sale of the 
business, upon payment of a transfer fee of ten percent of the annual tax, but not less than $3.00 nor 
more than $25.00, and presentation of the original tax receipt and evidence of the sale. 
(e) ?Upon written request and presentation of the original tax receipt, any receipt may be transferred 
from one location to another location upon payment of a transfer fee of ten percent of the annual tax, 
but not less than $3.00 nor more than $25.00. 
(Code 1993, § 74-90; Ord. No. 1955, § II, 8-1-2007) 
State Law reference— Due date and transfer, F.S. § 205.043. 


Sec. 66-104. - Partial year taxes. 
    Any business tax receipt required by this article and issued on or after April 1 of any year shall be 
subject to one-half of the applicable tax required by this article, and shall expire on September 30 next 
following, unless specifically excepted. 
(Code 1993, § 74-91; Ord. No. 1955, § II, 8-1-2007) 
State Law reference— Partial license authorized, F.S. § 205.053(1). 


Sec. 66-105. - Issuance of business tax receipt; duplicate receipts. 
    Business tax receipts required by this article shall be issued by the community development 
department only after payment of the applicable business tax set out in this article. A fee of $3.00 shall be 
paid to the community development department for the issuance of a duplicate or replacement receipt. 
(Code 1993, § 74-92; Ord. No. 1955, § II, 8-1-2007) 


Sec. 66-106. - Standards for approval of business tax receipt. 
(a) ?Food establishments. Every business which deals in any way or manner with food, beverages, 
confections or any other substance reasonably intended for human consumption shall, as a 
prerequisite to the issuance of a receipt under the provisions of this article, display, at the time of 
application for such receipt, the written approval of the county health department, provided that this 
provision shall not apply to any such business where the health department has no jurisdiction under 
state law or declines to accept jurisdiction or make an inspection and give written approval. 
(b) ?Businesses requiring approval by city. Whenever in this article the approval of the city council, or of 
a city officer or employee, is required for the issuance of a business tax receipt, such approval shall 
be given if it is shown that the applicant's business, profession or occupation will comply with all laws 
and ordinances. 
(Code 1993, § 74-93; Ord. No. 1955, § II, 8-1-2007) 


Sec. 66-107. - Illegal businesses. 
    Neither the provisions of this article, nor the levy or payment of a business tax pursuant to this 
article, shall authorize any person to engage in any business, occupation or profession within the city 
which is prohibited by ordinance. 
(Code 1993, § 74-94; Ord. No. 1955, § II, 8-1-2007) 


Sec. 66-108. - Tax not intended to be burden on interstate commerce. 
    No special or business tax provided for by this article is intended to be an undue burden upon 
interstate commerce. 
(Code 1993, § 74-95; Ord. No. 1955, § II, 8-1-2007) 


Sec. 66-109. - Tax supplemental to other fees. 
    The business taxes required by this article shall be in addition to all other fees or taxes levied or 
hereafter to be levied by the city. 
(Code 1993, § 74-96; Ord. No. 1955, § II, 8-1-2007) 


Sec. 66-110. - Determination of tax for businesses not specifically listed. 
    Any person engaging or proposing to engage in any business, occupation or profession not 
specifically covered by this article shall register and pay such amounts as the community development 
director shall determine, pending a final determination of the proper amount of the business tax by the city 
council, as provided in section 66-111. 
(Code 1993, § 74-97; Ord. No. 1955, § II, 8-1-2007) 


Sec. 66-111. - Disputes regarding amount of tax. 
    Every case of doubt or dispute as to the amount of the business tax required by this article shall be 
resolved by the city council, provided that the applicant shall have paid or tendered to the community 
development department prior thereto the full amount of the tax claimed by such applicant to be due 
under this article. 
(Code 1993, § 74-98; Ord. No. 1955, § II, 8-1-2007) 


Sec. 66-112. - Discounts. 
    The amount of the business taxes required by this article shall be paid in full without discount. 
(Code 1993, § 74-99; Ord. No. 1955, § II, 8-1-2007) 


Sec. 66-113. - Statement of inventory. 
(a) ?Every person engaged in business within the city as a merchant, as described in this article, where 
the amount of the business tax to be paid is dependent upon the value of the stock on hand, shall 
deliver to the community development department a sworn statement, on or before July 1 of each 
year, setting forth the value of his stock on hand as of the close of business reflected on the 
immediate past federal income tax return filed by said merchant, regardless of the fact that the return 
is based on the immediate previous calendar year or on an immediate previous fiscal year not 
coinciding with the immediate previous calendar year. 
(b) ?Every person engaged in business within the city in a business, occupation or profession, the 
business tax for which is based or dependent upon the number of seats for customers, or the 
number of rooms, etc., shall deliver to the community development department a sworn statement on 
or before July 1 of each year, setting forth the number of seats, the number of rooms, etc., as of July 
1 of the same year. 
(Code 1993, § 74-100; Ord. No. 1955, § II, 8-1-2007) 


Sec. 66-114. - Display. 
(a) ?Every business tax receipt issued under this article shall be at all times conspicuously displayed in 
the place of business for which it was issued. 
(b) ?When the business owner/manager does not maintain a place of business, he shall be prepared to 
present his tax receipt for inspection by any police or other officer of the city at all times while 
engaging in the business, occupation, privilege or profession for which the business tax receipt was 
issued. 
(Code 1993, § 74-101; Ord. No. 1955, § II, 8-1-2007) 


Sec. 66-115. - Nonprofit organizations. 
    For those organizations that can provide evidence from the state of their tax exemption, as set forth 
under F.S. ch. 205, no business tax will be required. However, the organization will be required to 
complete the local business tax application process. Occasional sales are excluded. 
(Code 1993, § 74-103; Ord. No. 1955, § II, 8-1-2007) 
State Law reference— Exemptions from tax, F.S. §§ 205.053—205.192. 


Sec. 66-116. - Schedule.[5] 
    There is hereby assessed, levied and imposed upon every business, trade, occupation and 
profession carried on within the city an annual business tax in the following amounts: 
(1) ?Abstract and title company: $48.00. 
(2) ?Advertising agent/agency: $61.00. 
(3) ?Agency, agent or salesperson: 
a. ?Claims or collection agency: $61.00. 
b. ?Credit reporting (separate business tax required for collection agency): $61.00. 
c. ?Employment: $61.00. 
d. ?Other (not otherwise specified): $61.00. 
(4) ?Aircraft/aircraft agency (including airplane and helicopter)*: 
a. ?For hire: $121.00. 
b. ?Flying/air pilot lessons: $121.00. 
(5) ?Airport facility (FAA license required). See storage for hangars: $121.00. 
(6) ?Ambulance service, private*: 
a. ?Office: $61.00. 
b. ?Each vehicle: $24.00. 
(7) ?Amusement: 
a. ?Amusement arcade having games and other amusement devices (for each game/device; 
see coin-operated machines or devices): $61.00. 
b. ?Bingo/casino: $61.00. 
c. ?Bowling alley, each lane: $21.00. 
d. ?Carnival, including riding devices, per day (city council approval required): $243.00. 
e. ?Circus, per day (city council approval required; $500.00 deposit required; unexpended 
balance returned): $243.00. 
f. ?Golf: 
1. ?Miniature, each course: $61.00. 
2. ?Driving range: $61.00. 
3. ?Par three, etc.: $121.00. 
4. ?Regulation, nine to 18 holes: $243.00. 
g. ?Kiddie ride used exclusively for the entertainment of children and not as a part of a carnival 
or circus, each machine: $24.00. 
h. ?Merry-go-round, Ferris wheel, etc. (except for carnivals), each device: 
1. ?Per year or portion thereof: $61.00. 
2. ?Temporary, per day: $24.00. 
i. ?Pony ride: $48.00. 
j. ?Pool and billiard room: 
1. ?First table: $21.00. 
2. ?Each additional table: $12.50. 
k. ?Rodeo, per day: $243.00. 
l. ?Skating rink: $121.00. 
m. ?Swimming pool (where a charge is made): $121.00. 
n. ?Track (bicycle, motorbike, midget cars, etc.): $181.00. 
(8) ?Animal service: 
a. ?Clinic/hospital* (premises permit required): $61.00. 
b. ?Veterinarian: $121.00. 
c. ?Grooming: $61.00. 
d. ?Kennel/boarding: $61.00. 
e. ?Pet sitter: $61.00. 
(9) ?Armored car: 
a. ?Office: ..... $61.00. 
b. ?Each vehicle: $24.00. 
(10) ?Appraiser, other than real estate: $61.00 
(11) ?Auction shop*: $243.00. 
(12) ?Automobile/motorized vehicle: 
a. ?Dealer.* (Agencies or persons engaged in sale of automobiles, trucks or tractors. Dealers 
paying a business tax under the provisions of this schedule are permitted to conduct a 
repair shop, including upholstering, painting, and body work, and to carry in stock repair 
parts to service the different lines or makes handled, and to deal in second-hand cars 
taken in exchange on sales of new cars by such agency, provided that the entire operation 
is conducted from one location.): 
1. ?New/used dealer, with accessories and repairing: $121.00. 
2. ?New/used dealer, no repair: $61.00. 
b. ?Detailing: $61.00. 
c. ?Rental (not including taxi or transfer companies): $61.00. 
d. ?Repair business* (not in connection with a dealer paying a local business tax). 
Note—Such shops are permitted to carry a stock of parts as necessary to be used only in 
making repairs in the shop holding a current business tax certificate. If any portion of the 
stock is sold in any other manner, a merchant's tax receipt is required. 
The business license tax is as follows, including the owner: 
1. ?One to three persons: $48.00. 
2. ?Four to eight persons: $61.00. 
3. ?Nine to 20 persons: $121.00. 
4. ?20+ persons: $183.00. 
e. ?Towing/wrecking service: 
1. ?Office and one truck: $69.00. 
2. ?Each additional truck: $24.00. 
f. ?Window tinting: $61.00. 
(13) ?Bakery: $61.00. 
(14) ?Bar/lounge*: $121.00. 
(15) ?Blacksmith, farrier, horseshoer: $61.00. 
(16) ?Bond, criminal or bail*: $364.00. 
(17) ?Bootblack: 
a. ?One or two seats: $12.50. 
b. ?Each additional operator seat: $2.10. 
(18) ?Broadcasting company (television, radio, etc.): $121.00. 
(19) ?Brokerage/broker: 
a. ?Merchandise: $121.00. 
b. ?Stocks and bonds*: $121.00. 
c. ?Insurance*: $121.00. 
d. ?Mortgages and loans*: $121.00. 
e. ?Not otherwise specified: $121.00. 
(20) ?Business/administrative office (not otherwise identified in this schedule): $61.00. 
(21) ?Cablevision company: 
a. ?Office: $121.00. 
b. ?Each vehicle: $24.00. 
(22) ?Carwash: $61.00. 
(23) ?Catering*: $61.00. 
(24) ?Coin-operated machine or device. Any machine in which a customer deposits a coin or token, 
and which returns a commodity or service for such coin or token: 
a. ?Machine, other than video, located in a place of business not owned and operated by the 
owner of the machine, each machine: $12.50. 
b. ?Machine, other than video, located in a place of business owned and operated by the 
owner of the machine, each machine: $5.25. 
c. ?Video game, each machine: $12.50. 
(25) ?Computer service (to include data processing, repair or programming, website design and/or 
maintenance, etc.): $61.00. 
(26) ?Concrete: 
a. ?Office: $61.00. 
b. ?Each truck: $24.00. 
(27) ?Consulting agency/consultant: $61.00. 
(28) ?Contractor. Any person who for compensation undertakes to or submits a bid to, or does 
himself or by others, construct, repair, alter, remodel, add to, subtract from, or improve any 
building or structure, including related improvements to real estate, for others, or for resale to 
others, on a cost-plus or hourly basis, is required to have a city business tax receipt: 
a. ?General*: $91.00. 
b. ?State-licensed, -certified or -registered contractors*: $61.00. 
c. ?Others, not state-licensed, -certified or -registered: $61.00. 
(29) ?Dance floor, as part of an establishment holding a current tax receipt: $61.00. 
(30) ?Dance hall, public ballroom*: $121.00. 
(31) ?Day care, children/adult*: $61.00. 
(32) ?Dealer in live bait*: $30.00. 
(33) ?Delivery/express/courier service (delivery of parcels, boxes, bags, packages, etc.): 
a. ?One vehicle: $30.00. 
b. ?Each additional vehicle: $12.50. 
(34) ?Designer (see "Professional" for interior designer): $61.00. 
(35) ?Detective, investigator, patrol and guard service*: 
a. ?Agency: $121.00. 
b. ?Detective, investigator, each: $61.00. 
Note—Class "C" detective is exempt under F.S. ch. 493. 
c. ?Patrol, guard, each: $24.00. 
(36) ?Development company: $121.00. 
(37) ?Disc jockey: $61.00. 
(38) ?Distributor (does not stock merchandise, but orders for customers only): $121.00. 
(39) ?Exhibition, for profit (per day): $121.00. 
(40) ?Exterminator*: 
a. ?Office with one truck: $61.00. 
b. ?Each additional vehicle: $12.50. 
(41) ?Financial service*: 
a. ?Bank, savings and loan, trust company or person doing a banking business: $243.00. 
b. ?Small loan company, as defined in F.S. ch. 516. Local business tax is to be computed on 
the basis of outstanding loan accounts as of December 31 of the previous year. Separate 
business tax receipts are required for each company and each location. The schedule of 
local business taxes is as follows: 
1. ?Accounts outstanding up to $100,000.00: $121.00. 
2. ?Accounts outstanding $100,001.00 to $500,000.00: $218.00. 
3. ?Accounts outstanding $500,000.00: $243.00. 
c. ?Discount consumer financing and finance company, including capital loans and the retail 
and wholesale financing of the sale or lease of motor vehicles, boats, trailers and mobile 
homes, and also mortgage loan business. Local business taxes are computed on the basis 
of the aggregate outstanding loan account balance as of December 31 of the previous 
year. Separate business tax receipts are required for each company and each location. 
The schedule of local business taxes is as follows: 
1. ?Accounts outstanding up to $1,000,000.00: $121.00. 
2. ?Accounts outstanding $1,000,001.00 to $5,000,000.00: $218.00. 
3. ?Accounts outstanding $5,000,001.00: $243.00. 
d. ?Automated teller machine (ATM), except those located on the site of a financial institution: 
$121.00. 
e. ?Check cashing company: $243.00. 
f. ?Other financial service not otherwise listed: $121.00. 
(42) ?Fish market and oysters*: 
a. ?Retail: $61.00. 
b. ?Wholesale: $69.00. 
(43) ?Florist shop (additional merchant business tax receipt is required): $61.00. 
(44) ?Fortuneteller, clairvoyant, palmist, astrologer, phrenologist, character reader, spirit medium, 
mental healer, divine healer and every person engaged in any occupation of a similar nature: 
$121.00. 
(45) ?Funeral*: 
a. ?Facility: $146.00. 
b. ?Director, each: $61.00. 
(46) ?Garbage hauling, for profit, including recycling materials (city franchise required): $121.00. 
(47) ?Gasoline and/or oil. Wholesale bulk dealer (flat rate) and/or liquid petroleum: $121.00. 
(48) ?Gasoline fueling station.* Accessories incidental to such business permitted without extra 
charge: 
a. ?One gasoline pump: $30.00. 
b. ?Each additional nozzle: $6.25. 
(49) ?Handyman (affidavit required): $61.00. 
(50) ?Health/exercise*: 
a. ?Limited service facility*: $121.00. 
b. ?Full service facility*: $243.00. 
c. ?Personal trainer: $30.00. 
(51) ?Home inspector/inspection: $61.00. 
(52) ?Home occupation: 
a. ?The fee for the following home occupations shall be as shown: 
1. ?Sewing and dressmaking: $12.50. 
2. ?Knife or scissor sharpening: $12.50. 
3. ?Music teacher or instructor (individual instruction): $30.00. 
4. ?Piano tuner: $24.00. 
5. ?Artist (paintings or other art for profit, small sizes): $61.00. 
6. ?Crafts: $61.00. 
b. ?Others not otherwise classified: $61.00. 
(53) ?Hospital, sanitarium*: $243.00. 
(54) ?Hotel or motel* (including apartments, roominghouses, etc.). All other activities, such as 
restaurants, bars, dancing, etc., must have a separate business tax receipt. Each bedroom 
rented: $6.25. 
(55) ?House mover or wrecker: $61.00. 
(56) ?Housing facility* (this includes adult congregate living facilities, adult foster homes, child foster 
homes, assisted living facilities, emergency shelters and homes, group homes and nursing 
homes): $121.00. 
(57) ?Insurance*: 
a. ?Each company or corporation writing life, fire, accident, health, public liability, indemnity, 
motor vehicle, industrial or other types or forms of insurance, collecting premiums from 
within the corporate limits of the city: $30.00. 
b. ?Agency: 
1. ?Insurance agency permitting operation of only one person: $36.00. 
2. ?Each additional person such as a solicitor or salesperson, taking applications for, 
negotiating, or collecting premiums: $12.50. 
Note—Each insurance company represented must first pay the local business tax as 
provided in this subsection for a company. 
c. ?Traveling agent, soliciting insurance of any kind, for mutual, reciprocal or other 
associations, companies or exchanges (not permitted to operate under a resident agent's 
business tax receipt or to solicit business for a company which has not paid the local 
business tax to operate in the city). Each agent: $24.00. 
d. ?Insurance adjuster: $61.00. 
e. ?Insurance premium financing: $61.00. 
(58) ?Interior decorator: $61.00. 
(59) ?Janitorial or cleaning service (residential, commercial, industrial, carpet, etc.): $61.00. 
(60) ?Jewelry and watch repairing: $61.00. 
Note—A separate tax receipt is not required for jewelry and watch repair within an 
establishment holding a tax receipt; merchant tax receipt required for sales. 
(61) ?Junk shop or dealer, including dealers in junk, old trash, rags, metal, rubber, etc., and 
including those gathering about the city in trucks: $121.00. 
(62) ?Junk, salvage, or wrecking yard: $364.00. 
(63) ?Laboratory: 
a. ?Chemical or other testing laboratory: $121.00. 
b. ?Those laboratories not otherwise classified where work is done, parts made or assembled, 
or analysis is made for the medical, dental or optical profession: $61.00. 
(64) ?Land clearing and site cleanup/excavation: $121.00. 
(65) ?Laundry and/or dry cleaning: 
a. ?Self-service and automatic: $61.00. 
b. ?Pickup station, each: $34.00. 
c. ?Supply and delivery service: $61.00. 
(66) ?Lawn service and care, general (see "Contractor" for landscaping): $30.00. 
(67) ?Lumber or building material dealer: $121.00. 
(68) ?Mail order company: $91.00. 
(69) ?Manufacturer. The businesses listed under this classification are permitted to manufacture 
and sell at wholesale the products manufactured. Any other manner of sales of the products 
manufactured may require a merchant's tax receipt. The business tax shall include the owner 
and the operators actively engaged in the business: 
a. ?One to three persons: $48.00. 
b. ?Four to eight persons: $61.00. 
c. ?Nine to 20 persons: $121.00. 
d. ?20 + persons: $183.00 
(70) ?Manufacturer representative: $61.00. 
(71) ?Marketing company/agency: $61.00. 
(72) ?Medical equipment supplies: $61.00. 
(73) ?Merchant, retail/wholesale. 
(Note—Arms dealers, upon demand of the city police department, are required to provide 
records of all acquisitions and disposal. Requires federal firearms license): 
a. ?Retail. 
b. ?Wholesale. 
c. ?Import/export. The business tax receipt shall permit but one location, when the average 
value of the stock of goods carried is as follows: 
1. ?Up to and including $25,000.00: $61.00. 
2. ?Each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof: $1.15. 
Note—Maximum business tax: $192.00. 
(74) ?Milk and dairy products distributor, wholesale or retail: 
a. ?One truck: $36.00. 
b. ?Each additional truck: $12.50. 
(75) ?Mobile home park or sales: 
a. ?Park, per space: $2.30. 
b. ?Sales: 
1. ?One to 100 trailers: $121.00. 
2. ?100 + trailers: $194.00. 
(76) ?Moving company: 
a. ?Office only: $61.00. 
b. ?Each vehicle: $24.00. 
(77) ?Newspaper: 
a. ?Published less than six times per week: $61.00. 
b. ?Published six or more times per week: $121.00. 
(78) ?Nursery, sales of shrubs, trees, plants, sod, etc., (not grown by operator): $30.00. 
(79) ?Organization/association: $61.00. 
(80) ?Parking lot, for profit: 
a. ?One to ten vehicles: $19.00. 
b. ?11 to 30 vehicles: $29.00. 
c. ?31 to 60 vehicles: $39.00. 
d. ?61 to 100 vehicles: $50.00. 
e. ?101+ vehicles: $96.00. 
(81) ?Pawnbroker.* Businesses selling goods other than those pledged must pay an additional 
business tax as other merchants: $303.00. 
(82) ?Peddler*: 
a. ?Fruits and vegetables and other items intended for human consumption, when not 
otherwise specified in this section: $30.00. 
b. ?Lunches, sandwiches, peanuts or ice cream (no vehicle): $24.00. 
c. ?Lunches, sandwiches, peanuts or ice cream (from pushcart or other vehicle): $48.00. 
d. ?Fish peddler: $61.00. 
e. ?Wares, merchandise, goods, etc.: $121.00. 
f. ?Itinerant merchant (seasonal and holiday sales): $121.00. 
g. ?Solicitation only (no sales taking place): $24.00. 
(83) ?Personal service business* (beauty, barber, nail, tan, etc.; may require additional merchant 
tax receipt): 
a. ?Establishment with one station/chair: $30.00. 
b. ?Each additional station/chair: $12.50. 
c. ?Cosmetologist, nail technician, facial specialist, electrolysis, etc., (independent contractor 
within an establishment with a current tax receipt)*: $24.00. 
d. ?Massage therapist*: $61.00. 
(84) ?Pharmacy: $61.00. 
(85) ?Photography/videography: 
a. ?Individual/freelance, each: $48.00. 
b. ?Studio (photographer/videographer included): $121.00. 
c. ?Photo finishing pickup station: $61.00. 
(86) ?Printing: 
a. ?Primary business: $61.00. 
b. ?Accessory to a business with a current tax receipt: $24.00. 
(87) ?Produce, established place of business (not grown by operator): $61.00. 
(88) ?Professional agency, association, firm, corporation, partnership, P.A. (office only): $61.00. 
(89) ?Professional* (individual): 
a. ?Medical: $121.00. 
b. ?Engineer: $91.00. 
c. ?Other (any profession not otherwise provided for in this article): $61.00. 
(90) ?Production company: $121.00. 
(91) ?Promoter. Entertainment, exhibits, shows, closed-circuit TV, sporting events, concerts, etc. 
(also see "Amusements"): $121.00. 
(92) ?Property management/leasing office: $61.00. 
(93) ?Public stenographer, letter service: $61.00. 
(94) ?Publishing house: $121.00. 
(95) ?Railroad, steamship, or airline company maintaining an office for the purpose of booking and 
touring passengers: $121.00. 
(96) ?Real estate*: 
a. ?Agency: $36.00. 
b. ?Principal broker: $36.00. 
c. ?Associate broker: $24.00. 
d. ?Sales associate: $22.00. 
e. ?Appraiser: $36.00. 
(97) ?Rental: 
a. ?Small equipment (including sporting equipment and tools, etc.): $61.00. 
b. ?Heavy equipment (including tractors, graders, etc.): $121.00. 
(98) ?Restaurant, cafe, deli, snack bar, cafeteria* (may require additional city business tax receipt): 
a. ?One to 25 seats: $42.00. 
b. ?Over 25 seats, each: $1.15. 
c. ?Drive-in or carry-out: $61.00. 
d. ?Alcoholic beverages served: $121.00. 
(99) ?Sales (not falling under the definition of "Merchant"): 
a. ?Office: $61.00. 
b. ?Internet: $61.00. 
(100) ?Sawmill: $121.00. 
(101) ?School, private, operating for profit (based on total annual enrollment): 
a. ?One to 25 students: $61.00. 
b. ?26 to 50 students: $121.00. 
c. ?51 to 100 students: $183.00. 
d. ?101 students or more: $243.00. 
(102) ?Septic tank cleaning and service: $61.00. 
Note—Equipment to comply with health department requirements. 
(103) ?Service and/or repair. Businesses paying a business tax under this classification are 
permitted to carry a stock of parts or supplies as necessary to be used only in the function of the 
business receipt. If any portion of the stock is sold in any other manner, a merchant's tax receipt 
is required. The business tax is based on the number of employees and including the owner 
and operators, as follows: 
a. ?One to three persons: $48.00. 
b. ?Four to eight persons: $61.00. 
c. ?Nine to 20 persons: $121.00. 
d. ?20+ persons: $183.00. 
(104) ?Shooting range: $61.00. 
(105) ?Storage/warehouse/public storage: $121.00; cold or food lockers only: $61.00. 
(106) ?Studio (recording, filming, processing, testing, sound and films): $121.00. 
(107) ?Tailor/seamstress (does not permit cleaning): $61.00. 
(108) ?Tax service/bookkeeping: $61.00. 
(109) ?Taxidermist (merchant's tax receipt required for sales): $72.00. 
(110) ?Telegraph system/wire service (e.g., Western Union, Dolex): 
a. ?Generally: $183.00. 
b. ?Sub-agent or station: $48.00. 
(111) ?Telephone answering service: $61.00. 
(112) ?Telephone solicitation*: $121.00. 
(113) ?Television antenna, satellite system, sale and/or installation, when not in connection with the 
sale of television sets. Additional permits may be required: $61.00. 
(114) ?Theater: 
a. ?Generally: $292.00. 
b. ?Drive-in: $194.00. 
(115) ?Travel agency*(also see "Insurance," if insurance is sold): $61.00. 
(116) ?Tree trimming or surgeon: $61.00. 
(117) ?Trucking business/terminal: $121.00. 
(118) ?Unclassified (not otherwise set out in this section): $61.00. 
(119) ?Utility: 
a. ?Electrical light or power company, furnishing light and power in the city, by city franchise 
only: $61.00. 
b. ?Gas distributor, manufactured or natural: 
1. ?Natural, pipeline, or manufactured: $121.00. 
2. ?Bottled, LPG: $61.00. 
c. ?Telephone system. Must comply with plans of city for underground distribution: $303.00. 
(120) ?Vehicle for hire (with driver). Must comply with requirements of chapter 82: 
a. ?One to six passengers, first vehicle: $61.00. 
b. ?Seven+ passengers, first vehicle: $61.00. 
c. ?Each additional vehicle: $24.00. 
(121) ?Water company selling bottled water: 
a. ?One truck: $121.00. 
b. ?Each additional truck: $24.00. 
(122) ?Weight control center (food sales requires additional merchant tax receipt): $91.00. 
(123) ?Window tinting (other than auto): $61.00. 
(Code 1993, § 74-104; Ord. No. 1955, § II, 8-1-2007; Ord. No. 2510 , §1, 12-21-2016) 
State Law reference— Privilege of doing business fees and exemptions, F.S. §§ 205.042, 
205.063 et seq. 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Note— An asterisk (*) denotes that a state license, registration, or permit may be required. 


Secs. 66-117—66-145. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE VI. - COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT TRUST FUND[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Community redevelopment, F.S. § 163.330 et seq. 


Sec. 66-146. - Established; purposes for which utilized and expended. 
    There is hereby established and created, in accordance with the provision of the Community 
Redevelopment Act of 1969, F.S. § 163.330, hereinafter referred to as the Act, a community 
redevelopment trust fund (the fund) for the community redevelopment area, which fund shall be utilized 
and expended for the purpose of and in accordance with the plan, including any amendments or 
modifications thereto approved by the community redevelopment agency, including any community 
redevelopment (as that term is defined in F.S. § 163.340) under this plan. 
(Code 1993, § 74-126; Ord. No. 783, § 1, 6-28-1993) 


Sec. 66-147. - Use of monies; duration of fund; administration of monies. 
    The monies to be allocated to and deposited into the fund shall be used to finance community 
redevelopment within the community redevelopment area, which shall be appropriated when authorized 
by the agency. The agency shall utilize the funds and revenues paid into and earned by the fund for 
community redevelopment purposes as provided in the plan and as permitted by law. The fund shall exist 
for the duration of the community redevelopment undertaken by the agency pursuant to the plan and the 
extent permitted by the Act. Monies shall be held in the fund and the fund shall be administered by the 
city for and on behalf of the agency, and disbursed from the fund as provided by the Act, this article, or 
when authorized by the agency. 
(Code 1993, § 74-127; Ord. No. 783, § 2, 6-28-1993) 


Sec. 66-148. - Security of money; investment; deposit of cash. 
    The money held in the fund shall be continuously secured in the same manner as state and 
municipal deposits are authorized to be secured by the laws of the state. The funds may be invested 
according to the Act and state statutes. The cash required to be accounted for in the trust fund described 
in this Act may be deposited in a single bank account, provided, that adequate accounting records are 
maintained to reflect and control the restricted allocation of cash on deposit therein for the various 
purposes of such funds and accounts as herein provided. 
(Code 1993, § 74-128; Ord. No. 783, § 3, 6-28-1993) 


Sec. 66-149. - Payment into fund. 
    There shall be paid into the fund each year by each of the taxing authorities (as that term is defined 
in F.S. § 163.340) levying ad valorem taxes within the community redevelopment area, and shall be that 
amount equal to 95 percent of the incremental increase in ad valorem taxes levied each year by that 
taxing authority, as calculated in accordance with section 66-150 and the Act, based on the base year 
established in this section (such annual amount being hereafter referred to as the tax increment). 
(Code 1993, § 74-129; Ord. No. 783, § 4, 6-28-1993) 


Sec. 66-150. - Tax roll. 
    The most recently approved tax roll prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article 
is derived used in connection with the taxation of real property in the community redevelopment area shall 
be the real property assessment roll of Orange County, Florida, reflecting the valuation of real property for 
purposes of ad valorem taxation as of January 1, 1992 (the base year value), and submitted to the 
department of revenue pursuant to F.S. § 193.1142, and all deposits into the fund shall be in the amount 
of tax increment calculated as provided in section 66-149 based upon increases in valuation of taxable 
real property from the base year value. 
(Code 1993, § 74-130; Ord. No. 783, § 5, 6-28-1993) 


Sec. 66-151. - Tax increment—Determination. 
    The tax increment shall be determined annually by each taxing authority and shall be that amount 
equal to 95 percent of the difference between: 
(1) ?The amount of ad valorem taxes levied each year by all taxing authorities, exclusive of any 
amount from any debt service millage, on taxable real property located within the geographic 
boundaries of the community redevelopment area; and 
(2) ?The amount of ad valorem taxes which would have been produced by the rate upon which the 
tax is levied each year by all taxing authorities upon the total of the assessed value of the 
taxable real property in the community redevelopment area as shown upon the assessment roll 
used in connection with the taxation of such property by all taxing authorities prior to the 
effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Code 1993, § 74-131; Ord. No. 783, § 6, 6-28-1993) 


Sec. 66-152. - Same—Appropriation and deposit. 
    All taxing authorities shall annually appropriate to and cause to be deposited in the fund the tax 
increment determined pursuant to the Act and section 66-149 at the beginning of each fiscal year thereof 
as provided in the Act. The obligation of each taxing authority to annually appropriate the tax increment 
for deposit in the fund shall commence immediately upon the effective date of the ordinance from which 
this article is derived and continue to the extent permitted by the Act until all loans, advances and 
indebtedness, if any, and interest thereon, incurred by the agency as a result of community 
redevelopment in the community redevelopment area have been paid. 
(Code 1993, § 74-132; Ord. No. 783, § 7, 6-28-1993) 


Sec. 66-153. - Established as separate fund. 
    The fund shall be established and maintained as a separate trust fund by the city pursuant to the Act 
and this article, and other directives of the governing body of the agency as may from time to time be 
adopted, whereby the fund may be promptly and effectively administered and utilized by the agency 
expeditiously and without undue delay for its statutory purpose pursuant to the plan. 
(Code 1993, § 74-133; Ord. No. 783, § 8, 6-28-1993) 


Sec. 66-154. - Responsibility for fund. 
    The chief financial officer of the city (the trustee), on behalf of the city and the agency, shall be the 
trustee of the fund and shall be responsible for the receipt, custody, disbursement, accountability, 
management, investment and proper application of all monies paid into or expended from the fund in 
accordance with agency authorization and with state and local laws. Disbursement of monies shall be 
made upon presentation of adequate supporting documentation in the reasonable opinion of the trustee. 
(Code 1993, § 74-134; Ord. No. 783, § 9, 6-28-1993) 


Sec. 66-155. - Copy of article authorized to be sent to each taxing authority. 
    The city clerk is hereby authorized to send a certified copy of this article to each of the taxing 
authorities and to the county property appraiser. 
(Code 1993, § 74-135; Ord. No. 783, § 12, 6-28-1993) 


Secs. 66-156—66-178. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE VII. - ADDITIONAL HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION FOR PERSONS AGE 65 YEARS AND OLDER[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt additional homestead exemption for persons age 65 and older, 
F.S. § 196.075. 


Sec. 66-179. - Authority. 
    This article is enacted in compliance with and pursuant to F.S. chapters 166 and 196, and section 
6(f), article VII of the state constitution. 
(Code 1993, § 74-161; Ord. No. 1596, § 1, 9-17-2003; Ord. No. 1944, § 1, 5-16-2007) 


Sec. 66-180. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have 
the meanings given herein. Words not defined herein shall have those meanings ascribed in F.S. § 
196.075, as the same may be amended from time to time. When not inconsistent with the context, words 
are to be gender neutral, words used in the present these include the future, words in the plural include 
the singular, and words in the singular include plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not 
merely directory. 
    City means the City of Apopka, Florida, a municipal corporation organized and existing under the 
laws of the state. 
    City limits means the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1993, § 74-162; Ord. No. 1596, § 2, 9-17-2003; Ord. No. 1944, § 2, 5-16-2007) 


Sec. 66-181. - Additional homestead exemption. 
    There is hereby granted an additional homestead exemption of $50,000.00 for any person who has 
legal or equitable title to real estate in the city limits and maintains thereon the permanent residence of 
the owner, who has attained age 65, and whose household income does not exceed $20,000.00. If title is 
held jointly with right of survivorship, the person residing on the property and otherwise qualifying may 
receive the entire amount of the additional homestead exemption. 
(Code 1993, § 74-163; Ord. No. 1596, § 3, 9-17-2003; Ord. No. 1944, § 3, 5-16-2007) 


Sec. 66-182. - Adjustment to household income limitation. 
    Beginning January 2, 2004, and for as long as permitted by state statute, the $20,000.00 household 
income limitation shall be adjusted annually, on January 1, by the percentage change in the average cost-
of-living index in the immediate prior calendar year compared with the calendar year prior to that. The 
index is the average of the monthly consumer price index figures for the stated 12-month period, relative 
to the United States as a whole, issued by the United States Department of Labor. 
(Code 1993, § 74-164; Ord. No. 1596, § 4, 9-17-2003) 


Sec. 66-183. - Exemption applies only to city taxes. 
    The additional homestead exemption granted pursuant to section 66-181 shall apply only to ad 
valorem taxes levied by the city at the millage rate adopted by the city for the respective year. 
(Code 1993, § 74-165; Ord. No. 1596, § 5, 9-17-2003) 


Sec. 66-184. - Applicability to dependent special districts and municipal service taxing units (MSTUs). 
    The additional homestead exemption granted pursuant to section 66-181 shall not apply to ad 
valorem tax levies of any dependent special district or municipal service taxing unit (MSTU) within the city 
limits. 
(Code 1993, § 74-166; Ord. No. 1596, § 6, 9-17-2003) 


Sec. 66-185. - Exclusion. 
    The additional homestead exemption granted pursuant to section 66-181 shall not apply to any non-
ad valorem assessments established by the city. 
(Code 1993, § 74-167; Ord. No. 1596, § 7, 9-17-2003) 


Sec. 66-186. - Sworn statement of household income. 
    To be entitled to the additional homestead exemption, a taxpayer claiming the exemption must 
annually submit to the county property appraiser, not later than March 1, a sworn statement of household 
income on a form prescribed or approved by the state department of revenue. The state department of 
revenue may require that the statement be supported by copies of any federal income tax returns for the 
prior year, any wage and earnings statements (W-2 forms), and any other documents the county property 
appraiser finds necessary, for each member of the household, to be submitted by June 1, and that the 
taxpayer's statement attest to the accuracy of such copies. If the state department of revenue imposes 
such a requirement, then the county property appraiser shall not allow the exemption without such 
supporting documentation. Failure to submit the sworn statement by March 1 or the other required 
documentation by June 1 of a given year shall constitute a waiver of the additional homestead exemption 
for that year. 
(Code 1993, § 74-168; Ord. No. 1596, § 8, 9-17-2003) 


Sec. 66-187. - Other statutory conditions. 
    Receipt of the additional homestead exemption provided for herein shall also be subject to the 
provisions of F.S. § 196.131, if applicable. 
(Code 1993, § 74-169; Ord. No. 1596, § 9, 9-17-2003) 


Sec. 66-188. - Delivery to property appraiser; event of repeal. 
    In the event this article is ever repealed, the city shall notify the county property appraiser no later 
than December 1 of the year prior to the year the exemption expires. 
(Code 1993, § 74-170; Ord. No. 1596, § 10, 9-17-2003; Ord. No. 1944, § 5, 5-16-2007) 


Chapter 70 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 70-1—70-18. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS, COMMUNICATION ANTENNAS AND ASSOCIATED 
EQUIPMENT 


Sec. 70-19. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish general guidelines for the siting of telecommunications 
towers, antennas, and associated equipment. The goals of this article are to: 
(1) ?Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts of towers and antennas; 
(2) ?Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas; 
(3) ?Minimize the total number of towers throughout the community; 
(4) ?Strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites as a primary option rather than 
construction of additional single-use towers; 
(5) ?Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where 
the adverse impact on the community is minimal; 
(6) ?Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the 
adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas through careful design, siting, landscape 
screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
(7) ?Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide such services to 
the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently; 
(8) ?Consider the public health and the safety of communication towers; and 
(9) ?Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and 
careful siting of tower structures. In furtherance of these goals, the city shall give due 
consideration to the city's comprehensive plan, official zoning map, existing land uses, and 
environmentally sensitive areas in approving sites for the location of towers and antennas. 
(Code 1993, § 75-21; Ord. No. 1042, § 1, 4-16-1997) 


Sec. 70-20. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alternative tower structure means manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar 
alternative design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. 
    Antenna means any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower, building or 
structure and used in communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, 
analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other 
communication signals. 
    Apopka Land Development Code means the Apopka Land Development Code as adopted by 
Ordinance Number 721 and as amended from time to time. 
    Backhaul network means the lines that connect a provider's towers/cell sites to one or more cellular 
telephone switching offices, and/or long distance providers, or the public switched telephone network. 
    Development review committee means the city's development review committee as established in 
the Apopka Land Development Code, section 11.04.00. 
    FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Height , when referring to a tower or other structure, means the distance measured from the finished 
grade of the parcel to the highest point on the tower or other structure, including the base pad and any 
antenna. 
    Pre-existing tower and pre-existing antenna mean any tower or antenna for which a building permit 
or special exception has been properly issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this 
article is derived, including permitted towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed, so long as 
such approval is current and not expired. 
    Tower means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting 
one or more antennas for telephone, radio and similar communication purposes, including self-supporting 
lattice towers, guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term "tower" includes radio and television 
transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative 
tower structures, and the like. The term "tower" includes the structure and any support thereto. 
(Code 1993, § 75-22; Ord. No. 1042, § 2, 4-16-1997) 


Sec. 70-21. - Applicability to new towers and antennas. 
    All new towers or antennas in the city shall be subject to this article, except as provided in 
subsections (1) through (3) of this section, inclusive. 
(1) ?Amateur radio station operators/receive-only antennas. This article shall not govern any tower 
or the installation of any antenna that is under 70 feet in height and is owned and operated by a 
federally-licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive-only 
antennas. 
(2) ?Pre-existing towers or antennas. Pre-existing towers and pre-existing antennas shall not be 
required to meet the requirements of this article, other than the requirements of section 70-22(f) 
and (g). 
(3) ?AM arrays. For purposes of implementing this article, an AM array, consisting of one or more 
tower units and a supporting ground system which functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, 
shall be considered one tower. Measurements for setbacks and separation distances shall be 
measured from the outer perimeter of the towers included in the AM array. Additional tower 
units may be added within the perimeter of the AM array by right. 
(Code 1993, § 75-23; Ord. No. 1042, § 3, 4-16-1997) 


Sec. 70-22. - General requirements. 
(a) ?Principal or accessory use. Antennas and towers may be considered either principal or accessory 
uses. A different existing use of an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the 
installation of an antenna or tower on such lot. 
(b) ?Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or antenna complies with 
district development regulations, including, but not limited to, setback requirements, lot coverage 
requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot of record shall control, 
even though the antennas or towers may be located on a leased portion of such lot. 
(c) ?Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower shall provide to the 
community development department an inventory of its existing towers, antennas, or sites approved 
for towers or antennas that are either within the city or within one mile of the border thereof, including 
specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower. The community 
development department may share such information with other applicants applying for 
administrative approvals or special exceptions under this article or other organizations seeking to 
locate antennas within the city; provided, however, that the community development department is 
not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available 
or suitable. 
(d) ?Aesthetics. Towers and antennas shall meet the following requirements: 
(1) ?Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of 
the FAA, be painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
(2) ?At a tower site, the design of the buildings and associated equipment shall, to the maximum 
extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend them 
into the natural setting and surrounding buildings. 
(3) ?If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and associated 
electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely 
compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and associated 
equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
(e) ?Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable 
authority. If lighting is required, the lighting alternatives and design chosen must cause the least 
disturbance to the surrounding views. 
(f) ?State or federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of 
the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to 
regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of 
the towers and antennas governed by this article shall bring such towers and antennas into 
compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of 
such standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the 
controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such 
revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at 
the owner's expense. 
(g) ?Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower 
shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable state or local 
building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries 
Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the city concludes that a tower fails 
to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon 
notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring such tower 
into compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such tower into compliance within said 30 days 
shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. 
(h) ?Measurement. For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks and separation distances shall be 
calculated and applied to facilities located in the city irrespective of municipal and county 
jurisdictional boundaries. 
(i) ?Not essential services. Towers and antennas shall be regulated and permitted pursuant to this article 
and shall not be regulated or permitted as essential services, public utilities, or private utilities. 
(j) ?Franchises. Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall certify that all franchises required 
by law for the construction and/or operation of a wireless communication system in the city have 
been obtained and shall file a copy of all required franchises with the community development 
department. 
(k) ?Public notice. For purposes of this article, any special exception request, variance request, or 
appeal of an administratively approved use or special exception shall require public notice to all 
abutting property owners and all property owners of properties that are located within the 
corresponding separation distance listed in section 70-25(b)(5)b., Table 2, in addition to any notice 
otherwise required by the city's Land Development Code. 
(l) ?Signs. No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower. 
(m) ?Buildings and associated equipment. Buildings and equipment associated with antennas or towers 
shall comply with the requirements of section 70-26. 
(n) ?Multiple antenna/tower plan. The city encourages the users of towers and antennas to submit a 
single application for approval of multiple towers and/or antenna sites. Applications for approval of 
multiple sites shall be given priority in the review process. 
(o) ?Building permit. The installation and/or construction of any tower, antenna, or associated 
equipment, including those designated as permitted uses, shall require a building permit. Building 
permits for administratively approved uses or special exception uses may be applied for only after 
such approvals are granted. 
(Code 1993, § 75-24; Ord. No. 1042, § 4, 4-16-1997) 


Sec. 70-23. - Permitted uses. 
(a) ?Generally. The uses listed in this section are deemed to be permitted uses and shall not require 
administrative approval or a special exception permit. 
(b) ?Permitted uses. The following uses are specifically permitted: antennas or towers located on 
property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the city, provided a license or lease authorizing 
such antenna or tower has been approved by the city. 
(Code 1993, § 75-25; Ord. No. 1042, § 5, 4-16-1997) 


Sec. 70-24. - Approved uses. 
(a) ?Generally. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of administrative approvals for towers 
and antennas: 
(1) ?The development review committee may administratively approve the uses listed in this 
section. 
(2) ?Each applicant for administrative approval shall apply to the community development 
department providing the information set forth in section 70-25(b)(1) and (3) and a 
nonrefundable fee for a minor development plan review as established by section 2-96(a)(15)g 
to reimburse the city for the costs of reviewing the application. 
(3) ?The development review committee shall review the application for administrative approval and 
determine if the proposed use complies with sections 70-22 and 70-25(b)(4) and (5). 
(4) ?The development review committee shall respond to each such application within 60 days after 
receiving it by either approving or denying the application. 
(5) ?In connection with any such administrative approval, the development review committee may, 
in order to encourage shared use, administratively waive any zoning district setback 
requirements in subsection 70-25(b)(4) or separation distances between towers in subsection 
70-25(b)(5) by up to 50 percent. 
(6) ?In connection with any such administrative approval, the development review committee may, 
in order to encourage the use of monopoles, administratively allow the reconstruction of an 
existing tower to monopole construction. 
(7) ?If an administrative approval is denied, the applicant shall file an application for a special 
exception pursuant to section 70-25 prior to filing any appeal that may be available through the 
Apopka Land Development Code. 
(b) ?List of administratively approved uses. The following uses may be approved by the development 
review committee after conducting an administrative review: 
(1) ?Locating a tower or antenna, including the placement of additional buildings or other associated 
equipment used in connection with said tower or antenna, in any industrial, wholesale 
commercial, or agricultural zoning district, provided they meet the requirements outlined in 
section 70-25. 
(2) ?Locating antennas on existing structures or towers consistent with the terms of subsections 
(b)(2)a. and b. of this section, as follows: 
a. ?Antennas on existing structures. Any antenna which is not attached to a tower may be 
approved by the development review committee as an accessory use to any commercial, 
industrial, professional, or institutional use, provided that: 
1. ?The antenna does not extend more than 20 feet above the highest point of the 
structure; 
2. ?The antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA regulations; and 
3. ?The antenna complies with all applicable building codes. 
b. ?Antennas on existing towers. An antenna which is attached to an existing tower may be 
approved by the development review committee and, to minimize adverse visual impacts 
associated with the proliferation and clustering of towers, collocation of antennas by more 
than one carrier on existing towers shall take precedence over the construction of new 
towers, provided such collocation is accomplished in a manner consistent with the 
following: 
1. ?A tower which is modified or reconstructed to accommodate the collocation of an 
additional antenna shall be of the same tower type as the existing tower, unless the 
development review committee allows reconstruction as a monopole. 
2. ?Height. 
(i) ?An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a taller height, not to exceed 20 
feet over the tower's existing height, to accommodate the collocation of an 
additional antenna. 
(ii) ?The height change referred to in subsection (b)(2)b.2.(i) of this section may only 
occur one time per communication tower. 
(iii) ?The additional height referred to in subsection (b)(2)b.3.(i) of this section shall 
not require an additional distance separation as set forth in section 70-25. The 
tower's pre-modification height shall be used to calculate such distance 
separations. 
3. ?On-site location. 
(i) ?A tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate the collocation of an additional 
antenna may be moved on-site within 50 feet of its existing location. 
(ii) ?After the tower is rebuilt to accommodate collocation, only one tower may remain 
on the site. 
(iii) ?A relocated on-site tower shall continue to be measured from the original tower 
location for purposes of calculating separation distances between towers 
pursuant to subsection 70-25(b)(5). The relocation of a tower hereunder shall in 
no way be deemed to cause a violation of subsection 70-25(b)(5). 
(iv) ?The on-site relocation of a tower which comes within the separation distances to 
residential units or residentially zoned lands as established in subsection 70-
25(b)(5) shall only be permitted when approved by the development review 
committee. 
(3) ?Locating any new tower in a nonresidential zoning district other than industrial, wholesale 
commercial, or agricultural, provided a licensed professional engineer certifies the tower can 
structurally accommodate the number of shared users proposed by the applicant; the 
development review committee concludes the tower is in conformity with the goals set forth in 
section 70-19 and the requirements of section 70-22; the tower meets the setback requirements 
in subsection 70-25(b)(4) and separation distances in subsection 70-25(b)(5); the tower meets 
the fencing requirements of subsection 70-25(b)(6); the tower meets the landscaping 
requirements of subsection 70-25(b)(7); and the tower meets the following height and usage 
criteria: 
a. ?For a single user, up to 90 feet in height; 
b. ?For two users, up to 120 feet in height; and 
c. ?For three or more users, up to 150 feet in height. 
(4) ?Locating any alternative tower structure in a zoning district other than industrial or wholesale 
commercial that, in the judgment of the development review committee, is in conformity with the 
goals set forth in section 70-19. 
(5) ?Installing a cable microcell network through the use of multiple low-powered 
transmitters/receivers attached to existing wireline systems, such as conventional cable or 
telephone wires, or similar technology that does not require the use of towers. 
(Code 1993, § 75-26; Ord. No. 1042, § 6, 4-16-1997) 


Sec. 70-25. - Special exceptions. 
(a) ?Generally. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of special exceptions for towers or 
antennas by the planning commission: 
(1) ?If the tower or antenna is not a permitted use under section 70-23 or permitted to be approved 
administratively pursuant to section 70-24, then a special exception shall be required for the 
construction of a tower or the placement of an antenna in all zoning districts. 
(2) ?Applications for special exceptions under this section shall be subject to the procedures and 
requirements of articles II, XI and XII of the Apopka Land Development Code, except as 
modified in this section. 
(3) ?In granting a special exception, the planning commission may impose conditions to the extent 
the planning commission concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse 
effect of the proposed tower on adjoining properties. 
(4) ?Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical, 
or electrical, shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer. 
(5) ?An applicant for a special exception shall submit the information described in this section and a 
nonrefundable fee as established by section 2-96 to reimburse the city for the costs of reviewing 
the application. 
(b) ?Towers. 
(1) ?Information required. Applicants for a special exception for a tower shall submit the following 
information: 
a. ?A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of the proposed tower, on-
site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning (including when adjacent to other 
municipalities), future land use classification of the site and all properties within the 
applicable separation distances set forth in subsection 70-25(b)(5), adjacent roadways, 
proposed means of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of the 
proposed tower and any other structures, topography, parking, and other information 
deemed by the development review committee to be necessary to assess compliance with 
this article. 
b. ?Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel (if applicable). 
c. ?The setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest residential unit, platted 
residentially zoned properties, and unplatted residentially zoned properties. 
d. ?The separation distance from other towers described in the inventory of existing sites 
submitted pursuant to subsection 70-22(c) shall be shown on an updated site plan or map. 
The applicant shall also identify the type of construction of the existing tower and the 
owner/operator of the existing tower, if known. 
e. ?A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials. 
f. ?Method of fencing, and finished color, and, if applicable, the method of camouflage and 
illumination. 
g. ?A description of compliance with section 70-22(c), (d), (e), (f), (g), (j), (l), and (m), 
subsections (b)(4) and (5) of this section, and all applicable federal, state or local laws. 
h. ?A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether construction of the tower will 
accommodate collocation of additional antennas for future users. 
i. ?Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network for the tower described in the 
application and other cellular sites owned or operated by the applicant in the municipality. 
j. ?A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers, other structures or alternative 
technology not requiring the use of towers or structures to provide the services to be 
provided through the use of the proposed new tower. 
k. ?A description of the feasible locations of future towers or antennas within the city based 
upon existing physical, engineering, technological or geographical limitations in the event 
the proposed tower is erected. 
(2) ?Factors considered in granting special exceptions for towers. In addition to any standards for 
consideration of special use permit applications pursuant to the Apopka Land Development 
Code, the planning commission shall consider the following factors in determining whether to 
issue a special exception: 
a. ?Height of the proposed tower; 
b. ?Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
c. ?Nature of the uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
d. ?Surrounding topography; 
e. ?Surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
f. ?Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect 
of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
g. ?Proposed ingress and egress; and 
h. ?Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or alternative technologies not 
requiring the use of towers or structures, as discussed in subsection (b)(3) of this section. 
(3) ?Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or alternative technology. No new tower 
shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the 
planning commission that no existing tower, structure or alternative technology that does not 
require the use of towers or structures can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. An 
applicant shall submit information requested by the development review committee or the 
planning commission related to the availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or 
alternative technology. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower, structure or 
alternative technology can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any 
of the following: 
a. ?No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area which meet the 
applicant's engineering requirements. 
b. ?Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering 
requirements. 
c. ?Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support the 
applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment. 
d. ?The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the 
antenna on the existing tower or structure, or the antenna on the existing tower or structure 
would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
e. ?The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an 
existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are 
unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be 
unreasonable. 
f. ?The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers 
and structures unsuitable. 
g. ?The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that does not require the use of 
towers or structures, such as a cable microcell network using multiple low-powered 
transmitters/receivers attached to a wireline system, is unsuitable. Costs of alternative 
technology that exceed new tower or antenna development shall not be presumed to 
render the technology unsuitable. 
(4) ?Setbacks. The following setback requirements shall apply to all towers for which a special 
exception is required: 
a. ?Towers must be set back in accordance with the applicable zoning district and the 
separation distances referenced in subsection (b)(5)a.2. of this section, in Table 1. 
b. ?Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback 
requirements. 
(5) ?Separation. The following separation requirements shall apply to all towers and antennas for 
which a special exception is required: 
a. ?Separation from off-site uses/designated areas. 
1. ?Tower separation shall be measured from the base of the tower to the lot line of the 
off-site uses and/or designated areas as specified in Table 1 in this subsection 
(b)(5)a., except as otherwise provided in Table 1. 
2. ?Separation requirements for towers shall comply with the minimum standards 
established in Table 1, as follows: 
TABLE 1 
Off-
Site 
Use
/De
sign
ate
d 
Are
a 
Sep
ara
tion 
Dist
anc
e 
Sin
gle-
fam
ily 
or 
dup
lex 
resi
den
tial 
unit
s in 
resi
den
tiall
y 
zon
ed 
dist
rict
s 1 
200 
feet 
or 
300
% 
hei
ght 
of 
tow
er, 
whi
che
ver 
is 
gre
ate
r 
Vac
ant 
sing
le-
fam
ily 
or 
dup
lex 
resi
den
tiall
y 
zon
ed 
lan
d 
whi
ch 
is 
eith
er 
plat
ted 
or 
has 
prel
imi
nar
y 
sub
divi
sio
n 
pla
n 
app
rov
al 
whi
ch 
is 
not 
exp
ired 
2 
200 
feet 
or 
300
% 
hei
ght 
of 
tow
er, 
whi
che
ver 
is 
gre
ate
r 
Vac
ant 
unp
latt
ed 
resi
den
tiall
y 
zon
ed 
lan
ds 3 
100 
feet 
or 
100
% 
hei
ght 
of 
tow
er, 
whi
che
ver 
is 
gre
ate
r 
Exis
ting 
mul
tifa
mil
y 
resi
den
tial 
unit
s 
gre
ate
r 
tha
n 
dup
lex 
unit
s 
100 
feet 
or 
100
% 
hei
ght 
of 
tow
er, 
whi
che
ver 
is 
gre
ate
r 
Res
ide
ntia
l 
unit
s 
exis
ting 
in 
non
resi
den
tial 
zon
ing 
dist
rict
s 1 
100 
feet 
or 
100
% 
hei
ght 
of 
tow
er, 
whi
che
ver 
is 
gre
ate
r 
No
nre
sid
enti
ally 
zon
ed 
lan
ds 
or 
non
resi
den
tial 
use
s 
No
ne; 
onl
y 
set
bac
ks 
app
ly 
 
1 Includes modular homes and mobile homes used for living purposes. Separation is 
measured from the base of the tower to the closest primary dwelling structure. 
2 Separation is measured from the base of tower to the closest building setback line. 
3 Includes any unplatted residential use properties without a valid preliminary 
subdivision plan or valid development plan approval and any multifamily 
residentially zoned land greater than a duplex. 
b. ?Separation distances between towers. Separation distances between towers shall be 
applicable for and measured between the proposed tower and pre-existing towers. The 
separation distance shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line between the 
base of the existing tower and the proposed base, pursuant to a site plan, of the proposed 
tower. The separation distances (listed in linear feet) shall be as shown in Table 2, as 
follows. 
TABLE 2 

Exis
ting 
To
wer
s—
Typ
es 

L
a
t
t
i
c
e
 
G
u
y
e
d
 
M
o
n
o
p
o
l
e
 
7
5
 
f
e
e
t
 
i
n
  
H
e
i
g
h
t
 
o
r
 
G
r
e
a
t
e
r
 
M
o
n
o
p
o
l
e
 
L
e
s
s
 
t
h
a
n
  
7
5
 
f
e
e
t
 
i
n
 
H
e
i
g
h
t
 
Latt
ice 
5
,
0
0
0
 
5
,
0
0
0
 
1
,
5
0
0
 
7
5
0
 
Guy
ed 
5
,
0
0
0
 
5
,
0
0
0
 
1
,
5
0
0
 
7
5
0
 
Mo
nop
ole 
75 
feet 
in 
hei
ght 
or 
gre
ate
r 
1
,
5
0
0
 
1
,
5
0
0
 
1
,
5
0
0
 
7
5
0
 
Mo
nop
ole 
less 
tha
n 
75 
feet 
in 
hei
ght 
7
5
0
 
7
5
0
 
7
5
0
 
7
5
0
 
 
(6) ?Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than eight feet in height 
and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device. 
(7) ?Landscaping. The following landscaping and buffering shall be required around the perimeter 
of communication tower sites, except that the standards may be waived by the planning 
commission or the development review committee for those sides of the proposed tower that 
are located adjacent to undevelopable lands or lands not in public view. Landscaping shall be 
installed on the outside of fences. Further, existing vegetation shall be preserved to the 
maximum extent practicable and may be used as a substitute for or in supplement towards 
meeting the landscaping requirements. 
a. ?A row of shade trees, a minimum of eight feet tall and a maximum of ten feet apart, shall be 
planted around the perimeter of the fence. 
b. ?A continuous hedge at least 30 inches in height at planting and capable of growing to at 
least 36 inches in height within 18 months shall be planted on the outside of the perimeter 
fence and tree line referenced above. 
c. ?All landscaping shall be of the evergreen variety. 
d. ?All landscaping shall be xeriscape-tolerant or irrigated and properly maintained to ensure 
good health and viability. 
(Code 1993, § 75-27; Ord. No. 1042, § 7, 4-16-1997) 


Sec. 70-26. - Buildings or other equipment storage. 
    Equipment enclosures shall conform to the following: 
(1) ?Equipment enclosures will be placed underground if site conditions permit and if technically 
feasible. 
(2) ?Equipment enclosures shall be screened from view except as provided in subsection (3) of this 
section. 
(3) ?Walk-in equipment enclosures: 
a. ?May not be constructed with exposed metal surfaces. 
b. ?May not be required to be totally screened from view, provided the city finds that the walk-
in equipment enclosure has been designed using materials, colors, and detailing that 
produces a structure which emulates the residential character of the city. 
(4) ?All enclosures shall meet the setback requirements included herein. 
(Code 1993, § 75-28; Ord. No. 1042, § 8, 4-16-1997) 


Sec. 70-27. - Removal of abandoned antennas and towers. 
    Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered 
abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of 
notice from the city notifying the owner of such abandonment. Failure to remove an abandoned antenna 
or tower within said 90 days shall be grounds to remove the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. If 
there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users 
cease using the tower. 
(Code 1993, § 75-29; Ord. No. 1042, § 9, 4-16-1997) 


Sec. 70-28. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a) ?Not expansion of nonconforming use. Towers that are constructed, and antennas that are installed, 
in accordance with the provisions of this article shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a 
nonconforming use or structure. 
(b) ?Pre-existing towers. Pre-existing towers shall be allowed to continue their usage as they presently 
exist. Routine maintenance (including replacement with a new tower of like construction and height) 
shall be permitted on such pre-existing towers. New construction other than routine maintenance on 
a pre-existing tower shall comply with the requirements of this article. 
(c) ?Rebuilding damaged or destroyed nonconforming towers or antennas. Notwithstanding section 70-
27, bona fide nonconforming towers or antennas that are damaged or destroyed may be rebuilt 
without having to first obtain administrative approval or a special use permit and without having to 
meet the separation requirements specified in section 70-25(b)(4) and (5). The type, height, and 
location of the tower on-site shall be of the same type and intensity as the original facility approval. 
Building permits to rebuild the facility shall comply with the then-applicable building codes and shall 
be obtained within 180 days from the date the facility is damaged or destroyed. If no permit is 
obtained or if said permit expires, the tower or antenna shall be deemed abandoned as specified in 
section 70-27. 
(Code 1993, § 75-30; Ord. No. 1042, § 10, 4-16-1997) 


Chapter 74 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Florida uniform traffic control law, F.S. ch. 316; power of local authorities to 
regulate traffic by means of signs, F.S. § 316.008(1)(u), (3). 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 74-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings 
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alley means a narrow passage or thoroughfare not meant as a substitute for a street or highway, but 
designated, intended or adapted to serve as a means of accommodation to a limited neighborhood for 
chiefly local convenience. 
    Authorized emergency vehicles means vehicles of the fire department, police vehicles and such 
ambulances and emergency vehicles of municipal departments, public service corporations operated by 
private corporations and the department of transportation as are designated or authorized by the 
department or the chief of police of an incorporated city or any sheriff of any of the various counties. 
    Bicycle means any device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two 
tandem wheels either of which is 20 inches or more in diameter, and including any device generally 
recognized as a bicycle though equipped with two front or two rear wheels. 
    Bus means any motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten passengers and used for the 
transportation of persons, and any motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, designed and used for the 
transportation of persons for compensation. 
    Business district means the territory contiguous to, and including, a highway within an area zoned for 
office, commercial or industrial use. 
    Commercial vehicle means a tractor cab, or tractor trailer or truck with a tandem rear axle or gross 
vehicle weight of over 10,000 pounds, or having a length greater than 21 feet, or height greater than ten 
feet, or buses used for transporting passengers for a fee, taxicabs, shuttle vans, limousines or vans used 
to transport passengers for a fee. Any vehicle with external modifications designed to be used for the 
purpose of lifting objects or persons above the height of the vehicle is included as a commercial vehicle. 
Step vans, flatbed and stake bed trucks, wreckers, farm equipment, dump trucks and earth moving 
equipment are included as commercial vehicles. Sport utility vehicles, family vans not transporting 
passengers for a fee and standard manufactured pickup trucks, and duel rear wheel pickup trucks used 
for personal use and emergency vehicles are expressly excluded from the definition of commercial 
vehicle. 
    Crosswalk means: 
(1) ?That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of 
the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs, or, in the absence of 
curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway. 
(2) ?Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian 
crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
    Daytime means the period from one-half hour before sunrise to one-half hour after sunset. Nighttime 
means at any other hour. 
    Intersection. 
(1) ?The term "intersection" means the area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the 
lateral curblines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways, of two highways 
which join one another at or approximately at right angles; or the area within which vehicles 
traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict. 
(2) ?Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of each 
roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate 
intersection. If such intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, 
then every crossing of two roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate 
intersection. 
    Motor vehicle means any self-propelled vehicle, excluding a bicycle. 
    Motorcycle means any motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to 
travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor. 
    Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named, they shall mean Eastern Standard Time 
or Daylight Saving Time as may be in current use in the city. 
    Official traffic control device means any sign, signal, marking or device, not inconsistent with this 
chapter, placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of 
regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
    Official traffic control signal means any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically 
operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and permitted to proceed. 
    Operator means any person who is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle, or who is exercising 
control over or steering a vehicle being towed by a motor vehicle. 
    Owner means the person to whom a vehicle is registered. 
    Park or parking means the halting of a vehicle otherwise than momentarily, regardless of whether the 
vehicle is occupied or in operation, and not for the purpose of receiving or discharging passengers or 
materials. 
    Pedestrian means any person afoot. 
    Police officer means every officer of the municipal police department. 
    Private road or driveway means any privately-owned way or place used for vehicular travel by the 
owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons. 
    Railroad means a carrier of persons or property upon cars operated upon stationary rails. 
    Railroad sign or signal means any sign, signal or device erected by authority of a public body or 
official or by a railroad, and intended to give notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a 
railroad train. 
    Residence district means the territory contiguous to, and including, a highway within an area zoned 
for residential use. 
    Right-of-way means the right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful manner in 
preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under such circumstances of direction, speed 
and proximity as to give rise to danger of collision unless one grants precedence to the other. 
    Safety zone means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of 
pedestrians, and protected or so marked by adequate signs or authorized pavement markings as to be 
plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone. 
    School bus means any motor vehicle that complies with the color and identification requirements of 
F.S. ch. 234 and is used to transport children to or from school or in connection with school activities, but 
not including buses operated by common carriers in urban transportation of schoolchildren. 
    Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curbline, or the lateral line of a roadway, and the 
adjacent property lines, intended for use by pedestrians. 
    Stand or standing means the halting of a vehicle temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually 
engaged in, receiving or discharging passengers or materials, regardless of whether the vehicle is in 
operation or occupied. 
    Stopping, standing, or parking means any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle, whether occupied 
or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with the directions of a 
police officer or traffic control sign or signal. 
    Street, highway or roadway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way or 
place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular 
traffic. 
    Traffic means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, and vehicles and other conveyances, either 
singly or together, while using any street or highway for purposes of travel. 
    Trailer means and includes any vehicle or device, with or without motorized power, regardless of 
whether connected to a tow vehicle, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a 
motor vehicle. The term "trailer" shall include, but not be limited to, vehicles or devices designed, 
manufactured or used for: transporting or carrying boats, jet skis, or similar watercraft; transporting or 
carrying motor scooters or motorcycles; transporting or carrying automobiles, trucks, buses or similar 
motor vehicles; or a dwelling place, living abode or sleeping place (either permanently or temporarily) and 
equipped for use as a conveyance on streets and highways. This definition excludes message boards 
used to transmit emergency messages or directional for traffic control. 
    Truck means any motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of 
property. 
    Truck tractor means any motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and 
not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn. 
    Vehicle means any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or 
drawn upon a street or highway and includes any portion of such device or attachment thereto. 
(Code 1983, § 22-7; Code 1993, § 78-1; Ord. No. 2527 , § 1, 3-1-2017) 


Sec. 74-2. - Applicability of chapter; obedience to traffic laws. 
(a) ?The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the operation of vehicles, bicycles and motorcycles, and 
the movement of pedestrians, upon all streets, highways and alleys and wherever vehicles have the 
right to travel within the city. 
(b) ?It is unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or to fail to perform any act required in this 
chapter. It is unlawful for the owner, or any person employing or otherwise directing the driver of any 
vehicle, to require or knowingly permit the operation of such vehicle in any manner contrary to the 
provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1983, § 22-8; Code 1993, § 78-2) 


Sec. 74-3. - Duties of police. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of police and other police officers to enforce this chapter and all other 
traffic ordinances of the city, to make arrests and issue citations for traffic violations, and to investigate 
accidents. 
(Code 1983, § 22-20; Code 1993, § 78-3) 


Sec. 74-4. - Use of coasters, roller skates and similar devices on street. 
    No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device 
shall go upon any roadway, except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and except upon streets set 
aside as play streets when and as authorized by this chapter. 
(Code 1983, § 22-9; Code 1993, § 78-4) 


Sec. 74-5. - Operation of golf carts on roadway in Errol Estates and Rock Springs Ridge. 
(a) ?Statutory authority. F.S. § 316.212 provides for the operation of golf carts on certain roadways. 
(b) ?Operation permitted on designated streets. All dedicated streets within Errol Estates, including Vick 
Road between Welch Road and Sun Bluff Lane, for traversing between golf holes, and within Rock 
Springs Ridge are hereby designated for use by persons operating golf carts as permitted and 
governed by state law. 
(c) ?Erection of signs. The city council will cause to be erected signs advising motorists that golf carts 
can use certain designated streets. 
(d) ?Responsibility of operators. Although the city council is hereby authorizing use of the dedicated 
streets by golf carts, vehicular traffic will have the right-of-way, and persons operating golf carts on 
these streets accept all responsibility for their actions. 
(Code 1983, § 22-5; Code 1993, § 78-5; Ord. No. 1856, § I, 9-6-2006) 
State Law reference— Operation of golf carts, F.S. § 316.212. 


Sec. 74-6. - Trains blocking railroad crossings. 
    No railroad locomotive, cars or trains shall be allowed to obstruct any street crossing within the city 
for a longer period of time than five minutes. 
(Code 1983, § 20-1; Code 1993, § 78-6) 
State Law reference— Railroads generally, F.S. ch. 351; blocking intersection, F.S. § 
335.141(4). 


Secs. 74-7—74-30. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Stopping, standing, parking, F.S. §§ 316.194—316.1957. 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 74-31. - General application. 
(a) ?Applicable portions of this article shall not apply to the driver or owner of any vehicle which is 
disabled while on the paved or main-traveled portion of a street in such manner and to such extent 
that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in such position. 
Such vehicle may be towed in accordance with this chapter, and all costs associated with the 
removal are the responsibility of the registered owner. 
(b) ?Nothing in this article shall prevent a bona fide emergency vehicle from stopping, standing, or 
parking in any area, whether posted or not, during and for the performance of official duties. 
(c) ?Unless in conflict with this chapter, F.S. § 316.003, Definitions, and all parking violations found in 
F.S. ch. 316, as may be amended by the Florida Legislature, are hereby incorporated by reference. 
Such prohibitions may be enforced under this section on a ticket form issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2527 , § 2(78-35), 3-1-2017) 


Sec. 74-32. - Authority to place signage and designate parking time limits and local restrictions. 
(a) ?The chief of police may install street signs, as may be necessary, to indicate the parking limit or 
restriction placed on any street, any portion of such street, or right-of-way within the city. 
(b) ?The chief of police may designate time limits or local restrictions for parking on streets during 
special events and emergency situations. 
(Ord. No. 2527 , § 2(78-36), 3-1-2017) 


Sec. 74-33. - Manner of stopping, standing, or parking. 
(a) ?When parked upon a street which has been marked or a sign erected for angle parking, a vehicle 
shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such mark or sign and within 12 inches of the 
edge of the pavement. 
(b) ?When parked upon a street which has been marked or a sign erected for parallel parking with the 
edge of the street, a vehicle shall be parked headed in the direction of traffic and with the curbside 
wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the edge of the pavement. 
(c) ?When parked upon a street in accordance with this chapter a vehicle shall be parked headed in the 
direction of traffic and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the edge of the 
pavement. 
(d) ?When parked within any marked parking space, no vehicle may be parked over any marking line, 
nor shall any portion of the vehicle protrude outside the marked space. 
(e) ?No person shall abandon any vehicle within the city and no person shall leave any vehicle at any 
place within the city for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle 
reasonably to appear to have been abandoned. 
(f) ?No person shall leave any partially dismantled, non-operating, wrecked, or junked vehicle on any 
street, including any right-of-way, within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2527 , § 2(78-37), 3-1-2017) 


Sec. 74-34. - Obstructing traffic. 
(a) ?No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in a street in such a manner or under such 
conditions as to leave available less than 12 feet of the width of any lane of the street for free 
movement of vehicular traffic, except when necessary in obedience to a traffic regulation or a traffic 
sign or signal or police officer. 
(b) ?No person shall stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the 
paved or main-traveled part of the street when it is practicable to stop, park, or so leave the vehicle 
off such part of the street and parked in a driveway or paved area created for such purpose. In any 
event, any vehicle parked on a street must leave no less than 12 feet of unobstructed street width. 
(c) ?No person shall stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle so that there is not a clear view of the 
stopped vehicle from a distance of 200 feet, in each direction upon the roadway. 
(d) ?No person shall stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended in an 
alley so as to provide free passage for emergency vehicles. 
(e) ?No person shall park a vehicle on a curve, or within 30 feet of the approach of a curve, when such 
parking obstructs the regular flow of traffic along a curve and/or disrupts the sight picture along the 
roadway. 
(Ord. No. 2527 , § 2(78-38), 3-1-2017) 


Sec. 74-35. - Stopping, standing and parking prohibited in specified places. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other 
traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following 
places: 
(1) ?At any place within 15 feet of a community mail box, except momentarily to pick up or drop off 
mail, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. any day, excluding Sundays and federal 
holidays; or at any place within 15 feet of a single mail box between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 
6:00 p.m. any day, excluding Sundays and federal holidays, unless the vehicle has a valid 
registration which lists the street address on which the mail box is located. Such vehicle shall be 
exempted from this requirement. 
(2) ?At any place in such a manner which would block access to residential or commercial refuse 
containers by public or private refuse removal equipment. 
(3) ?Alongside any curb which has been painted yellow or red, unless otherwise specifically 
permitted by appropriate signs or devices posted by the city. 
(4) ?In any parking space specifically designated and marked for the disabled unless such vehicle 
displays a parking permit as required by state law, or in such a manner as to block or obstruct a 
wheelchair ramp or any such specially designated and marked parking space provided in 
accordance with F.S. § 553.5041, and the vehicle is transporting the person to whom the 
displayed permit is issued. The violation may not be dismissed for failure of the marking on the 
parking space to comply with F.S. § 553.5041 if the space is in general compliance and is 
clearly distinguishable as a designated accessible parking space for people who have 
disabilities. 
a. ?A law enforcement officer or a parking enforcement specialist has the right to demand to be 
shown the person's disabled parking permit and driver license or state identification card 
when investigating the possibility of a violation of this section. If such a request is refused, 
the person in charge of the vehicle may be charged with resisting an officer without 
violence, as provided in F.S. § 843.02. 
b. ?It is unlawful for any person to obstruct the path of travel to an accessible parking space, 
curb cut, or access aisle by standing or parking a vehicle within any such designated area. 
The violator is subject to the same penalties as are imposed for illegally parking in a space 
that is designated as an accessible parking space for persons who have disabilities. 
c. ?Any person who is chauffeuring a person who has a disability is allowed, without need for a 
disabled parking permit or a special license plate, to stand temporarily in any such parking 
space, for the purpose of loading or unloading the person who has a disability. A penalty 
may not be imposed upon the driver for such temporary standing. 
d. ?A vehicle that is transporting a person who has a disability and that has been granted a 
permit under F.S. § 320.0848(1)(a) may be parked for a maximum of 30 minutes in any 
parking space reserved for persons who have disabilities. 
e. ?A violation of this section with regard to parking in a handicapped space or access area 
may be voided at the discretion of a police supervisor upon payment by the offender of 
$7.50 payable to the city if, at the time of the infraction, the driver or person legally 
operating the vehicle possesses a government issued handicap parking permit but failed to 
property display it. 
(5) ?Within the curved area of a cul-de-sac. 
(6) ?Within an intersection or within 30 feet of the intersection approach. 
(7) ?Upon certain designated municipal streets within a community controlled by a homeowner's 
association. Any such parking prohibition shall be upon petition to the chief of police by the 
association, by majority vote of members of such association, ratified by the board, and 
submitted to the chief of police. Such action shall be effective upon approval by resolution of the 
city council, upon recommendation of the chief of police. Such association-controlled areas shall 
be properly marked with signs as approved by the city. Any costs associated with the 
procurement or installation thereof of signage shall be borne by the association. 
(8) ?At any place, other than a bus stop, taxi stand, or other designated passenger loading area, by 
the driver of a bus, taxi, or other vehicle for hire, except that this provision shall not prevent the 
driver of any such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or 
parking regulations, at any place for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in loading or 
unloading passengers. 
(9) ?In a designated bus stop or taxi stand unless the vehicle is a bus or taxi, respectively. 
(10) ?In front of, across from, or along the curb within 12 feet of the entrance to, a public or private 
driveway, except momentarily to pick up or drop off passengers. 
(11) ?On a sidewalk or in such a manner that any part of such vehicle is protruding over a sidewalk 
or any part of the sidewalk area. 
(12) ?On a crosswalk; within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection unless permitted to do so by 
appropriate signs or devices posted in such area. 
(13) ?Facing the wrong way on a one way street, or in opposition to the direction of travel of the 
lane in which the vehicle is located (left wheels to curb, prohibited). 
(14) ?Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant, fire department connection, or fire drafting connection; or 
within 20 feet of any driveway entrance to a fire station. 
(15) ?Within any fire lane. 
(16) ?Within an alley, or blocking access to such alley, or in such position to block any entrance to 
any abutting property. 
(17) ?Along or within any bicycle path, walking path, or other pedestrian or human-powered vehicle 
lane. 
(18) ?Within 50 feet of the nearest rail upon a railroad or railroad crossing, unless behind the safety 
line of a railroad crossing if less than 50 feet. 
(19) ?Upon any bridge or elevated structure upon a roadway. 
(20) ?In painted safety zones or gore areas on roadways. 
(21) ?Within any space designated for an emergency vehicle. 
(22) ?Within or on a median. 
(23) ?Within or on any off-street right-of-way within the city limits unless otherwise allowed. 
(Ord. No. 2527 , § 2(78-39), 3-1-2017) 


Sec. 74-36. - Stopping, standing, or parking in place where prohibited by sign or markings. 
    No person shall park a vehicle at any place where an official sign or marking prohibits stopping, 
standing, or parking. 
(Ord. No. 2527 , § 2(78-40), 3-1-2017) 


Sec. 74-37. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited; parking of vehicle types prohibited. 
(a) ?Curbstoning (reference F.S. § 316.1951): 
(1) ?It is unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle upon a public street or highway, a public 
parking lot, or other public property, or upon private property where the public has the right to 
travel by motor vehicle, for the principal purpose and intent of displaying the motor vehicle 
thereon for sale, hire, or rental unless the sale, hire, or rental of the motor vehicle is specifically 
authorized on such property by the city and the person is in compliance with all city licensing 
regulations. 
(2) ?The provisions of subsection (a)(1) of this section do not prohibit a person from parking his own 
motor vehicle or his other personal property on any private real property which the person owns 
or leases or on private real property which the person does not own or lease, but for which he 
obtains the permission of the owner, or on the public street immediately adjacent thereto, for the 
principal purpose and intent of sale, hire, or rental. 
(3) ?Subsection (a)(1) of this section does not prohibit a licensed motor vehicle dealer from 
displaying for sale or offering for sale motor vehicles at locations other than the dealer's 
licensed location if the dealer has been issued a supplemental license for off-premises sales, as 
provided in F.S. § 320.27(5), and has complied with the requirements in subsection (a)(1) of this 
section. A vehicle displayed for sale by a licensed dealer at any location other than the dealer's 
licensed location is subject to immediate removal without warning. 
(4) ?A law enforcement officer, compliance officer, code enforcement officer from the city may issue 
a citation and cause to be immediately removed at the owner's expense any motor vehicle 
found in violation of subsection (a)(1) of this section, except as provided in subsections (a)(2) 
and (a)(3) of this section, or in violation of subsection (a)(5), (a)(6), (a)(7), or (a)(8) of this 
section, and the owner shall be assessed a penalty as provided in division 2 of this article. A 
motor vehicle removed under this section shall not be released from an impound or towing and 
storage facility before a release form prescribed by the department has been completed 
verifying that the fine has been paid. 
(5) ?It is unlawful to offer a vehicle for sale if the vehicle identification number has been destroyed, 
removed, covered, altered, or defaced, as described in F.S. § 319.33(1)(d) A vehicle found in 
violation of this subsection is subject to immediate removal without warning. 
(6) ?It is unlawful to knowingly attach to any motor vehicle a registration that was not assigned or 
lawfully transferred to the vehicle pursuant to F.S. § 20.261. A vehicle found in violation of this 
subsection is subject to immediate removal without warning. 
(7) ?It is unlawful to display or offer for sale a vehicle that does not have a valid registration as 
provided in F.S. § 320.02. A vehicle found in violation of this subsection is subject to immediate 
removal without warning. This subsection does not apply to vehicles and recreational vehicles 
being offered for sale through motor vehicle auctions as defined in F.S. § 320.27(1)(c)4. 
(8) ?A vehicle is subject to immediate removal without warning if it bears a telephone number that 
has been displayed on three or more vehicles offered for sale within a 12-month period. 
(9) ?Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, a violation of subsection (a)(1), 
(a)(5), (a)(6), (a)(7), or (a)(8) of this section shall subject the owner of such motor vehicle to 
towing fees reasonably necessitated by removal and storage of the motor vehicle and a fine as 
required by division 2 of this article. 
(b) ?No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any street for the principal purpose of painting, 
greasing or repairing such vehicle. 
(c) ?No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any street for the principal purpose of washing or 
polishing such vehicle or any part thereof. However, bona fide, temporary carwashes conducted with 
the intent of raising funds for a nonprofit entity upon publicly accessed and traveled parking and 
business lots may be allowed given they are properly authorized by the property owner; last no 
longer than six hours; and are conducted on weekends only. 
(d) ?No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any street, alley, parking lot, or residential area for the 
principal purpose of displaying advertising. 
(e) ?No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any street or alley for the principal purpose of selling 
merchandise from the motor vehicle, except in a duly established marketplace or when so authorized 
or licensed under the laws of the city. 
(f) ?Parking of trailers, is regulated in the same manner as a vehicle for the purpose of this chapter and 
per the requirements of this section. 
(1) ?Trailers within any city park or city recreation facility are prohibited except where specifically 
authorized by a police officer, park ranger, or recreation attendant or permitted by an official 
sign. If so permitted, trailers may be parked only for the purpose of, and during the time of, 
visiting or using the park or recreation facility where such parking is permitted. 
(2) ?Nothing in this section shall apply to a work or utility trailer being used to assist in the 
performance of such work, on a temporary basis, and with proper maintenance of traffic 
protocol in place and in a manner not to obstruct the flow of traffic. 
(g) ?Parking of recreational vehicles or trailered vessels is regulated in the same manner as a vehicle for 
the purpose of this chapter and per the requirements of this section. 
(1) ?Recreation vehicles and trailered vessels may be parked on a street for a maximum of 72 
hours when necessary for loading, unloading, cleaning or other preparations as may be 
necessary provided all other restrictions are followed and all driveway and on-site parking is first 
occupied (or is otherwise unusable) and such vessel is registered (or leased) to the owner or 
occupier of the residence adjacent to the street on which parked. 
(2) ?In any case where an exception exists to park on a street, a recreational vehicle or trailered 
vessel must be parked within 12 inches of the curb and with the flow of traffic and adhering to all 
other parking rules. Nothing in this section is intended to conflict with restrictions in storage of 
such vehicles identified in section 7.02.04, Storage of boats and recreational vehicles, of the 
Land Development Code. 
(h) ?Parking of commercial vehicles is prohibited in the same manner as a vehicle for the purpose of this 
chapter and per the requirements of this section. 
(1) ?Commercial vehicles are prohibited from parking in any residential area at any time. Nothing in 
this section precludes a bona fide vendor from using a commercial vehicle in conducting 
legitimate business and for its designed purpose, during such time the business is being 
conducted. Promotional trucks or other commercial vehicles being used solely for promotional 
purposes are specifically prohibited. 
(2) ?Commercial vehicles are prohibited from parking in any business district unless specifically 
owned or leased by such business having ownership or control of the property. Such vehicles 
shall not be used in an effort to advertise or promote the business through the method of 
parking or position in relation to the traveling public in an effort contrary to the spirit of the city's 
sign codes and ordinances. Such vehicles shall be located in a bona fide parking space unless 
being actively loaded or unloaded. 
(Ord. No. 2527 , § 2(78-41), 3-1-2017) 


Sec. 74-38. - Use of loading zones. 
(a) ?No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any place marked as a loading zone for a period of 
time longer than the time indicated by signs or other appropriate markings or devices. 
(b) ?No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the 
expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a 
loading zone during the hours when the provisions applicable to loading zones are in effect. Such 
vehicle must have attached in a conspicuous place on the rear of the vehicle a permit issued 
pursuant to section 74-39 for such loading and unloading. In no case shall the stop for loading and 
unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes. 
(Ord. No. 2527 , § 2(78-42), 3-1-2017) 


Sec. 74-39. - Loading zone permit. 
(a) ?The chief of police or his designee shall issue to applicants as provided in this section, tag permits 
for the use of loading and unloading zones, which shall be effective October 1 through September 
30. 
(1) ?The application for such permit shall contain the following information: 
a. ?Whether the applicant is a wholesaler, retailer or common carrier. 
b. ?The number of vehicles operated by the applicant. 
c. ?The number of vehicles owned by the applicant which will carry loading and unloading 
permits. 
d. ?The average number of stops per day for loading and unloading purposes. 
e. ?The name of the business, the type of business, the location of the business, and the 
mailing address and telephone number of the business. 
f. ?The names and driver's license numbers of the employed or contracted drivers doing 
business within the city. 
g. ?The appropriate permit fee as specified below. 
(2) ?All applications will be submitted in writing to the chief of police or his designee, and the chief 
of police or his designee shall have the authority to issue, deny, and/or revoke such permits. 
The applicant shall have the right to appeal denial or revocation of a permit to the city council. 
(b) ?Schedule of fees for loading zone permit. 
(1) ?Such permit fees shall be $30.00 for the initial applicant vehicle and $20.00 for each additional 
vehicle under the same application. Each additional vehicle must either be registered to the 
applicant or applicant's organization or in the name of an employee of the applicant or applicant 
organization. The chief of police reserves the right to revoke any application or permit for errors, 
omissions, or false statement. 
(2) ?A charge of $10.00 shall be required for any lost, stolen, or misplaced permits. Permits are not 
transferrable between and among vehicles. 
(3) ?Any permit issued after April 1 of the fiscal year, October 1 through September 30, shall be 
prorated by 50 percent of the above fee. 
(c) ?Violation of any such terms and conditions shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the permit 
by the chief of police, who shall give written notice thereof to the holder of the permit. Any person 
whose permit is revoked by the chief of police may appeal such decision to the city council. Such 
appeal shall be taken by filing written notice thereof, in duplicate, with the city administrator's office 
within five days after the decision of the chief of police. The notice of the appeal shall contain the 
grounds for the appeal and shall contain information that either the finding is contrary to the law or is 
not supported by competent substantial evidence. The chief of police shall forthwith transmit copies 
of the appeal to the city council along with all papers constituting the record upon which the action 
appealed from is based. The filing of a notice of appeal will not delay the effectiveness of any 
revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2527 , § 2(78-43), 3-1-2017) 


Sec. 74-40. - Removal of illegally parked, abandoned or disabled vehicles. 
    Members of the police department of the city are hereby authorized, but are not required, to have 
immediately removed any vehicle from any street or alley or other public place within the city by the city's 
authorized towing service under the following circumstances: 
(1) ?When such vehicle is in violation of any portion of this chapter. 
(2) ?When a vehicle upon a street or alley is: 
a. ?Disabled or when the person in charge of the vehicle is by reason of physical injury or 
condition incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or 
removal and the vehicle is obstructing traffic or otherwise creating a safety hazard. 
b. ?Disabled, abandoned, or otherwise left in a manner obstructing traffic or otherwise creating 
a safety hazard. 
c. ?Stolen, subject to forfeiture, being held as evidence or contains evidence in a criminal 
investigation, or the driver is being arrested and the arresting officer decides to remove the 
vehicle from the location to protect the vehicle from potential damage. 
(3) ?When any vehicle is parked on any municipal parking facility or area designated or used in 
connection with city hall, the police station or other municipal property of the city in violation of 
the posted signs and the permitted uses. 
(4) ?When any motor vehicle remains stopped or parked on any property owned or controlled by the 
city not designated for parking; longer than allowable posted times; overnight; or in a manner 
endangering the safety and security of any property owned or controlled by the city. If the 
towing is due to a security concern, and such concern is ultimately determined to be unfounded, 
the chief of police reserves the right to waive any tow fee. 
(5) ?Storage, cost and removal of impounded vehicles. 
a. ?When a vehicle is removed under this chapter, notice of storage and costs shall be sent to 
the vehicle owner within seven days via certified mail, return receipt requested, pursuant to 
the provisions of F.S. § 713.78. 
b. ?Owner responsibility. The cost of towing, booting, or removing a vehicle impounded or 
immobilized under this section and the cost of storing the same or removing the 
immobilization device, shall be chargeable against the vehicle owner and a lien shall be 
placed upon the vehicle. Before the release of the vehicle, the owner of the vehicle shall 
pay these charges and any outstanding parking tickets, administrative delinquency or 
collection fees owed. The vehicle shall be stored in a private place and the towing and/or 
storage charges shall be set by the private towing company. All of such charges shall be 
the responsibility of the vehicle owner. 
(6) ?Notice to vehicle owner. 
a. ?Upon taking possession of any vehicle, as provided in this section, the towing company 
shall follow guidelines set forth in F.S. § 715.05 regarding notification of owner, upon 
towing or removing a motor vehicle. 
b. ?Notification shall be by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall notify the owner 
and all lien holders of the location of the vehicle and the fact that is it unclaimed. Notice 
shall be given within seven days excluding Saturdays and Sundays, from the date of 
storage and shall be complete upon mailing. 
c. ?If the state of registration is unknown, a good faith best effort to notify the owner shall be 
made, and such notice shall be given within a reasonable period of time from the date of 
storage. 
(7) ?Recovery. 
a. ?The registered owner of a towed, impounded or immobilized vehicle shall be entitled to 
recover such vehicle only after making payment for the charges and expenses for the cost 
of towing or immobilizing such vehicle, plus the cost of storage and any outstanding 
parking tickets, administrative delinquency or collection fees owed on such vehicle herein 
specified. 
b. ?The registered owner of such vehicle shall be responsible for paying the charges and fines 
as herein provided whether or not such registered owner was the person who unlawfully 
parked or left standing such vehicle and in each instance the police department shall 
require payment of the sums herein provided for before restoring possession of such 
vehicle to the registered owner. 
(Ord. No. 2527 , § 2(78-44), 3-1-2017) 


Sec. 74-41. - Official traffic control devices. 
    The location and existence of all official traffic control devices which are in place or in existence on 
all streets and highways, except state roads, within the boundaries of the city on the effective date of the 
ordinance from which this article is derived are hereby ratified and confirmed and shall be considered to 
have been authorized by the city council. The city council hereby delegates its authority to place official 
traffic control devices on all streets and highways, except state roads, within the boundaries of the city to 
the chief of police, who shall hereafter be responsible for determining the need for placement of official 
traffic control devices. 
(Ord. No. 2527 , § 2(78-45), 3-1-2017) 


Sec. 74-42. - Overtime parking in parking zones. 
(a) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit, or suffer any vehicle to be parked 
overtime or beyond the period of legal parking time, and any vehicle in any parking zone longer than 
the time limit fixed for such zone by sign or ordinance shall be considered to be illegally parked. 
(b) ?It shall be unlawful to relocate a vehicle from one parking space within the same parking zone or to 
relocate a vehicle temporarily from the same parking space unless the vehicle has left the parking 
zone for an amount of time equal to or greater than the legal time limit for parking fixed for such 
zone. 
(c) ?It shall be unlawful to roll the tires of a vehicle to remove or obscure or attempt to remove or obscure 
the markings made by parking enforcement personnel prior to removing the vehicle from the parking 
zone. 
(Ord. No. 2527 , § 2(78-46), 3-1-2017) 


Sec. 74-43. - Parking of vehicles without affixed current and valid registration license plate and 
validation sticker; removing, impounding, or immobilization of vehicles without affixed current and valid 
registration license plate and validation sticker. 
(a) ?No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle upon any street, in any off-street parking facility in the 
city, right-of-way, upon any property owned and controlled by the city, or any private parking area 
open to the public, unless such vehicle has affixed to it a current and valid registration license plate 
and validation sticker. 
(b) ?Any motor vehicle without a current and valid license plate and validation sticker affixed to it found 
parked at any time upon any street, in any off-street parking facility in the city, or upon any property 
owned and controlled by the city may, in addition to the issuance of a parking violation notice, be 
immediately immobilized by or under the direction of a police officer, parking enforcement specialist, 
or code enforcement officer in such a manner as to prevent its operation. No such vehicle shall be 
immobilized by any means other than the use of a device or other mechanism which will cause no 
damage to such vehicle unless it is moved while such device or mechanism is in place. 
(c) ?It shall be the duty of the police officer, parking enforcement specialist, or code enforcement officer 
immobilizing such motor vehicle, or under whose direction such vehicle is immobilized, to post on 
such vehicle, in a conspicuous place, notice sufficient to inform the owner or operator of the vehicle 
that: 
(1) ?Such vehicle has been immobilized pursuant to and by the authority of this section; and 
(2) ?The owner of such immobilized vehicle, or other duly authorized person, shall be permitted to 
repossess or to secure the release of the vehicle upon payment to the police department the 
fine prescribed in division 2 of this article for the offense of parking a vehicle without a current 
and valid registration license plate and validation sticker affixed to it. 
(d) ?It shall be unlawful for anyone, except those persons authorized by the police department, to 
remove or attempt to remove, tamper with, or in any way damage or alter the immobilization device. 
(e) ?If the owner of the immobilized vehicle, or other duly authorized person, does not make 
arrangements for removal of the immobilization device in accordance with the foregoing provisions 
within 24 hours of the time such motor vehicle was immobilized, a police officer, parking enforcement 
specialist, or code enforcement officer of the city is hereby authorized to have such vehicle towed by 
the city's authorized towing company. 
(1) ?The owner of the vehicle shall be responsible for any and all towing and storage charges along 
with the civil penalty identified in division 2 of this article. 
(2) ?The penalty must be remitted prior to the release of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2527 , § 2(78-47), 3-1-2017) 


Sec. 74-44. - Removing, impounding, and immobilization of vehicles for non-payment of fines within the 
section. 
(a) ?Any motor vehicle found to have three or more outstanding municipal parking violations that is 
parked at any time upon any street, in any off-street parking facility in the city, or upon any property 
owned and controlled by the city may, in addition to the issuance of a parking violation notice, be 
immediately immobilized by or under the direction of a police officer, parking enforcement specialist, 
or code enforcement officer in such a manner as to prevent its operation. No such vehicle shall be 
immobilized by any means other than by the use of a device or other mechanism which will cause no 
damage to such vehicle unless it is moved while such device or mechanism is in place. 
(b) ?It shall be the duty of the police officer, parking enforcement specialist, or code enforcement officer 
immobilizing such motor vehicle, or under whose direction such vehicle is immobilized, to post on 
such vehicle, in a conspicuous place, notice sufficient to inform the owner or operator of the vehicle 
that: 
(1) ?Such vehicle has been immobilized pursuant to and by the authority of this section. 
(2) ?The owner of such immobilized vehicle, or other duly authorized person, shall be permitted to 
repossess or to secure the release of the vehicle upon payment to the police department the 
fine prescribed in division 2 of this article for the offense of parking a vehicle without a current 
and valid registration license plate and validation sticker affixed to it. 
(c) ?It shall be unlawful for anyone except those persons authorized by the police department to remove 
or attempt to remove, tamper with, or in any way damage or alter the immobilization device. 
(d) ?If the owner of the immobilized vehicle, or other duly authorized person, does not make 
arrangements for removal of the immobilization device in accordance with the foregoing provisions 
within 24 hours of the time such motor vehicle was immobilized, a police officer, parking enforcement 
specialist, or code enforcement officer of the city is hereby authorized to have such vehicle towed by 
the city's authorized towing company. 
(1) ?The owner of the vehicle shall be responsible for any and all towing and storage charges along 
with the civil penalty identified in division 2 of this article. 
(2) ?The penalty must be remitted prior to the release of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2527 , § 2(78-48), 3-1-2017) 


Sec. 74-45. - Protection of pedestrians in and around school zones. 
(a) ?In order to protect drivers and pedestrians around the county public schools within the municipal 
limits of the city, no person shall load or unload passengers 17 years of age or younger into or from a 
vehicle within one-fourth mile around such school, on the streets, alleyways, cul-de-sacs, rights-of-
way, public parking areas, or private parking areas open to the public, or other such areas, unless on 
the campus proper of the school, within designated loading or unloading areas provided for such 
purpose, or under the direction of a police officer or school official. 
(b) ?A notice of such prohibition is not required in all areas within one-fourth mile around such schools in 
order to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2527 , § 2(78-49), 3-1-2017) 


Sec. 74-46. - State statute incorporation. 
    Adoption of state statutes by reference includes statutes both in existence at the time and those later 
adopted by the state legislature. 
(Ord. No. 2527 , § 2(78-50), 3-1-2017) 


Secs. 74-47—74-65. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - CITATIONS; PENALTIES 


Sec. 74-66. - Schedule of fees, charges, civil penalties; court appearance. 
    The schedule of charges and penalties shall be as follows: 
(1) ?Fines. Any person cited for violation of the regulations set forth in this chapter who submits 
payment within five working days of the issuance of the citation shall be fined as follows: 
Viol
atio
n 
Fin
e 
Any 
por
tion 
of 
this 
cha
pte
r 74 
not
wit
hst
and
ing 
bel
ow. 
$40
.00 
Sec. 
74-
35(
4)
—
Sto
ppi
ng, 
sta
ndi
ng 
or 
par
kin
g 
pro
hibi
ted 
in 
des
ign
ate
d 
han
dic
ap 
par
kin
g 
pla
ces. 
$25
0.0
0 
Sec. 
74-
37(
a)
—
Cur
bst
oni
ng 
(no
twit
hst
and
ing 
any 
tow 
fee
s). 
$10
0.0
0 
Sec. 
74-
39
—
Loa
din
g 
zon
e 
per
mit. 
$50
.00 
Sec. 
74-
40
—
Re
mo
val 
of 
ille
gall
y 
par
ked
, 
aba
ndo
ned
, or 
disa
ble
d 
veh
icle
s 
(no
twit
hst
and
ing 
any 
tow 
fee
s). 
$10
0.0
0 
 
(2) ?Penalties. 
a. ?Penalties must be paid within five business days of the date of issuance of the parking 
violation notice, by either hand-delivery to the parking fines unit or by mailing the penalty in 
the envelope provided with the notice. If such penalty is not paid within five working days 
as provided in this subsection, the amount of the civil penalty shall be $10.00 greater than 
the amount specified for the parking violation as provided in the schedule of penalties 
above. 
b. ?Any person receiving a parking violation notice shall, within five business days, pay the civil 
penalty as prescribed above, transfer liability to the person who had the care, custody, or 
control of the vehicle at the time of the parking violation, or request a hearing. Any person 
electing to appear before the designated hearing officer shall be deemed to have waived 
his right to pay the civil penalty as set forth above. The hearing will be governed in 
accordance with section 74-71. 
(3) ?Surcharges. 
a. ?A surcharge in the amount of $10.00 is imposed on all parking fines for parking violations 
occurring within the city, for the sole purpose of funding school crossing guard programs 
pursuant to authority of F.S. § 318.12(11). 
b. ?This surcharge shall be placed in the school crossing guard trust fund and funds collected 
from this surcharge shall be distributed to fund school crossing programs. However, the 
city may set aside funds from this surcharge to pay for startup costs and recurring 
administrative costs related to printing new tickets or other means of implementing the 
school crossing guard program. 
c. ?Funds collected from this surcharge must be distributed quarterly to fund the school 
crossing guard programs. 
(4) ?Administrative charges. In addition to the assessment pursuant to this section, administrative 
charges in the amount of the city's actual costs may be assessed in the event of an 
unsuccessful appeal under section 74-71 or the necessity to institute collection procedures. 
(5) ?Collection of fines. The city may establish procedures for the collection of a penalty imposed 
herein, and may enforce such penalty by civil action in the nature of debt. 
(Ord. No. 2527 , § 2(78-61), 3-1-2017) 


Sec. 74-67. - Liability for payment of penalties. 
(a) ?Pursuant to F.S. § 316.1967, the owner of a vehicle is responsible and liable for payment of any 
parking ticket violation unless the owner can furnish evidence, when required by this section, that the 
vehicle was, at the time of the parking violation, in the care, custody, or control of another person. In 
such instances, the owner of the vehicle is required, within five working days after notification of the 
parking violation, to furnish to the records unit of the police department an affidavit setting forth the 
name, address, and driver's license number of the person who leased, rented, or otherwise had the 
care, custody, or control of the vehicle. 
(b) ?The affidavit submitted under this section is admissible in a proceeding charging a parking ticket 
violation and raises the rebuttable presumption that the person identified in the affidavit is 
responsible for payment of the parking ticket violation, provided it contains, at a minimum, the full 
name, address, and the date of birth of the person on control, care, or custody of the vehicle at the 
time of violation and such person must be a valid license holder of one of the 50 states or the several 
territories of the United States. 
(c) ?The owner of a vehicle is not responsible for a parking ticket violation if the vehicle involved was, at 
the time, stolen or in the care, custody, or control of some person who did not have permission of the 
owner to use the vehicle. If the vehicle was stolen at the time of the parking citation, the owner of the 
vehicle shall submit an affidavit to the police department indicating that the vehicle was stolen along 
with a stolen vehicle police report. The owner of a leased vehicle is not responsible for a parking 
ticket violation and is not required to submit an affidavit or the other evidence specified in this 
section, if the vehicle is registered in the name of the person who leased the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2527 , § 2(78-62), 3-1-2017) 


Sec. 74-68. - Failure to obey violation notice; alteration or destruction of violation notice. 
(a) ?It shall be unlawful for the responsible party as defined in section 74-67 to neglect to answer to the 
charge set forth in a parking violation notice affixed to a motor vehicle by an authorized member of 
the city. 
(b) ?The notice referred to in subsection (a) of this section is and shall remain the property of the city 
before and after the serving, delivery or affixing thereof. All persons receiving any such notice in 
writing, whether by personal service or by affixing the notice to a motor vehicle, shall be and are 
hereby required to preserve such notice and to bring and present or otherwise transmit the notice to 
the police department when answering the charge set forth in such notice. 
(c) ?No person, whether the recipient thereof or otherwise, shall willfully throw away, alter, mar, mutilate, 
destroy or discard the parking violation notice of the city. Any person violating this section shall be 
subject to the penalty provided in section 74-69. 
(Ord. No. 2527 , § 2(78-63), 3-1-2017) 


Sec. 74-69. - Procedure upon noncompliance with violation notice. 
    If any person summoned by a parking violation notice affixed on a motor vehicle does not respond to 
such notice within the time period specified on such notice, the police department shall assess the 
appropriate delinquent fee per violation against the registered owner of the motor vehicle. In addition, a 
notice of summons shall be sent, by U.S. mail, to the registered owner of the motor vehicle which was 
cited, informing such owner of the parking violation notice and the failure to comply therewith. Such notice 
shall direct the recipient to respond within ten calendar days; otherwise, a separate citation may be 
issued for failure to comply in violation of section 74-68(a). Costs in the amount of $5.00 shall be 
assessed incident to each notification process. A violation of section 74-68(a) shall be deemed a separate 
and distinct violation and shall not be construed to be merged with or a part of the original parking 
violation. 
(Ord. No. 2527 , § 2(78-64), 3-1-2017) 


Sec. 74-70. - Withholding of issuance of license plates and stickers by state. 
(a) ?The city police department may prepare and supply to the county clerk's office a list of persons who 
have three or more outstanding parking violations on a magnetically encoded computer reel or 
cartridge, or by any other electronic means which is machine readable by the installed computer 
system at the department, listing persons who have three or more outstanding parking violations 
which occurred within the city. 
(b) ?If a person's name appears on the list referred to in subsection (a) of this section, the tax collector 
shall, in accordance with F.S. §§ 315.1967 and 320.03, not issue a license plate or revalidation 
sticker to such person until such person's name no longer appears on the list or until the person 
presents a receipt showing that such parking fines and all applicable late charges or other related 
charges have been paid, and also pays an administrative service charge to the tax collector. 
(c) ?Pursuant to the authority granted in F.S. §§ 316.1967 and 320.03, this section shall be applicable 
throughout the city; providing, however, that the police department responsible for enforcement of 
parking violations in the city shall be responsible for preparing and supplying the applicable list of 
persons who have three or more outstanding parking violations. 
(Ord. No. 2527 , § 2(78-65), 3-1-2017) 


Sec. 74-71. - Procedure for referring cases involving the violation of a municipal parking ordinance to a 
hearing officer. 
(a) ?Guiding statute. 
(1) ?Pursuant to F.S. § 318.325, any municipality may adopt an ordinance that allows the 
municipality to refer cases involving the violation of a municipal parking ordinance to a hearing 
officer. 
(2) ?Notwithstanding the provisions of F.S. §§ 318.14 and 775.08(3), any parking violation shall be 
deemed to be an infraction as defined in F.S. § 318.13(3); however, the violation must be 
enforced and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of general law applicable to parking 
violations and in accordance with this Code where the violation occurred. 
(3) ?The police department records unit shall be responsible for collecting and distributing the fines, 
forfeitures, and court costs assessed under this section. 
(4) ?Pursuant to F.S. § 316.1967, any person who elects to appear before the city's hearing officer 
to present evidence, waives his right to pay the civil penalty provisions of the ticket. The hearing 
officer, after a hearing, shall make a determination as to whether a parking violation has been 
committed and shall impose the civil penalty designated by ordinance, plus the hearing officer 
shall impose the city-authorized administrative fee. The administrative fee for parking 
enforcement hearings and local hearings for red light camera infractions shall be the same. 
(b) ?Appeal to hearing officer. 
(1) ?Request for hearing. 
a. ?The city's code enforcement hearing officer or the city's local hearing officer is authorized 
to consider disputes under this chapter. The responsible party as defined in section 74-67, 
shall, within five business days of the date of the notice of infraction, file a request for 
hearing with the city. Such request shall be in writing, or on a form provided and approved 
by the chief of police, and delivered to the police department records unit. A hearing shall 
be scheduled. 
b. ?Upon receipt of the request, the city shall schedule a hearing. Notice of hearing shall be 
provided to the responsible party, shall be hand-delivered, or delivered by U.S. mail, to the 
address provided on the request for appeal. 
c. ?If the person receiving the parking violation requests a hearing, but later chooses to cancel 
the hearing, there will be a $50.00 cancellation fee instead of the city assessed 
administrative fee in addition to the civil penalty. 
d. ?If a hearing date is set, and the person requesting a hearing wishes to continue the 
hearing, the person shall request a continuance within five business days of the hearing. 
The request for continuance may be granted one time for cause but shall be assessed an 
additional $50.00 cancellation fee. 
(2) ?Hearing. 
a. ?Formal rules of evidence do not apply at the hearing, but due process shall be observed 
and govern the proceedings. 
b. ?Any person, who requests a hearing and does not appear at the hearing, shall waive his 
right to be heard at the hearing and waives his right to present additional evidence or 
additional defenses. The local hearing officer or city code enforcement hearing officer may 
make a determination as to whether a parking violation was committed based on the 
evidence presented at the hearing by the city. 
(c) ?Presumption of owner operation. Unless an affidavit is provided pursuant to section 74-67, it is 
presumed the person registered as the vehicle owner with the state department of motor vehicles or 
any other state vehicle registration office, or an individual having the owner's consent, was operating 
the vehicle at the time of the infraction. 
(Ord. No. 2527 , § 2(78-66), 3-1-2017) 


Secs. 74-72—74-100. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - THE CITY OF APOPKA TRAFFIC LIGHT SAFETY ACT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Alternate procedure for enforcement of red light violations, F.S. § 316.0083. 


Sec. 74-101. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known as the "The City of Apopka Traffic Light Safety Act." 
(Code 1993, § 78-81; Ord. No. 2318b, § 3, 9-4-2013) 


Sec. 74-102. - The Mark Wandall Traffic Safety Program. 
    The city council, in its adoption of this article, expressly intends to enforce traffic infractions as 
allowed under F.S. § 316.008(8) in effect at the time of this adoption, and as may be modified from time 
to time by the state legislature, until such time the city council rescinds this article. 
(Code 1993, § 78-82; Ord. No. 2318b, § 3, 9-4-2013) 


Sec. 74-103. - Authority; delegation of authority. 
    Within the city, the chief administrative officer is authorized to implement the provisions and 
requirements of F.S. § 316.0083, as may be amended from time to time and may take any action which is 
necessary for such purpose. 
(Code 1993, § 78-83; Ord. No. 2318b, § 3, 9-4-2013) 


Sec. 74-104. - Intent. 
    It is the intent, through the adoption of this article, that the enforcement of the Mark Wandall Traffic 
Safety Program, as adopted in F.S. § 316.0083, in effect at the time of this adoption and as may be 
modified from time to time by the state legislature, shall be consistent with state law. 
(Code 1993, § 78-84; Ord. No. 2318b, § 3, 9-4-2013) 


Sec. 74-105. - Local hearings for notices of violation. 
    The city elects to use a local hearing officer to hear notices of violation under the Mark Wandall 
Traffic Safety Act as permitted by general law. 
(Code 1993, § 78-85; Ord. No. 2318b, § 3, 9-4-2013) 


Sec. 74-106. - Construction. 
    This article shall be liberally construed in order to effectuate its purpose and intent. 
(Code 1993, § 78-86; Ord. No. 2318b, § 3, 9-4-2013) 


Chapter 78 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal public works, F.S. ch. 180; public utilities, F.S. ch. 366; water and 
wastewater systems, F.S. ch. 367; pollution control, F.S. § 403.011 et seq.; water treatment and water 
supply, F.S. § 403.850 et seq. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 78-1. - Service deposits. 
(a) ?All new customers shall be required to pay a utility deposit per type of service. 
(b) ?A utility deposit may be refunded to the customer if the customer has not been delinquent in the 
past 12 months. A customer shall be required to pay one utility deposit per type of service if the 
customer has been delinquent in the past 12 months. If a customer has been refunded a deposit and 
becomes delinquent more than one month in a calendar year, he shall be required to pay a new 
utility deposit based on the applicable use. If a customer has received a utility deposit refund and has 
moved out of the service area but wishes to return to the service area within 12 months from the last 
disconnection from utility services, he shall not be required to pay a utility deposit if his account was 
not delinquent during his prior service. Previous customers that have been delinquent in their last 12 
months of service, are also required to pay a deposit. 
(Code 1983, § 23-1; Code 1993, § 82-1) 


Secs. 78-2—78-20. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Water and sewer systems, F.S. § 381.261; Florida Safe Drinking Water Act, F.S. 
§ 403.850 et seq. 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 78-21. - Tampering with lines or other facilities. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or fraudulently, without the consent and authority of the 
city council: 
(1) ?Tap, make or cause to be made any connection with; 
(2) ?Injure, tamper or meddle with; 
(3) ?Plug or in any way hinder or interfere with; or 
(4) ?Make use of 
any lines, mains, pipes, connections, appliances and appurtenances used for or in connection with the 
municipal water and sewer systems. 
(Code 1983, § 23-76; Code 1993, § 82-36) 


Sec. 78-22. - Sewer connections; applicability of sewer charges. 
(a) ?Every owner, tenant or occupant of a lot or parcel of land within the city which abuts upon a street or 
other public way or easement containing a sanitary sewer line or conduit within one-half mile 
measured from the nearest lot line, and upon which lot or parcel a building or structure has been 
constructed for residential, commercial or industrial use, shall be required to connect such building or 
structure with the sanitary sewer system and cease to use any other method for the disposal of 
wastewater. 
(b) ?Upon failure of any owner, tenant or occupant to connect with the sanitary sewer system within 60 
days, unless inconsistent with applicable state law, in which case this section shall be interpreted in 
accordance with the number of days prescribed by state law, the city shall charge and assess the 
minimum monthly charge established by ordinance against the property owner, tenant or occupant, 
and shall collect the charge according to law. 
(c) ?An impact fee in the amount established in 22-91 et seq. shall be paid to the city when an 
application is made to tap into the sanitary sewer facilities of the city. 
(d) ?Any owner, tenant or occupant who is subject to subsection (a) of this section who has been paying 
continuously the monthly sanitary sewer charge as per subsection (b) of this section prior to May 2, 
1973, and whose building or structure was in existence and for which such charges were paid prior 
to that time will not be required to pay the impact fee when tapping into the sanitary sewer facilities. 
(e) ?Any existing single-family home within the city limits at the time of construction of new sewer lines or 
at the time of annexation is exempted from the above requirements if they have a fully functional 
septic system. However, if the septic system should fail and require replacement, the owner, tenant, 
or occupant of the lot or parcel of land would lose this exemption and then be required to connect to 
the city system. 
(f) ?Any owner, tenant or occupant of land which is unimproved, or of property which becomes vacant 
due to removal of the building or structure, must file an affidavit with the utilities department of the 
city swearing or affirming that the property is vacant. Upon proper filing of the affidavit of vacancy, 
the utilities department shall cease billing for sanitary sewer treatment. When such vacant property is 
developed or improved with a building or structure, the monthly charges will be reinstated, and, upon 
application to tap into the sanitary sewer system, the impact fee shall be due and payable. If the 
owner, tenant or occupant abandons or vacates the property and has the municipal water and 
garbage services discontinued, the monthly charge for sanitary sewer service will be discontinued 
simultaneously. Such sanitary sewer service charges shall be reinstated when municipal water 
service is requested by the current owner, tenant or occupant. 
(Code 1983, § 23-77; Code 1993, § 82-37; Ord. No. 1175, § I, 5-20-1998) 


Sec. 78-23. - Industrial and commercial pretreatment guidelines. 
(a) ?The city council has the authority to adopt these provisions through its city Charter and through the 
home rule powers under the authority of article VIII of the state constitution, under the authority of 
F.S. ch. 166. 
(b) ?These provisions, which shall be known and may be cited as "The Industrial and Commercial 
Pretreatment Guidelines of the City of Apopka, Florida," and the terms of the Industrial and 
Commercial Pretreatment Guidelines as set forth in Exhibit A hereto, incorporated herein by 
reference and on file in the city clerk's office, are hereby adopted. The city council is hereby 
authorized, to the extent permitted by law, to amend, repeal and adopt provisions to the Industrial 
and Commercial Pretreatment Guidelines by resolution. 
(c) ?These provisions shall be a minimum standard and shall apply to and be enforced throughout the 
incorporated area of the city, and throughout the unincorporated service areas. 
(d) ?These provisions supplement all other applicable regulations, codes and requirements pertaining to 
industrial and commercial wastewater in the city and the unincorporated service areas and are not 
intended to supersede or supplant said requirements. 
(Code 1983, § 23-29; Code 1993, § 82-38; Ord. No. 1096, § 1, 7-16-1997; Ord. No. 1744, § I, 
10-4-2006; Ord. No. 2109, § I, 8-5-2009) 


Secs. 78-24—78-49. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - FEES AND CHARGES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Rate establishment and collection of charges, notice, etc., F.S. § 180.13; 
disconnection of service for non-payment, exception, F.S. § 180.135; limitations on rates, fees, etc., 
charged consumers outside city limits, F.S. § 180.191. 


Sec. 78-50. - Water connection fees. 
(a) ?Meter set fee. The water meter set fee shall be on file in the finance department, utility billing 
division. 
(b) ?Tap fee. A water tap fee shall be charged at the time of approval by the city of a service connection. 
Such fee will include labor cost and the cost of connection piping from the main to the meter not to 
exceed 50 feet in length, and shall be in an amount on file in the finance department, utility billing 
division. 
(c) ?The term "short service" is defined as service located on the same side of a road or driveway of an 
existing water line where the connection is to be made. The term "long service" is defined as service 
located on the opposite side of a road or driveway of an existing water line where the connection is 
to be made. There will be an additional charge in an amount on file in the finance department, utility 
billing division for every linear foot for service over 50 linear feet. An additional charge will be added 
equal to the county right-of-way permit fee whenever it is required. 
(d) ?Meters and taps over two inches in size. For a meter or tap over two inches in size, the work will be 
performed by the contractor; however, in circumstances where the city elects to perform the work, 
the fee charged shall be the actual cost plus ten percent. 
(e) ?Installation. Wireless service meters shall be installed in all development. 
(Code 1983, § 23-78(n); Code 1993, § 82-61; Ord. No. 1744, § II, 10-4-2006; Ord. No. 2475, § I, 
2-17-2016) 


Sec. 78-51. - Sewer tap fees. 
    A sewer tap fee shall be charged at the time of approval by the city of a service connection. The 
costs of extending or installing six-inch sewer lateral shall be $745.00 up to 25 feet and including clean 
out. For additional footage beyond 25 feet, the charge shall be $12.00 per linear foot. The costs of any 
applicable county or state permits will also be an additional charge. Any sewer lateral within the public 
right-of-way or easement will remain the property of the city. 
(Code 1983, §§ 23-78(o), 23-79.1; Code 1993, § 82-62; Ord. No. 1744, § III, 10-4-2006; Ord. 
No. 2475, § I, 2-17-2016) 
State Law reference— Limitations on rates, fees, etc., charged consumers outside city limits, 
F.S. § 180.191. 


Sec. 78-52. - Proration of costs of oversizing of lines. 
    In areas where oversized water mains, sewer lines, or reclaimed service lines are installed or have 
been installed to meet the requirements of the city's master water plan and sewer plan, and the city and a 
private developer share the cost of installing the oversized water main, sewer line, or reclaimed service 
lines. The oversizing cost shall be limited to the difference in material cost only. The city shall have the 
right and power to charge future individuals and developers who connect to the water, sewer, or 
reclaimed service lines an appropriate pro rata fee, based on their share of usage of the water, sewer, or 
reclaimed service line. This pro rata fee shall be in addition to the normal impact and tapping connection 
fees. Upon collection of the pro rata fee by the city, a portion of the pro rata fee may be reimbursed to the 
individual or developer who shared the original installation cost with the city in accordance with any 
agreement between the individual or developer and the city. 
(Code 1983, § 23-80; Code 1993, § 82-63; Ord. No. 1744, § IV, 10-4-2006) 


Sec. 78-53. - Initiation of water service. 
    A service charge of $35.00 shall be imposed for each initiation of water service. 
(Code 1983, § 23-85; Code 1993, § 82-64; Ord. No. 1708, § I, 9-1-2004; Ord. No. 2475, § I, 2-
17-2016) 


Sec. 78-54. - Water use charges and deposit. 
(a) ?Service charges. The following shall be the schedule of monthly rates and charges for water service 
provided by the city: 
(1) ?Residential service. The charges for residential service shall be based upon the monthly 
amount of water used per dwelling unit as follows: a monthly service fee of $7.81 per dwelling 
unit, plus: 
a. ?A charge of $1.45 per thousand gallons for the first 6,000 gallons used per dwelling unit per 
month. 
b. ?A charge of $1.77 per thousand gallons for each thousand gallons of water used greater 
than 6,000 gallons per dwelling unit per month, up to and including 15,000 gallons. 
c. ?A charge of $2.64 per thousand gallons for each thousand gallons of water used greater 
than 15,000 gallons per dwelling unit per month, up to and including 30,000 gallons. 
d. ?A charge of $5.34 per thousand gallons for any water used over and above 30,000 gallons 
per dwelling unit per month. 
(2) ?Commercial water service. The monthly charge for commercial service shall be determined per 
each separate commercial or business unit, for office buildings (per commercial or business 
unit), service stations, department stores, service businesses, churches, clubs, hospitals, 
professional office units, etc. A separate business would usually, but not always, be identified as 
any operation requiring an occupational license from the city, where applicable. Irrigation of 
common areas in both residential and nonresidential developments shall fall within the 
commercial rate structure. The usage shall be as measured by the water consumption at the 
water meter, and the monthly charges shall be as follows: a monthly service fee of $9.34 per 
unit, plus: 
a. ?A charge of $1.73 per thousand gallons for the first 6,000 gallons used per unit per month. 
b. ?A charge of $2.15 per thousand gallons for each thousand gallons of water used greater 
than 6,000 gallons per unit per month, up to and including 15,000 gallons. 
c. ?A charge of $3.18 per thousand gallons for each thousand gallons of water used over and 
above 15,000 gallons per unit month. 
(3) ?City recreation and parks service. City-maintained grounds, rights-of-way, parks, and 
recreational facilities shall be charged for service at $1.12 per thousand gallons. 
(4) ?Wholesale service. Rates for wholesale users shall be negotiated on a case-by-case basis with 
final approval of the rate by the city council. 
(b) ?Rate adjustments. All water charges and consumptive use charges established in subsections 
(a)(1), (2), and (3) of this section shall be adjusted on October 1 of each year through the adoption of 
the city's annual budget through Fiscal Year 2020, in accordance with either the Florida Public 
Service Commission Price Index, or Appendix A of the 2015 Water, Wastewater, and Reclaimed 
Water Rate Study, incorporated herein by reference. The city council shall have the discretion to 
determine which rate escalator is the most appropriate in each respective budgeting cycle. 
Additionally, the city council shall have the authority to make rate adjustments at a lesser level than 
those that would be dictated by either the Florida Public Service Commission Price Index or 
Appendix A of the 2015 Water, Wastewater, and Reclaimed Water Rate Study. The new rates will be 
rounded up to the next whole penny. 
(c) ?Proration of charges. There shall be no proration of fees. 
(d) ?Deposit. For each residential customer requesting water service, a utility deposit of $50.00 per 
dwelling unit shall be paid by each customer, unless otherwise provided in this chapter. For each 
commercial customer requesting water service, a utility deposit of $100.00 per unit shall be paid by 
each customer, unless otherwise provided in this chapter. A utility deposit of $2,000.00 per meter for 
a temporary construction site hydrant meter shall be paid by each customer, unless otherwise 
provided in this chapter. 
(e) ?Deposit for newly annexed property. The city will waive the deposit requirement for any county 
customer who connects to the city water system within 12 months of annexing into the city, provided 
the customer maintains a good payment history. 
(Code 1983, § 23-81; Code 1993, § 82-65; Ord. No. 886, § 1, 9-20-1995; Ord. No. 1111, § 1, 10-
1-1997; Ord. No. 1376, § 1, 10-18-2000; Ord. No. 1812, § I, 4-5-2006; Ord. No. 1909, § I, 4-18-
2007; Ord. No. 1961, § I, 7-18-2007; Ord. No. 1988, § I, 10-3-2007; Ord. No. 2020, § I, 1-2-
2008; Ord. No. 2064, § I, 5-21-2008; Ord. No. 2071, § II, 6-18-2008; Ord. No. 2475, § I, 2-17-
2016) 
State Law reference— Limitations on rates, fees, etc., charged consumers outside city limits, 
F.S. § 180.191. 


Sec. 78-55. - Wastewater use charges and deposit. 
(a) ?Service charges. The following shall be the schedule of monthly rates and charges for wastewater 
treatment provided by the city: 
(1) ?Residential service. The charges for residential service shall be based upon the monthly 
amount of water used per dwelling unit as follows: 
a. ?A monthly service fee of $14.78 per dwelling unit, plus a charge of $2.46 for each 1,000 
gallons of water used per dwelling unit per month, up to and including 12,000 gallons, 
excluding separately metered irrigation usage. 
b. ?The maximum service fee for residential service shall be $44.30 per dwelling unit per 
month. 
(2) ?Commercial wastewater service. The monthly charge for city commercial service shall be 
determined per each separate commercial or business unit, for office buildings (per commercial 
or business unit), service stations, department stores, service businesses, churches, clubs, 
hospitals, professional office units, etc. A separate business would usually, but not always, be 
identified as any operation requiring an occupational license from the city, where applicable. 
The usage shall be as measured by the water consumption at the water meter, and the monthly 
charges shall be as follows: a monthly service fee of $17.75 per unit, plus a charge of $2.94 for 
each 1,000 gallons of potable water used per unit per month, excluding separately metered 
irrigation usage. 
(3) ?Wholesale service. Rates for wholesale users shall be negotiated on a case-by-case basis with 
final approval of the rate by the city council. 
(b) ?Rate adjustments. All wastewater charges and consumptive use charges established in subsections 
(a)(1) and (2) of this section may be adjusted on October 1 of each year through the adoption of the 
city's annual budget through Fiscal Year 2020, in accordance with either the Florida Public Service 
Commission Price Index, or Appendix A of the 2015 Water, Wastewater, and Reclaimed Water Rate 
Study, incorporated herein by reference. The city council shall have the discretion to determine 
which rate escalator is the most appropriate in each respective budgeting cycle. Additionally, the city 
council shall have the authority to make rate adjustments at a lesser level than those that would be 
dictated by either the Florida Public Service Commission Price Index or Appendix A of the 2015 
Water, Wastewater, and Reclaimed Water Rate Study. The new rates will be rounded up to the next 
whole penny. 
(c) ?Proration of charges. There shall be no proration of fees. 
(d) ?Deposit. For each residential customer requesting wastewater service, a utility deposit of $90.00 per 
unit shall be paid by each customer, unless otherwise provided in this chapter. For each commercial 
customer requesting wastewater service, a utility deposit of $180.00 per unit shall be paid by each 
customer, unless otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(e) ?Deposit for newly annexed property. The city will waive the deposit requirement for any county 
customer who connects to the city water system within 12 months of annexing into the city, provided 
the customer maintains a good payment history. 
(Code 1983, § 23-82; Code 1993, § 82-66; Ord. No. 886, § 1, 9-20-1995; Ord. No. 1111, § 1, 10-
1-1997; Ord. No. 1376, § 1, 10-18-2000; Ord. No. 1812, § II, 4-5-2006; Ord. No. 1909, § I, 4-18-
2007; Ord. No. 2064, § IV, 5-21-2008; Ord. No. 2475, § I, 2-17-2016) 
State Law reference— Limitations on rates, fees, etc., charged consumers outside city limits, 
F.S. § 180.191. 


Sec. 78-56. - Defective water meters. 
(a) ?In the event of defective water meters, the city has the authority to average the past monthly water 
consumption to arrive at a fair consumption level for billing purposes. If the meter is defective due to 
tampering by the customer, such customer shall be liable for all reasonable expenses incurred by the 
city to repair any damage that results from the tampering. 
(b) ?Upon a written request by a customer, the utility billing division will remove the meter and forward it 
to a certified meter laboratory to be tested for over-registering. 
(1) ?If the laboratory verifies the water meter is over-registering, the customer's water bill will be 
adjusted to an amount equal to an average monthly bill. 
(2) ?If the laboratory finds the water meter is not over-registering, the customer shall pay the water 
bill in full, along with a service fee equal to the cost of having the meter tested plus ten percent. 
(Code 1983, § 23-83; Code 1993, § 82-67; Ord. No. 1069, § 1, 6-18-1997; Ord. No. 2092, § I, 1-
7-2009; Ord. No. 2475, § I, 2-17-2016) 


Sec. 78-57. - Areas using privately-owned water lines. 
    In the areas where the water lines are privately-owned and maintained and they do not meet current 
city standards, the city has the right and power to require the owner of the private substandard water lines 
to install a master water meter, and to install individual water lines for each dwelling unit and building 
therein. In such cases, the city has the right to require persons residing or doing business within such 
dwelling units or buildings to pay their water bill, and to require the owner of the private substandard 
water lines to pay for the difference in water consumption between the master meter and the individual 
water meters. 
(Code 1983, § 23-84; Code 1993, § 82-68) 


Sec. 78-58. - Water and reclaimed water meter reading re-check. 
    Potable and reclaimed water customers may request a re-check of their last meter reading. There is 
no charge for re-checks conducted through the automated system. Each customer shall be granted one 
manual re-check free of charge each calendar year. Each manual re-check in excess of one per calendar 
year shall incur a fee of $35.00. This fee will be included on the customer's next potable/reclaimed water 
bill. If the re-check indicates that the city meter registered incorrectly, the re-check fee will not be 
assessed, and the customer's bill will be corrected. 
(Code 1993, § 82-69; Ord. No. 2092, § II, 1-7-2009; Ord. No. 2475, § I, 2-17-2016) 
State Law reference— Limitations on rates, fees, etc., charged consumers outside city limits, 
F.S. § 180.191. 


Secs. 78-59—78-89. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 3. - RECLAIMED WATER SYSTEM[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Reuse of reclaimed water, F.S. § 403.064. 


Sec. 78-90. - Connection required. 
    Where available, the owner of every lot or parcel of land within the city utility service area developed 
for residential, public, commercial office, industrial, warehousing or multifamily use shall connect the 
premises or cause the premises to be connected with the reclaimed water distribution system. 
(Code 1983, § 23-87(c); Code 1993, § 82-91) 


Sec. 78-91. - Connection charges. 
    The connection charge for reclaimed water service will consist of the tap fee and the fee for installing 
a backflow prevention device on each potable water service. A meter set fee shall be required for 
metered connections. 
(1) ?Tap fee. 
a. ?The reclaimed water tap fee does not include the cost of the meter and shall be as follows: 
Rec
lai
me
d  
Wa
ter  
Ser
vice 
Size 
S
h
o
r
t  
S
e
r
v
i
c
e 
L
o
n
g  
S
e
r
v
i
c
e 
¾? 
$
2
7
5
.
0
0 
$
8
3
6
.
0
0 
1? 
$
2
7
5
.
0
0 
$
8
3
6
.
0
0 
1½? 
$
3
5
7
.
0
0 
$
9
1
8
.
0
0 
2? 
$
3
5
7
.
0
0 
$
9
1
8
.
0
0 
Ove
r 2? 
Act
ual 
cos
t 
plu
s 
10
% 
 
b. ?The term "short service" is defined as service located on the same side of a road or 
driveway of an existing reclaimed water line where the connections is to be made. The 
term "long service" is defined as service located on the opposite side of a road or driveway 
of an existing reclaimed water line where the connection is to be made. There will be an 
additional charge of $10.00 for every linear foot for service over 50 linear feet. 
c. ?An additional charge will be added equal to the county right-of-way permit fee whenever it 
is required. 
(2) ?Backflow prevention fee*. The backflow prevention fee shall be as follows: 
Wa
ter 
Ser
vice 
Size 
Fee 
¾? 
$22
0.0
0 
1? 
$26
0.0
0 
1½? 
$40
0.0
0 
2? 
$46
0.0
0 
Ove
r 2? 
Act
ual 
cos
t 
plu
s 
10
% 
 
Fee applies to dual service accounts with a potable water meter. 
(3) ?Meter set fee. 
a. ?The meter set fee shall be as follows: 
Size 
of  
Me
ter 
D
u
a
l  
S
e
r
v
i
c
e 
S
i
n
g
l
e  
S
e
r
v
i
c
e 
¾? 
$
2
7
4
.
0
0 
$
3
5
0
.
0
0 
1? 

$
4
1
2
.
0
0 
1½? 

$
8
9
1
.
0
0 
2? 
$
3 
$
1
,
3
9
3
.
0
0 
Ove
r 2? 
Act
ual 
cos
t 
plu
s 
10
% 
 
b. ?All reclaimed water connections larger than two inches or involving potable water service 
larger than two inches will be performed by the contractor; however, in circumstances 
where the city elects to perform the work, the fee charged shall be the actual cost. The 
connection charge shall be waived for development activities that will furnish and install 
taps and backflow prevention devices in accordance with this chapter. 
c. ?Wireless service meters shall be installed for all development. 
(Code 1983, § 23-87(b); Code 1993, § 82-92; Ord. No. 1744, § V, 10-4-2006; Ord. No. 2475, § I, 
2-17-2016) 


Sec. 78-92. - Reclaimed water use charges. 
(a) ?Service charges. The following shall be the schedule of monthly rates and charges for reclaimed 
water provided by the city: 
(1) ?Residential service. The charges for residential service shall be based upon the monthly 
amount of reclaimed water consumed per dwelling unit as follows: a monthly service fee of 
$7.82, which will include 6,000 gallons of reclaimed water per dwelling unit, plus: 
a. ?A charge of $1.35 for each 1,000 gallons over 6,000 gallons per dwelling unit per month, 
up to and including 15,000 gallons of reclaimed water. 
b. ?A charge of $2.02 for each 1,000 gallons over 15,000 gallons per dwelling unit per month 
of reclaimed water. 
c. ?A charge of $4.02 for each 1,000 gallons over 30,000 gallons per dwelling unit per month of 
reclaimed water. 
(2) ?Commercial reclaimed water service. The monthly charge for commercial service shall be 
determined per each separate commercial or business unit, for office buildings (per commercial 
or business unit), service stations, department stores, service businesses, churches, clubs, 
hospitals, professional office units, etc. A separate business would usually, but not always, be 
identified as any operation requiring an occupational license from the city, where applicable. 
Irrigation of common areas in both residential and nonresidential developments shall fall within 
the commercial rate structure. The usage shall be as measured by the reclaimed water 
consumption at the meter, and the monthly charges shall be as follows: a monthly service fee of 
$9.39, which will include 6,000 gallons of reclaimed water per unit, plus: 
a. ?A charge of $1.61 for each 1,000 gallons over 6,000 gallons per unit per month, up to and 
including 15,000 gallons of reclaimed water. 
b. ?A charge of $2.40 for each 1,000 gallons over 15,000 gallons per unit per month of 
reclaimed water. 
(3) ?Consumptive use rate for contract and bulk users will be $0.61 per 1,000 gallons with on-site 
storage and $0.93 per 1,000 gallons without on-site storage. Required storage shall 
accommodate a minimum 14-day demand. At no time should a bulk user be charged less than 
$500.00 per month. 
(4) ?Contracts for bulk users who use less than 100,000 gallons per day may be negotiated with the 
approval of council. 
(5) ?Wholesale service. Rates for wholesale users shall be negotiated on a case-by-case basis with 
final approval of the rate by the city council. 
(b) ?Waiver of fees. The mayor or his designee may adjust or waive reclaimed charges to bulk users 
willing to take reclaimed water for storage at the request of the city. 
(c) ?Rate adjustments. All reclaimed minimum monthly charges and consumptive use charges 
established in subsections (a)(1), (2) and (3) of this section may be adjusted on October 1 of each 
year through the adoption of the city's annual budget through Fiscal Year 2020, in accordance with 
either the Florida Public Service Commission Price Index, or Appendix A of the 2015 Water, 
Wastewater, and Reclaimed Water Rate Study, incorporated herein by reference. The city council 
shall have the discretion to determine which rate escalator is the most appropriate in each respective 
budgeting cycle. Additionally, the city council shall have the authority to make rate adjustments at a 
lesser level than those that would be dictated by either the Florida Public Service Commission Price 
Index or Appendix A of the 2015 Water, Wastewater, and Reclaimed Water Rate Study. The new 
rates will be rounded up to the next whole penny. 
(d) ?Proration of charges. There shall be no proration of fees. 
(e) ?Deposit. For each residential customer requesting reclaimed water service, a utility deposit of 
$50.00 per dwelling unit shall be paid by each customer, unless otherwise provided in this chapter. 
For each commercial customer requesting reclaimed water service, a utility deposit of $100.00 per 
unit shall be paid by each customer, unless otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(f) ?Deposit for newly annexed property. The city will waive the deposit requirement for any county 
customer who connects to the city water system within 12 months of annexing into the city, provided 
the customer maintains a good payment history. 
(Code 1983, § 23-87(a); Code 1993, § 82-94; Ord. No. 1217, § 1, 5-5-1999; Ord. No. 1376, § 1, 
10-18-2000; Ord. No. 1598, §§ I, II, 10-15-2003; Ord. No. 1717, §§ I—III, 9-15-2004; Ord. No. 
1812, § III, 4-5-2006; Ord. No. 1909, § I, 4-18-2007; Ord. No. 1961, § I, 7-18-2007; Ord. No. 
1988, § I, 10-3-2007; Ord. No. 2020, § I, 1-2-2008; Ord. No. 2064, § I, 5-21-2008; Ord. No. 
2071, § II, 6-18-2008; Ord. No. 2475, § I, 2-17-2016) 


Sec. 78-93. - Billing and collection procedures. 
    Billing and collection procedures for the reclaimed water system shall be in accordance with article 
IV of this chapter. 
(Code 1983, § 23-87(h); Code 1993, § 82-95) 


Sec. 78-94. - Discontinuance of service at request of customer. 
    A customer will not be charged a fee for discontinuing reclaimed water service. Discontinuance shall 
not relieve the customer of any amounts due or liens imposed for monthly service charges, connection 
fees, meter installation fees or other costs. 
(Code 1983, § 23-87(g); Code 1993, § 82-96) 


Sec. 78-95. - Reconnection when service disconnected due to violation of regulations. 
    Where reclaimed water service has been disconnected for violation of an ordinance or regulation 
regarding reclaimed water, such service shall not be reconnected until the utility services director receives 
adequate assurances and guarantees that such a violation will not recur. 
(Code 1983, § 23-87(i); Code 1993, § 82-97) 


Sec. 78-96. - Authority to prescribe additional regulations. 
(a) ?The public services director shall have the power to promulgate procedures and regulations for 
reclaimed water service with respect to the following matters, and such procedures and regulations 
shall become effective upon a resolution approving such procedures and regulations being adopted 
by the city council: 
(1) ?Application procedures and requirements. 
(2) ?Installation requirements, including specifications for acceptable materials and devices to help 
prevent backflow or cross-connections between the reclaimed water system and any other utility 
system. 
(3) ?Procedures for enforcement of the ordinances and regulations pertaining to reclaimed water, 
including procedures for inspection of the customer's system. 
(4) ?Procedures for the orderly expansion of the reclaimed water system. 
(5) ?Procedures for plugging wells located on the property which will be receiving reclaimed water. 
(6) ?Procedures for use of hose connections to the reclaimed water system. 
(7) ?Other matters relating to the construction, operation and use of the reclaimed water system. 
(b) ?The public services director may, when necessary for the efficient operation of the reclaimed water 
system or for the health or safety of the general public or the customer, establish regulations 
regarding the following matters, and such regulations shall become effective at the time of 
promulgation without the need for city council approval: 
(1) ?The times of day or night during which the reclaimed water may be used by customers. 
(2) ?The maximum rate of use of the reclaimed water. 
(Code 1983, § 23-88(a), (b); Code 1993, § 82-98; Ord. No. 2475, § I, 2-17-2016) 


Sec. 78-97. - Requirements for customer facilities. 
(a) ?Cross-connections prohibited; use of reclaimed water. Cross-connection of the reclaimed water 
system with other sources of water or use of reclaimed water for potable purposes is prohibited. No 
person shall construct, operate, maintain or allow to remain present on property owned or controlled 
by such person any system or device which is not in compliance with all provisions of this Code 
related to reclaimed water and with all procedures and regulations promulgated pursuant to this 
article. The person who owns or controls the property upon which such a noncomplying device or 
system is found shall be liable to the city for the amount by which the costs associated with the 
securing and removal of the noncomplying device or system exceeds the cost of normal 
discontinuance of service. These excess costs shall constitute a lien against the property upon which 
the noncomplying device or system is located. 
(b) ?Cross-connection control program. The water resources superintendent shall be the designee for 
the cross-connection control program. He shall be responsible for the administration of the cross-
connection control program, including training of personnel. 
(c) ?Irrigation. All irrigation with reclaimed water shall be conducted using permanently installed irrigation 
systems consisting of large droplet, low-trajectory spray heads, using underground irrigation, or by 
other means which are approved by the city. 
(d) ?Compliance with applicable regulations. The reclaimed water facilities installed on the customer's 
property shall comply with applicable city, county and state rules and regulations. 
(e) ?Noncomplying systems. Any customer whose reclaimed water system is in violation of any city 
ordinance, regulation or procedure shall be subject to immediate discontinuance of reclaimed water 
service. Such discontinuance of service shall not relieve any person of liability for civil actions or for 
criminal or municipal ordinance violation prosecution. 
(Code 1983, § 23-88(c)—(g); Code 1993, § 82-99) 


Sec. 78-98. - Maintenance of customer facilities. 
    All users of reclaimed water must properly maintain the reclaimed water system on their property. 
This specifically includes the isolation valve. Failure to keep the system in repair is subject to the 
enforcement procedures established pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1983, § 23-89(b); Code 1993, § 82-100) 


Sec. 78-99. - Inspections. 
(a) ?To ensure that the provisions of the city ordinances and regulations and procedures are being 
observed, the city reserves the right and privilege of inspecting, removing and securing any or all 
devices installed by the customer which connect to or control reclaimed water, including, but not 
limited to, backflow preventers, valves, fittings, pipes, sprinklers, etc. 
(1) ?Inspections without cause to believe that an ordinance or regulation is being violated shall be at 
reasonable times and not exceed a reasonable frequency. 
(2) ?Inspections where there is reasonable cause to believe that an ordinance or regulation is being 
violated shall be at such times and shall occur with such frequency as is necessary to establish 
that an ordinance or regulation is or is not being violated. 
(b) ?Each customer of reclaimed water shall, by application, give prior written consent to entry upon his 
premises, and thereby waives any other written notice for such inspection. Failure of the city to 
obtain such a written waiver shall not affect the right of the city to proceed pursuant to subsection (a) 
of this section. 
(c) ?Refusing to permit an authorized city agent or employee to enter onto the premises for purposes of 
inspecting the customer's reclaimed water system pursuant to this section shall constitute a violation 
of this Code and shall be grounds for immediate discontinuance of the reclaimed water service by 
the city to the subject premises. 
(Code 1983, § 23-90; Code 1993, § 82-101) 


Sec. 78-100. - Tampering with system. 
    No person, unless expressly authorized by the utilities director or his designee, shall tamper with, 
work on or in any way alter or damage any city reclaimed water facility. For purposes of this section, the 
term "tampering" or "work" shall include, but is not limited to, opening or closing of valves or causing of 
any water to flow from the system. No unauthorized person shall cut into or make any connection to the 
system. The offending person shall be liable for the cost of all charges attributable to the correcting of 
such tampering, including legal expenses, but payment of or correcting of such damage shall not relieve 
the offending person from civil or criminal penalties the city or a court of law may impose for a violation of 
city ordinance. 
(Code 1983, § 23-89(a); Code 1993, § 82-102) 


Secs. 78-101—78-128. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Stormwater plans, F.S. §§ 403.0891—403.0893; stormwater debris, F.S. § 
403.7071. 


Sec. 78-129. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Equivalent drainage unit (EDU) means a standard unit of measure determined to represent the 
stormwater runoff or impervious area generated by a typical residential unit in the city. Such measure 
provides a basis for comparing the runoff generated by one parcel with that generated by another. 
    Impervious area means land surfaces, natural or man-affected, which do not, or only minimally, allow 
the penetration or infiltration of water. 
    Site mitigation factor means a factor which allows for adjustment to the calculation of EDUs for those 
accounts which have stormwater management facilities and practices in place and functioning. 
    Stormwater management program means the system by which the city manages and controls 
stormwater within the city. The system includes management services such as designing, permitting, 
planning and reviewing stormwater-related infrastructure, and the operation, maintenance, repair and 
replacement and improvement of such infrastructure consistent with the capital improvement and 
stormwater management element of the city's comprehensive plan. 
(Code 1983, § 23-96; Code 1993, § 82-136) 


Sec. 78-130. - Findings; intent of article. 
    It is hereby found, determined and declared as follows: 
(1) ?Those elements of the program for the collection of and disposal of stormwater and surface 
water are of benefit and provide services to all property within the city. 
(2) ?The cost of operating and maintaining the city stormwater management program and financing 
necessary repairs, replacements, improvements and extensions thereof should, to the extent 
practicable, be allocated in relationship to the user impacts, benefits enjoyed and services 
received therefrom. 
(3) ?All property within the city demonstrates a hydrologic response to rainfall events which 
generate stormwater runoff. The volume, rate and quality of this runoff will vary with the soil 
type, land use conditions, topographic conditions and other variables. In particular, the 
construction of commercial units on previously undeveloped property will generally increase the 
volume and rate of stormwater runoff, and will adversely affect its water quality. 
(4) ?It is the intent of this article to establish the stormwater management utility as a city utility and 
to establish a program of utility fees for stormwater management services and facilities, which 
fees are to be levied against each parcel of land within the city; provided, however, that no 
additional or special charges shall be imposed on lakes, public streets, boulevards, highways, 
expressways, alleys (private alleys excepted), viaducts, sidewalks, curbing, street crossing, 
grade separations, common areas as defined by recorded plat, and any highway structures. 
(5) ?Properties that have existing stormwater management facilities may have their stormwater 
service charges reduced or prorated as determined by the city. 
(Code 1983, § 23-97; Code 1993, § 82-137; Ord. No. 1438, § I, 5-15-2002) 


Sec. 78-131. - Enforcement of article; violations. 
(a) ?The utilities director and other duly authorized employees of the city, bearing the proper credentials 
and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties tributary to the city's stormwater 
management program for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement and testing in 
accordance with the provisions of this article and any rules or regulations adopted pursuant hereto. 
(b) ?Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be prosecuted as provided in 
accordance with the enforcement process established by this Code and shall become liable to the 
city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation, to include 
reasonable attorney fees, whether or not litigation is necessary. 
(Code 1983, § 23-105; Code 1993, § 82-138) 


Sec. 78-132. - Creation of stormwater management utility. 
    Pursuant to its authority under article VIII, 2(b), of the state constitution, F.S. ch. 166 and F.S. ch. 
403, the city does hereby establish a stormwater management utility and declares its intention to acquire, 
own, construct, equip, operate and maintain open drainageways, underground storm drains, treatment 
facilities, equipment and appurtenances necessary, useful or convenient for a complete stormwater 
management system, and also including maintenance, extension and construction of the present 
stormwater management system of the city; to minimize by suitable means such system's contribution to 
flooding; to minimize by suitable means such system's adverse effect on the water quality of lakes, ponds 
and basins within the city and to maintain the levels of lakes, ponds and basins within the city; and to 
facilitate the maintenance of retention areas. 
(Code 1983, § 23-95; Code 1993, § 82-139) 


Sec. 78-133. - Implementation of stormwater management program. 
(a) ?The utilities director is responsible for the following: 
(1) ?Plan and execute the stormwater management utility; 
(2) ?Assess and collect fees, fines and penalties in accordance with city ordinances and 
resolutions; 
(3) ?Conduct periodic rate studies for consideration by the city council so as to maintain an efficient 
and equitable rate structure and ensure a prudent and stable financial base from which to 
operate the stormwater management utility; 
(4) ?Promulgate rules, practices and procedures necessary for efficient and effective management 
of the stormwater management utility; 
(5) ?Perform other acts necessary or appropriate to the efficient and effective operation of the 
stormwater management utility. 
(b) ?The city engineer is responsible for the following: 
(1) ?Plan, design, acquire right-of-way for and construct capital projects as approved and funded by 
the city council; 
(2) ?Research, develop and refine experimental and prototypical stormwater management systems, 
facilities, devices and techniques; 
(3) ?Review drawings, submittals and site plans, both public and private, for stormwater 
management systems, devices and facilities for adequacy, sufficiency and consistency with 
applicable codes and regulations; 
(4) ?Prepare a master stormwater management plan; 
(5) ?Advise the mayor, or other appropriate city officials, on matters concerning stormwater 
management. 
(Code 1983, § 23-99; Code 1993, § 82-140) 


Sec. 78-134. - Fee schedule. 
    The schedule of fees to be charged by the stormwater management utility shall be adopted by 
resolution by the city council. 
(Code 1983, § 23-99; Code 1993, § 82-141) 


Sec. 78-135. - Appeal of fee calculation. 
    Any person disagreeing with the calculation of EDUs as determined by the city may appeal such 
determination to the city engineer or his designee. Any appeal must be filed in writing and, as determined 
by the city engineer, shall include a survey prepared by a registered surveyor showing total property area, 
topography, drainage structures, impervious surface area or other technical data required to demonstrate 
the appellant's claim. Based upon the information provided by the city and the appealing party, the city 
engineer shall make a final calculation of pervious and impervious surfaces and any applicable mitigation 
criteria. The city engineer shall notify the parties, in writing, of his decision. If still dissatisfied, a party may 
appeal the decision to the city council. Such an appeal must be filed with the city clerk not later than ten 
days after receipt of the decision from the city engineer. The decision of the city council shall be final. Any 
adjustment to the originally determined fee shall be retroactive to October 1 of the fiscal year of the date 
of the request for the adjustment. 
(Code 1983, § 23-100; Code 1993, § 82-142) 


Sec. 78-136. - Billing and collection procedures. 
(a) ?The city's finance director is hereby authorized and directed to establish a stormwater management 
utility fee billing and collection system. The stormwater management utility fee shall be billed at least 
annually, but not more than 12 times in one calendar year. The finance director may use any 
combination of billing procedures to achieve an efficient, effective and equitable method of collection. 
The finance director is specifically authorized to use the following two billing and collection methods, 
but is not limited to such methods: 
(1) ?The stormwater management utility fee may be billed and collected by the county tax collector 
and property appraiser in accordance with applicable statutes. 
(2) ?The finance director may, at his sole discretion, bill and collect the stormwater management 
utility fee with the monthly utility bill for some or all of those lots or parcels of land utilizing city 
utilities, and bill and collect separately the stormwater management utility fees for some or all of 
those lots or parcels of land and owners thereof not utilizing other city utilities. All such bills for 
stormwater management utility fees shall be rendered monthly by the city's finance department 
and shall become due and payable in accordance with the rules and regulations of the finance 
department pertaining to the collection. If the stormwater management utility fee is part of a 
consolidated statement for utility customers, and if a partial payment is received, the payment 
shall first be applied to garbage and trash, next applied to stormwater management, next 
applied to sewer and finally applied to the water account. 
(b) ?Any charge due under this section which is not paid when due shall bear interest at the highest legal 
rate and, in accordance with applicable law, shall constitute a lien against the subject property. Such 
lien shall be superior in dignity to any encumbrances on the property, except for tax liens, and may 
be recovered in an action at law by the city. The delinquent account shall be responsible for all costs 
of collection, to include reasonable attorney fees, whether or not litigation is necessary. Failure of 
any user of city utilities within the city to pay the charges promptly when due shall subject such user 
to discontinuance of utility services, and the finance director is hereby empowered and directed to 
enforce this provision as to any and all delinquent users. 
(c) ?If a tenant in possession of any premises or buildings shall pay the stormwater management utility 
fees, it shall relieve the landowner from such obligation, but the city shall not be required to look to 
any person whatsoever other than the owner for the payment of such charges. 
(Code 1983, § 23-102; Code 1993, § 82-143) 


Sec. 78-137. - Stormwater management fund. 
(a) ?All stormwater management utility fees collected by the city shall be paid into a proprietary fund 
which is hereby created, to be known as the "stormwater management fund." The fund shall be used 
exclusively to pay for the costs of the stormwater management program, including, but not limited to, 
the costs to plan, construct, operate and maintain stormwater management facilities and to 
administer the stormwater management program as described in this article. 
(b) ?To the extent that the stormwater management utility fees collected are insufficient to operate, 
maintain or construct the needed stormwater management facilities, the costs of such operation, 
maintenance or construction may be paid from such city funds as may be determined by the city 
council, but the city council may order the reimbursement of such fund if additional fees are 
thereafter collected. When the fund has surplus dollars on hand in excess of current needs, the 
surplus dollars will be invested to return the highest yield consistent with proper safeguards and such 
interest earnings shall be paid into the stormwater management fund. 
(Code 1983, § 23-101; Code 1993, § 82-144) 


Sec. 78-138. - Emergency work. 
    In case of an emergency, the utilities director or his designee may direct that action be taken 
immediately to correct the condition or abate the activity to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
The city may perform the required work and charge the owner for all costs related thereto. 
(Code 1983, § 23-103; Code 1993, § 82-145) 


Sec. 78-139. - Non-liability of city for damage caused by flooding. 
    Floods from stormwater runoff may occasionally occur which exceed the capacity of storm drainage 
facilities constructed, operated or maintained by funds made available under this article. This article shall 
not be construed or interpreted to mean that property subject to the fees and charges established in this 
article will always, or at any time, be free from stormwater flooding or flood damage, or that stormwater 
systems capable of handling all storm events can be cost-effectively constructed, operated or maintained. 
The provisions of this article shall not create any liability on the part of the city, or any official or employee 
thereof, for any flood damage that may result from such storms or the runoff thereof. This article shall not 
be interpreted to reduce the need or the necessity for obtaining flood insurance by individual property 
owners. 
(Code 1983, § 23-104; Code 1993, § 82-146) 


Sec. 78-140. - Discharge of polluting matter in natural waters prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly drain, deposit, place or otherwise, directly discharge 
into any natural waters, receiving waters, outlets or stormwater management systems within the city, or to 
cause or permit to be drained, deposited, placed or otherwise discharged into such natural waters, 
receiving waters, outlets or stormwater management systems any organic or inorganic matter which 
causes pollution. Polluting matter includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1) ?Chemicals and petroleum products, including, but not limited to, oil, gasoline, grease, paints, 
soaps, laundry waste, steam cleaning waste, degreasers, solvents, antifreeze, other automotive 
products, acids, alkalis, dyes, toxic or poisonous solids or liquids, pesticides, herbicides or 
fertilizers, chemically treated cooling water, or continuous commercial or mechanical direct 
discharge of heated water. 
(2) ?Solid waste, pet waste, wastewater (sanitary sewerage), animal carcasses, recreational vehicle 
wastes. 
(3) ?Lawn clippings, leaves, branches, silt, construction materials (block, concrete, bricks, etc.), 
heavy solids that may obstruct the flow of stormwater in the city's storm systems, or the direct 
dumping of soil into the stormwater system or water body. 
(Code 1993, § 82-147; Ord. No. 1155, § I, 4-15-1998) 


Sec. 78-141. - Correction and discontinuance of prohibited discharge. 
(a) ?The utilities director may order the correction of any unsafe, nonconforming or unauthorized 
condition which is in violation of any provision of this Code or regulation adopted hereunder. The 
utilities director may also order the discontinuance of any activity causing such condition. 
(b) ?Whenever the utilities director orders the correction or discontinuance of any condition or activity on 
any premises pursuant to this chapter, the utilities director shall notify the owner or other person 
responsible for such condition or activity in writing and shall state the nature of the violation, direct 
the person to correct or discontinue the condition or activity, and provide a reasonable time limit for 
the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the time period stated in such notice, 
permanently cease or correct all violations. Failure to comply with such order shall constitute a 
violation of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1993, § 82-148; Ord. No. 1155, § I, 4-15-1998) 


Sec. 78-142. - Emergency conditions requiring immediate action. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, whenever the utilities director determines that 
conditions or activities exist requiring immediate action to protect the public health, safety, or welfare, he 
or his designee is authorized to enter, with written notice, at all reasonable times in or upon any property 
for the purpose of testing, inspecting, investigating, measuring, sampling, and correcting such emergency 
conditions. The utilities director, or his designee, may order verbally (followed in writing) the immediate 
discontinuance of any activity which causes or tends to cause the emergency condition. Failure to comply 
with such order within a reasonable time limit shall constitute a separate violation of this article. 
(Code 1993, § 82-149; Ord. No. 1155, § I, 4-15-1998) 


Sec. 78-143. - Liability for pollution abatement. 
    Any person responsible for illicit pollutant discharge into any natural waters, receiving waters, outlets 
or stormwater management system and who fails to correct any prohibited condition or discontinue any 
prohibited activity at the utilities director's order shall be responsible to pay the necessary expenses 
incurred in testing, measuring, sampling, collecting, removing, containing, treating, and disposing of the 
pollutant materials. 
(Code 1993, § 82-150; Ord. No. 1155, § I, 4-15-1998) 


Sec. 78-144. - Injunctive relief prohibiting discharge. 
    The utilities director, or his designee, may immediately upon discovery of an ongoing or potential 
discharge of pollutants into the city's natural waters, receiving waters, outlets, or stormwater management 
systems in violation of this article, shall give verbal or written notice to the owner of the property or other 
legally responsible party indicating the nature of such violation and directing appropriate action to effect 
correction of existing deficiencies. Failure of the owner or other legally responsible party to make directed 
corrections shall constitute a violation of this article; in addition to other remedies provided for herein the 
city shall have a right to injunctive relief from a court of competent jurisdiction and to receive an award of 
all attorney fees and costs in regard thereto. 
(Code 1993, § 82-151; Ord. No. 1155, § I, 4-15-1998) 


Sec. 78-145. - Notice, correction of violations. 
(a) ?Any person who knowingly violates any of the provisions of sections 78-140 through this section 
shall be punished as provided in section 1-14. Each and every day on which such person continues 
to violate the provisions of sections 78-140 through this section, after having been notified of such 
violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b) ?Any person who knowingly causes or allows an unauthorized discharge, or who otherwise violates 
the provisions of sections 78-140 through this section may be required to appear before the code 
enforcement board of the city for enforcement proceedings pursuant to Land Development Code 
section 11.03.00 of the Apopka Code. 
(c) ?The remedies and penalties provided in sections 78-140 through this section are not exclusive, and 
the city may seek whatever other remedies are authorized by state law or in equity against any 
person who violates the provisions of sections 78-140 through this section. 
(Code 1993, § 82-152; Ord. No. 1155, § I, 4-15-1998) 


Secs. 78-146—78-173. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - BILLING AND COLLECTION PROCEDURES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Utility administration of rates, etc., F.S. § 180.13; discontinuance of service, F.S. 
§ 180.135. 


Sec. 78-174. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Utility means the city's water service, the city's reclaimed water service, the city's sewage collection 
service, the city's garbage collection and disposal service, the city's refuse service, the industrial waste 
program, or any other city services established by the city council. 
(Code 1983, § 23-126; Code 1993, § 82-171; Ord. No. 2092, § II, 1-7-2009) 


Sec. 78-175. - Provisions of article cumulative. 
    The provisions of this article shall be supplemental to all ordinances of the city, and shall be 
cumulative to all other remedies provided by law or ordinance for the collection of unpaid utility bills. 
(Code 1983, § 23-140; Code 1993, § 82-172; Ord. No. 2092, § II, 1-7-2009) 


Sec. 78-176. - Joint billing. 
    The monthly charges to any premises for utility services shall be billed monthly on a single bill or 
statement. 
(Code 1983, § 23-127; Code 1993, § 82-173) 


Sec. 78-177. - Liability for payment of charges. 
    Utility usage charges shall apply to all residential, commercial and industrial establishments directly 
or indirectly connected with and served by the utility systems of the city, and shall be billed to the owners 
of the premises, provided that, upon application by the tenant of any premises who is not the owner, filed 
with the water and sewer department and accompanied by appropriate security or deposit in an amount 
and a kind approved or authorized by the city council, such bills may be rendered to the tenant. The 
rendering of a bill to a tenant who is not the owner of the premises shall not interfere with or impair the 
right of the city to enforce and collect any monies due from the owner of the premises. 
(Code 1983, § 23-128; Code 1993, § 82-174) 


Sec. 78-178. - Due date for payment of bills. 
    Utility bills shall be rendered monthly by the city. All bills shall be due and payable within 20 days of 
the billing date and shall be deemed delinquent if not paid within such period. 
(Code 1983, § 23-129; Code 1993, § 82-175) 


Sec. 78-179. - Time payment schedule. 
    If a resident is unable to pay the balance on his utility services account, a payment schedule may be 
arranged through the finance department. After consultation with the utility billing division, a payment 
schedule must be signed by the applicant. 
(Code 1993, § 82-176) 


Sec. 78-180. - Returned checks. 
    If a bank returns a customer's check the city has deposited for any reason, the returned check will be 
processed as provided for in section 2-104(a). The service fee will be included in the customer's next 
utility bill. 
(Code 1983, § 23-86; Code 1993, § 82-177; Ord. No. 1681, § I, 8-4-2004) 
State Law reference— Fee for returned checks, F.S. § 166.251. 


Sec. 78-181. - Notice of intention to terminate service. 
    If any utility bill shall remain unpaid for a period of 20 days, the city shall send a past due notice by 
regular United States mail to the occupant of the premises for which such bill was rendered, specifying 
the amount due, and advising of the city's intention to terminate service not less than ten days after the 
mailing of such notice and providing that an appeal may be filed for a hearing before the director of 
financial services regarding the amount within ten days from the mailing of such notice. 
(Code 1983, § 23-130; Code 1993, § 82-178) 


Sec. 78-182. - Termination of service generally; late payment charge; illegal use of water; tampering; 
maintenance of customers facilities. 
(a) ?Authority to terminate service. If a utility bill remains unpaid for ten days after service of the past due 
notice and an appeal has not been filed pursuant to section 78-181, the city may terminate all utility 
service to such premises. 
(b) ?Reconnection fee. Utility service which has been terminated pursuant to the provisions of this 
section shall not be reconnected until all past due utility bills and penalties have been paid, together 
with a reconnection charge of $70.00. For potable and reclaimed water service that has been 
discontinued due to non-payment, if payment, along with the reconnection fee, is made before 3:00 
p.m., Monday through Friday, excluding weekends and city holidays, service will be restored the 
same day. If the required payments are received after 3:00 p.m., service will be restored the next 
business day. If the required payments are received or an arrangement for payment has been made, 
after 3:00 p.m., but no later than 8:00 p.m., and the customer may request the service be restored 
the same day, however, an additional service charge fee of $50.00 will be assessed. If any owner or 
tenant reconnects or turns on the water service after it has become discontinued because of a 
delinquent bill, the meter will be locked or removed and an additional reconnection fee of $70.00 will 
be required over and above the above-referenced fees upon receipt of payment of the delinquent 
bill. 
(c) ?Late payment charge. If the bill is unpaid by the delinquent/due date, a ten percent late charge 
based upon the amount of the bill that is delinquent shall be added to the amount owed the city on 
the following month's billing. 
(d) ?Locking or removal of water meter; illegal use of water. The city reserves the right to lock or remove 
the water meter at first cutoff for any customer who has a past record of reconnecting or tampering 
with a meter illegally. 
(e) ?Tampering. No person, unless expressly authorized by the public services director or his designee, 
shall tamper with, work on, or in any way alter or damage any city potable or reclaimed water facility, 
including meters. No unauthorized person shall open or close valves, cut into, or make any 
connection to the system. The offending person shall be liable for the actual cost plus ten percent of 
all charges attributable to the correction of such tampering, as outlined in F.S. § 180.13, including 
legal expenses. The offender may also be subject to code enforcement proceedings consistent with 
this Code and with F.S. ch. 162. Payment for, or the correcting of, damages shall in no way relieve 
the offending person from civil or criminal penalties a court or other judicial or quasi-judicial body 
may impose for damage to public property or violation of a city ordinance. 
(f) ?Maintenance. It is the responsibility of all potable and reclaimed water customers to properly protect 
and maintain access to the meter box that services their property or residence. Property owners 
must maintain a clear area of three feet around the potable water and/or reclaimed water meter box 
located on their property. The meter box may not be buried or obstructed from view, and must 
remain clearly visible and readily accessible at all times to allow access by city employees for 
reading, maintenance, emergency disconnection from service, and disconnection from service for 
non-payment. Property owners shall be assessed, on their associated utility bills for any costs 
incurred by the city for actions necessary to gain access to an obstructed meter, and the city shall 
not be financially liable for any damages that actions that an inaccessibility necessary to access an 
obstructed meter. 
(g) ?Customer requested service; fee. A service fee of $35.00 will be charged for customer requested 
connections and disconnections of service. 
(h) ?Customer requested site visits; fee. A service fee of $35.00 will be charged for miscellaneous 
customer requested site visits not previously described in this article. 
(Code 1983, § 23-179; Ord. No. 1453, § I, 6-19-2002; Ord. No. 1909, § IV, 4-18-2007; Ord. No. 
2092, § II, 1-7-2009; Ord. No. 2475, § I, 2-17-2016) 


Sec. 78-183. - Lien for unpaid charges. 
(a) ?If a utility bill remains unpaid for 30 days after service of the required notice, and if no hearing 
before the finance director has been requested, or if after such hearing such charges are found to be 
properly imposed, such charges may become a lien upon the premises served in the following 
manner: 
(1) ?Such charges shall be added to the ad valorem taxes levied against the property served, and 
the amount of such charges shall become a lien upon the real property of equal dignity with the 
lien of the city for ad valorem taxes upon the property; or 
(2) ?The city clerk may record in the official records a notice of lien in the amount of such charges, 
which lien shall have priority over all other liens except tax liens, and may be foreclosed in the 
manner provided by law. 
(b) ?The method of collection of such charges provided in this section shall not be construed as limiting, 
or in any way restricting, the use of any other remedy or method of collection available to the city. 
(Code 1983, § 23-132; Code 1993, § 82-180; Ord. No. 2092, § II, 1-7-2009) 
State Law reference— Limitation on liens, F.S. § 180.135. 


Sec. 78-184. - Civil actions. 
    Any delinquent utility bill or charges due the city may be enforced by the city in a civil action to 
recover the monies due and any costs incurred by the city to recover such sums. 
(Code 1983, § 23-133; Code 1993, § 82-181) 


Sec. 78-185. - After-hours service charge. 
    Any utility customer may request service after regularly scheduled working hours, Monday through 
Friday, except city holidays, between the hours of 3:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m., and between the hours of 
8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. weekends and city holidays. Any utility customer requesting such service must sign 
an after-hours service request form. A service charge fee of $50.00 will be assessed, unless waived by 
the finance director, and such fee will be billed to the customer. 
(Code 1983, § 23-134; Code 1993, § 82-182; Ord. No. 981, § 1, 12-4-1996; Ord. No. 1909, § IV, 
4-18-2007; Ord. No. 2092, § II, 1-7-2009; Ord. No. 2475, § I, 2-17-2016) 


Secs. 78-186—78-208. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE V. - CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Requirements for fire protection systems, F.S. § 633.334. 


Sec. 78-209. - Manual of cross-connection control. 
    The city adopts by reference the City of Apopka Manual of Cross-Connection Control, dated May 7, 
1997. Compliance with the manual and the cross-connection program contained therein is hereby 
required. 
(Code 1993, § 82-183; Ord. No. 1068, § 1, 6-4-1997) 


Sec. 78-210. - Cross-connection control inspections. 
    The utility services director or his designee may cause inspections to be made of all properties 
served by the public potable water supply where cross-connections with the public potable water supply is 
deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and re-inspections based on potential health hazards 
involved shall be as established by the Manual of Cross-Connection Control of the utility services 
department of the city. Any fees or charges established by the city pursuant to the regulations of 
requirements established herein may be changed from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1993, § 82-184; Ord. No. 1068, § 1, 6-4-1997) 


Sec. 78-211. - Property access for cross-connection control. 
    Duly authorized employees of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be 
permitted to enter any building, structure, or property served by a connection to the public potable water 
supply system of the city for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems on such property. 
Consent to such access shall be obtained from a person of suitable age and discretion therein or in 
control thereof. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed 
evidence of the presence of cross-connections. 
(Code 1993, § 82-185; Ord. No. 1068, § 1, 6-4-1997) 


Sec. 78-212. - Cross-connection; discontinued service. 
    The utility services director or his designee is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue potable 
water service to any property after notice wherein any connection in violation of these regulations exists 
and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of 
contamination of the public potable water supply. 
(Code 1993, § 82-186; Ord. No. 1068, § 1, 6-4-1997) 


Sec. 78-213. - Protection of public potable water supply; labeling. 
    The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply shall 
be protected from the presence of future possible contamination as specified by this chapter and by state 
and city plumbing codes. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and 
which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled "WATER UNSAFE FOR DRINKING" in a 
conspicuous manner or any other appropriate warning notice deemed acceptable by the utility services 
director. 
(Code 1993, § 82-187; Ord. No. 1068, § 1, 6-4-1997) 


Sec. 78-214. - Control expenses and records. 
    The consumer shall bear all expense of installing, testing and maintaining all protective devices to 
ensure proper operation on a continuing basis. Installation, testing and maintenance of protective devices 
shall be conducted by certified personnel approved by the city's utility services department. The 
consumer shall notify the city's utility services department at least 48 hours in advance, in writing, when 
the tests are to be undertaken so that it may have a representative witness the tests if it is so desired. 
The consumer shall keep records on his testing, maintenance and repair activities related to cross-
connection control and shall make these records available upon request. Copies of all testing, 
maintenance and repair records shall be sent to the city's utility services department immediately after the 
work is performed. 
(Code 1993, § 82-188; Ord. No. 1068, § 1, 6-4-1997) 


Sec. 78-215. - Other codes and rules. 
    This article does not supersede the Florida Building Code, the state department of health plumbing 
rules, or any city plumbing ordinance but is supplementary to them; where conflicts exist, the more 
restrictive provision shall apply. 
(Code 1993, § 82-189; Ord. No. 1068, § 1, 6-4-1997) 


Sec. 78-216. - Violation liability. 
    Any person or customer found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this article or any written 
order of the city or pursuance thereof shall be subject to all available legal penalties and fines and shall 
be in violation of this Code. Notice of such violation shall be given by delivering the same to the premises 
and a copy thereof mailed to the billing address as it appears on the city's billing records. Each day upon 
which there is a violation of the provisions of this article, the customer shall become liable to the city for 
any expense, loss or damage incurred by the city by reason of such violation to include attorney fees. In 
addition to any penalty provided by law for the violation of any of the provisions of this article, the city may 
bring suit in the appropriate court to enjoin, restrain or otherwise prevent the violation of any of the 
provisions of this article. 
(Code 1993, § 82-190; Ord. No. 1068, § 1, 6-4-1997) 


Sec. 78-217. - Areas embraced. 
    All territories served by the city's potable water system shall be governed by this article to the extent 
permitted by law. 
(Code 1993, § 82-191; Ord. No. 1068, § 1, 6-4-1997) 


Sec. 78-218. - Public employees. 
    No provision of this article designating the duties of any city officer or employee shall be so 
construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine or penalty for failure to perform such 
duty. 
(Code 1993, § 82-192; Ord. No. 1068, § 1, 6-4-1997) 


Sec. 78-219. - Penalty. 
(a) ?A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or order issued 
hereunder, shall be liable to the city for a minimum civil penalty of $50.00 per violation, per day and a 
maximum civil penalty of $10,000.00 per violation, per day. 
(b) ?The utility services director may recover reasonable attorney fees, court costs, and other expenses 
associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of 
any actual damages incurred by the city. 
(c) ?In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant 
circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the 
magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, 
corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice 
requires. 
(d) ?Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action 
against a user. 
(Code 1993, § 82-193; Ord. No. 1068, § 1, 6-4-1997) 


Secs. 78-220—78-246. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE VI. - WATER CONSERVATION FOR LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Conservation of water, landscaping, F.S. § 166.048; declaration of shortage of 
water, F.S. § 373.175; xeriscape provisions, F.S. § 373.185. 


Sec. 78-247. - Intent and purpose. 
    It is the intent and purpose of this article to implement procedures that promote water conservation 
through more efficient landscape irrigation. 
(Code 1993, § 82-194; Ord. No. 2172, § II, 7-7-2010) 


Sec. 78-248. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Address means the house number of a physical location of a specific property. This includes rural 
route numbers but excludes post office box numbers. If a lot number in a mobile home park or similar 
community is used by the U.S. Postal Service to determine a delivery location, the lot number shall be the 
property's address. An even-numbered address means an address ending in the numbers 0, 2, 4, 6, 8 or 
the letters A through M. An odd-numbered address means an address ending in the numbers 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 
or the letters N through Z. 
    Daylight Saving Time means time during which clocks are set one hour ahead of standard time to 
provide more daylight at the end of the working day during late spring, summer, and early fall. 
    District means the St. Johns River Water Management District. 
    Eastern Standard Time means the standard time during which clocks are not set one hour ahead 
occurring during late fall and winter. 
    Landscape irrigation means the outside watering of plants in a landscape such as shrubbery, trees, 
lawns, grass, groundcovers, plants, vines, gardens and other such flora that are situated in such diverse 
locations as residential areas, public, commercial, and industrial establishments, and public medians and 
rights-of-way. The term "landscape irrigation" does not include agricultural crops, nursery plants, 
cemeteries, golf course greens, tees, fairways, primary roughs, and vegetation associated with 
recreational areas such as playgrounds and football, baseball and soccer fields. 
    Nonresidential landscape irrigation means the irrigation of landscape not included within the 
definition of "residential landscape irrigation," such as that associated with public, commercial and 
industrial property, including commercial or transient housing units, hotel and motel units, and public 
medians and rights-of-way. 
    Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of 
any kind. 
    Reclaimed water system means a system in which the primary source is reclaimed water, which may 
or may not be supplemented from another source during peak demand periods. 
    Residential landscape irrigation means the irrigation of landscape associated with any housing unit 
having sanitary and kitchen facilities designed to accommodate one or more residents, including multiple 
housing units and mobile homes. 
(Code 1993, § 82-195; Ord. No. 2172, § II, 7-7-2010) 


Sec. 78-249. - Landscape irrigation schedules. 
(a) ?When Daylight Saving Time is in effect, landscape irrigation shall occur only in accordance with the 
following irrigation schedule: 
(1) ?Residential landscape irrigation at odd-numbered addresses or no address may occur only on 
Wednesdays and Saturdays and shall not occur between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.; 
(2) ?Residential landscape irrigation at even-numbered addresses may occur only on Thursdays 
and Sundays and shall not occur between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.; 
(3) ?Nonresidential landscape irrigation may occur only on Tuesdays and Fridays and shall not 
occur between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.; and 
(4) ?No more than three-fourths inch of water may be applied per irrigation zone on each day that 
irrigation occurs, and in no event shall irrigation occur for more than one hour per irrigation zone 
on each day that irrigation occurs. 
(b) ?When Eastern Standard Time is in effect, landscape irrigation shall occur only in accordance with 
the following irrigation schedule: 
(1) ?Residential landscape irrigation at odd-numbered addresses or no address may occur only on 
Saturdays and shall not occur between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.; 
(2) ?Residential landscape irrigation at even-numbered addresses may occur only on Sundays and 
shall not occur between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.; 
(3) ?Nonresidential landscape irrigation may occur only on Tuesdays and shall not occur between 
10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.; and 
(4) ?No more than three-fourths inch of water may be applied per irrigation zone on each day that 
irrigation occurs, and in no event shall irrigation occur for more than one hour per irrigation zone 
on each day that irrigation occurs. 
(c) ?All landscape irrigation shall be limited in amount to only that necessary to meet landscape needs. 
(Code 1993, § 82-196; Ord. No. 2172, § II, 7-7-2010) 


Sec. 78-250. - Landscape irrigation schedule for city reclaimed water customers. 
(a) ?The use of reclaimed water for landscape irrigation is allowed only in accordance with the following 
irrigation schedule year-round: 
(1) ?Residential landscape irrigation at odd-numbered addresses or no address may occur only on 
Wednesdays and Saturdays and shall not occur between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.; and 
(2) ?Residential landscape irrigation at even-numbered addresses may occur only on Thursdays 
and Sundays and shall not occur between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.; and 
(3) ?Nonresidential landscape irrigation may occur only on Tuesdays and Fridays and shall not 
occur between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.; and 
(4) ?No more than three-fourths inch of water may be applied per irrigation zone on each day that 
irrigation occurs, and in no event shall irrigation occur for more than one hour per irrigation zone 
on each day that irrigation occurs. 
(b) ?All landscape irrigation shall be limited in amount to only that necessary to meet landscape needs. 
(Code 1993, § 82-197; Ord. No. 2172, § II, 7-7-2010) 


Sec. 78-251. - Exceptions to the landscape irrigation schedules. 
    Landscape irrigation shall be subject to the following irrigation schedule exceptions: 
(1) ?Irrigation using a micro-spray, micro-jet, drip or bubbler irrigation system is allowed anytime. 
(2) ?Irrigation of new landscape is allowed at any time of day on any day for the initial 30 days and 
every other day for the next 30 days for a total of one 60-day period, provided that the irrigation 
is limited to the minimum amount necessary for such landscape establishment. 
(3) ?Watering in of chemicals, including insecticides, pesticides, fertilizers, fungicides, and 
herbicides, when required by law, the manufacturer, or best management practices, is allowed 
at any time of day on any day within 24 hours of application. Watering in of chemicals shall not 
exceed 1/-04-inch of water per application except as otherwise required by law, the 
manufacturer, or best management practices. 
(4) ?Irrigation systems may be operated at any time of day on any day for maintenance and repair 
purposes not to exceed 20 minutes per hour per zone. 
(5) ?Irrigation using a hand-held hose equipped with an automatic shut-off nozzle is allowed at any 
time of day on any day. 
(6) ?Discharge of water from a water-to-air air conditioning unit or other water dependent cooling 
system is not limited. 
(7) ?The use of recycled water from wet detention treatment ponds for irrigation is allowed anytime, 
provided the ponds are not augmented from any ground or off-site surface water, or public 
supply sources. 
(8) ?For those reclaimed water users who do not receive reclaimed water from the city, the use of 
water from a reclaimed water system is allowed anytime. For the purpose of this subsection, a 
reclaimed water system includes systems in which the primary source is reclaimed water, which 
may or may not be supplemented from another source during peak demand periods. 
(Code 1993, § 82-198; Ord. No. 2172, § II, 7-7-2010) 


Sec. 78-252. - Additional requirement. 
    Any person who purchases and installs an automatic landscape irrigation system must properly 
install, maintain, and operate technology that inhibits or interrupts operation of the system during periods 
of sufficient moisture. 
(Code 1993, § 82-199; Ord. No. 2172, § II, 7-7-2010) 


Sec. 78-253. - Variance from specific day of the week limitations. 
    A variance from the specific landscape irrigation days or day set forth in sections 78-249 and 78-250 
may be granted if strict application of the scheduled days or day would lead to unreasonable or unfair 
results in particular instances, provided that the applicant demonstrates with particularity that compliance 
with the scheduled days or day will result in a substantial economic, health or other hardship on the 
applicant requesting the variance or those served by the applicant. Where a contiguous property is 
divided into different zones, a variance may be granted hereunder so that each zone may be irrigated on 
different days or day than other zones of the property. However, in no event shall a variance allow a 
single zone to be irrigated more than two days per week during Daylight Saving Time or more than one 
day per week during Eastern Standard Time. 
(Code 1993, § 82-200; Ord. No. 2172, § II, 7-7-2010) 


Sec. 78-254. - Application of article. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to each person located within the city and the city's utility 
service area. 
(Code 1993, § 82-201; Ord. No. 2172, § II, 7-7-2010) 


Sec. 78-255. - Enforcement officials. 
    The public services director and his authorized designees shall be authorized to enforce all 
provisions of this article and shall have the power to issue written warning notices, and/or citations as set 
below. 
(Code 1993, § 82-202; Ord. No. 2172, § II, 7-7-2010) 


Sec. 78-256. - Penalties. 
(a) ?Violation of any provision of this article shall be subject to the following penalties: 
Firs
t 
offe
nse 
Wri
tte
n 
war
nin
g 
Sec
ond 
viol
atio
n 
$50
.00 
Thir
d 
viol
atio
n 
$10
0.0
0 
Sub
seq
uen
t 
viol
atio
ns 
$50
0.0
0 
 
(b) ?Each day in violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. Enforcement officials shall 
provide violators with no more than one written warning. In addition to the civil sanctions contained 
herein, the city may take any other appropriate legal action, including, but not limited to, injunctive 
action to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1993, § 82-203; Ord. No. 2172, § II, 7-7-2010) 


Chapter 82 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 82-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings 
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Company means any person, association, corporation or other organization which operates or 
intends to engage in the business of operating vehicles for hire or operates as a TNC. 
    Conviction means the conviction by a court, including an adjudication of guilt on a plea of guilty or 
nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond, when charged with a crime. 
    Digital credential means the permission or access given to a driver to operate on a company's digital 
platform. 
    Digital platform means any online or smartphone-enabled application that allows passengers to 
request transportation network vehicle services. 
    Driver means an individual permitted to drive a vehicle for hire. 
    Fees mean nonrefundable payments required in this chapter. 
    Limousine means a specialized vehicle not equipped with a taximeter and for hire only by pre-
arrangement at a rate charged per hour, or fixed in advance; and provided, also that each such vehicle 
for hire is: 
(1) ?Chauffeured; 
(2) ?A luxury class passenger vehicle built or modified for the purpose of a limousine as defined and 
recognized by the limousine industry; and 
(3) ?Operated on a reserved, hourly basis for a continuous period. 
A vehicle which is held out to be a limousine or which has an appearance deceptively similar to a 
limousine is a limousine for the purposes of this chapter. 
    Narcotic drugs, barbituric acid derivatives and central nervous system stimulants. The term "narcotic 
drugs," as used in this chapter, means coca leaves, opium, cannabis, marijuana, isonipecaine and every 
synthetic substance known to have narcotic action. The term "barbituric acid derivative" means each of 
the salts and derivatives of barbituric acid, also known as malonyl urea, and derivatives, compounds, 
mixtures or preparations thereof. The term "barbiturate" or "barbiturates" includes all hypnotic or 
somnifacient drugs, whether or not derivatives of barbituric acids. The term "central nervous system 
stimulants" means amphetamine and desocyephedrine, and any derivatives, compounds, mixtures or 
preparations thereof. 
    Permit means the authority granted to companies to operate, or persons who qualify to drive, 
vehicles for hire. 
    Revocation means the rescinding of a permit. A person or entity whose permit is revoked shall not be 
entitled to reinstatement or an opportunity to re-apply for such permit for a period of two years, except as 
provided in section 82-79(a)(5). 
    Shuttle bus means a vehicle with a capacity of at least eight persons, including the driver, that is 
operated on a fixed route, or owned and operated directly by a motel or hotel and limited to registered 
guests thereof. 
    Suspension means the temporary rescinding of a permit or license. The suspension may be for a 
time certain or indefinite, pending compliance with the terms of this chapter. 
    Taxicab means a vehicle for hire with a capacity of not more than eight persons, including the driver, 
equipped with a taximeter operated under a company and vehicle permit required by this article, which is 
routed under the direction of the person hiring the vehicle. 
    Taximeter means an instrument or device attached to a vehicle and designed to measure, 
mechanically or electronically, the distance traveled by such vehicle, to record the times such vehicle 
travels or is in waiting, and to indicate the fare to be obtained. 
    Transportation network application company (TNC) means any company operating in the city that 
uses a digital network or software application to connect a passenger to transportation network services 
provided by a transportation network operator. 
    Transportation network operator means any driver or operator who operates a personal vehicle that 
utilizes any digital platform to arrange transportation of a passenger between points chosen by the 
passenger and that is in connection with a digital platform controlled by a TNC. 
    Transportation network service means the provision of transportation by a transportation network 
operator to a rider, beginning when the transportation network operator accepts a ride requested through 
a digital platform controlled by a TNC, continuing while the transportation network operator transports a 
requesting rider, and ending when the last requesting rider departs from the personal vehicle. 
    Transportation service means a vehicle for hire with a capacity of not more than eight persons, 
including the driver, which is not equipped with a taximeter, which charges passengers a fare generally 
based on a flat fee, and does not operate over a fixed or defined route, but is routed under the direction of 
the person hiring the vehicle. 
    Use of narcotic drugs. The term "use," as employed in this chapter in relation to the drugs described 
in this chapter, shall apply to any person who uses one or more of the narcotic drugs or barbituric acid 
derivatives or central nervous system stimulants as defined in this section to any extent, with or without 
medical need or authority or prescription. 
    Vehicle for hire means any vehicle, whether owned by the driver or a company, that is operated by a 
taxicab driver, transportation service driver, transportation network operator, or any other motor vehicle 
with a driver transporting passengers for a fare, fee, or other charge in the city. The term "vehicle for hire," 
by definition, excludes: 
(1) ?School, church, college or university buses. 
(2) ?Sightseeing cars and buses. 
(3) ?Ambulances. 
(4) ?Funeral home vehicles. 
(5) ?Interstate buses. 
(6) ?Limousines. 
(7) ?Shuttle buses. 
    Vehicle for hire administrator means the city administrator or his designee. 
(Code 1983, § 24-1; Code 1993, § 86-36; Ord. No. 2511 , § 1(86-1), 12-21-2016) 


Secs. 82-2—82-20. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 


Sec. 82-21. - Authority of city council to establish rates and charges; displaying rate cards. 
(a) ?Taxicabs. 
(1) ?The city council may by ordinance establish maximum rates and charges for the transportation 
of persons and their baggage within the corporate limits of the city and suburban territory 
adjacent thereto. Any ordinance establishing rates as provided by this section shall become 
effective 24 hours after its adoption. 
(2) ?Every taxicab operating under this chapter shall have posted in a conspicuous place therein a 
schedule of rates for the transportation of persons within the corporate limits of the city, and no 
charges shall be made in excess of the rates so posted. 
(3) ?There is hereby established a schedule of the maximum rates which can be charged by all 
taxicab drivers operating taxicabs within the city. A taximeter may be set so that it will register 
and compute on a mileage or other basis at less than the maximum rates set forth in this 
section. 
(b) ?Transportation service. 
(1) ?All fares as agreed to between any transportation service operator and any passenger must be 
agreed upon prior to leaving the point of origin. No transportation service operator may increase 
the agreed upon fare after leaving the point of origin. 
(2) ?No transportation service shall be authorized to charge for wait time, or to charge any other 
rates or fees except for mileage. 
(3) ?Every transportation service vehicle shall have cards displayed visibly from the outside of the 
vehicle on the passenger side and on the inside of the right rear window at the eye level of a 
seated passenger that state the following: "RATE OF TRANSPORT IS BY FLAT FEE ONLY." 
(c) ?Transportation network application (TNC) or transportation network operator. 
(1) ?All TNCs shall disclose the fare calculation method, the applicable rates being charged, and 
the option for an estimated fare to a passenger before the passenger arranges or books a trip 
with the transportation network application company or transportation network operator. 
(2) ?Upon completion of the trip, a TNC shall transmit an electronic receipt to the passenger's e-
mail or mobile application that lists the origin and destination of the trip, the total time and 
distance of the trip, and a breakdown of the total fare paid, if any. 
(Ord. No. 2511 , § 1(86-95), 12-21-2016) 


Sec. 82-22. - Miscellaneous regulations and other penalties. 
(a) ?It shall be unlawful for any driver or operator of a vehicle for hire to drive or operate or be on duty or 
on call for the operation of a vehicle for hire for more than 12 hours within any 24-hour period. 
(b) ?A driver shall take the most direct route to a passenger's destination, unless otherwise authorized or 
directed by the passenger. 
(c) ?No driver shall refuse to accept a passenger unless the passenger is obviously disorderly, 
dangerous, or otherwise a threat to the safety or welfare of the driver. 
(d) ?It shall be unlawful for the driver operating in the city to permit any person to accompany or use 
such vehicle for hire for the purpose of prostitution, or to direct, take or transport any other person 
with knowledge or reasonable cause to believe that the purpose of such directing, taking or 
transporting is for the purpose of prostitution. 
(e) ?No vehicle for hire shall be permitted to carry nonpaying passengers while transporting a paying 
passenger or passengers, except for the purpose of driver training. 
(f) ?No vehicle for hire shall solicit or carry a paying passenger while in the process of carrying another 
paying passenger, except when requested to do so by the latter passenger. 
(g) ?Transportation network operators shall exclusively accept passengers booked through a 
transportation network company's digital platform, and shall not solicit or accept street hails. 
(h) ?No TNC may provide personal information about a passenger to a transportation network operator, 
including a passenger's full name, e-mail address, or telephone number. 
(Ord. No. 2511 , § 1(86-96), 12-21-2016) 


Sec. 82-23. - Enforcement. 
    The city police department and the vehicles for hire administrator shall be authorized to enforce the 
regulations contained in this chapter, including the promulgation of rules consistent with this chapter and 
the setting of fees. 
(Ord. No. 2511 , § 1(86-97), 12-21-2016) 


Secs. 82-24—82-49. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - COMPANY PERMIT 


Sec. 82-50. - Application; contents. 
(a) ?No taxicab company, transportation service, or TNC shall operate or engage in the business of 
operating vehicles for hire or operating a TNC within the city without having first obtained a company 
permit from the vehicle for hire administrator or his designee. An application shall be submitted on 
forms furnished by the vehicles for hire administrator or his designee containing appropriate 
information which is reasonably related to the business of operating vehicles for hire. 
(b) ?In order to secure or renew a company permit, the company applicant shall file an application with 
the vehicles for hire administrator or his designee, and such application shall be verified under oath 
and shall furnish the following information: 
(1) ?The name and address of the company. If the company is a corporation or partnership, the 
name and address of all officers, shareholders, partners or any principals or owners with an 
interest greater than 20 percent of the company must be listed. 
(2) ?The color scheme and insignia to be used to designate the vehicles of any taxicab company. 
(3) ?No company permit shall be granted to a taxicab company operating less than five vehicles. 
The vehicles must be currently operating, licensed, and inspected as required by this chapter. 
Each vehicle must conform to the United States Department of Transportation (USDOT) 
maximum passenger standards allowed for the vehicle to operate. 
(4) ?Proof of the proper amount of insurance coverage as provided in section 82-110, with the 
insurance coverage being filed with the vehicle for hire administrator and approved by the city. 
(5) ?Such other information as the vehicle for hire administrator may require. 
(c) ?Payment of an annual company permit fee of $250.00. 
(Ord. No. 2511 , § 1(86-31), 12-21-2016) 


Sec. 82-51. - Maintaining a company permit. 
    In order to maintain a company permit to operate or engage in the business of operating vehicles for 
hire or operating a TNC, the company must: 
(1) ?Obtain and hold a current business tax receipt from the city as required by chapter 66, if 
applicable. 
(2) ?Maintain a telephone number that is monitored 24 hours a day for emergency contact by the 
vehicle for hire administrator or his designee or law enforcement, and an e-mail address for 
citizen complaints or concerns. 
(3) ?Maintain the name, home address, and telephone number of each driver affiliated with the 
company. 
(4) ?Maintain a log listing the year, make, model, and license plate number of all vehicles in the 
company's fleet or that operate on a company's platform. 
(5) ?Maintain the proper amount of insurance as provided in section 82-110. 
(6) ?Maintain records available for inspection, upon request by the vehicle for hire administrator or 
his designee, pursuant to a complaint received or if the vehicle for hire administrator has a 
reasonable basis to suspect that a company or driver is violating the requirements of this 
chapter. The records shall include, but not be limited to, records pertaining to permitted/certified 
drivers, vehicle inspection records, daily logs, and the maximum rate charged in compliance 
with section 82-21. Unless otherwise agreed to by the company and the vehicle for hire 
administrator, such records shall be made available for inspection to the vehicle for hire 
administrator at a permit holder's place of business or a mutually agreed upon location in the 
city. 
(7) ?Each company shall implement a zero-tolerance policy on the use of drugs or alcohol 
applicable to all drivers, and provide notice of the policy to all company drivers and to the public 
through its website, if applicable. In addition, the company shall provide notice to the public on 
the procedure for reporting a driver whom the passenger reasonably suspects was under the 
influence of drugs or alcohol during the course of the ride. The company shall cooperate with 
the vehicle for hire administrator or his designee during the pendency of the investigation, 
pursuant to subsection 82-81(b)(3). 
(8) ?The vehicle for hire administrator or police chief is authorized to conduct annual audits of any 
company authorized to operate under this chapter. The company shall provide to the vehicle for 
hire administrator, on request, up to 250 unique identification numbers, each of which has been 
assigned to an individual driver affiliated with the company. The vehicle for hire administrator 
may send to the company a list of up to ten driver identification numbers and request copies of 
records held by the company for those ten drivers. Within five business days of receiving a 
request seeking records, the company shall make available to the vehicle for hire administrator, 
at the company's place of business or a mutually agreed upon setting in the city, records to 
verify that the company has properly screened drivers in accordance with section 82-79, 
provided, that the company may redact any records it provides access to in order to protect the 
privacy and identifying information of the driver. 
(Ord. No. 2511 , § 1(86-32), 12-21-2016) 


Sec. 82-52. - Revocation or suspension of a company permit; grounds; right of appeal. 
(a) ?Revocation or suspension of company permit; grounds. Upon a finding of due cause as defined in 
subsection (b) of this section, the vehicle for hire administrator or his designee shall have the 
authority to revoke or suspend any company permit which has been granted or which may 
hereinafter be granted by the city. Prior to suspension or revocation, the company shall be served 
notice by certified mail or hand-delivery of the proposed action to be taken, and shall have an 
opportunity to present to the vehicle for hire administrator or his designee evidence as to why the 
company permit should not be revoked or suspended. 
(b) ?Causes for revocation or suspension. Due cause for revocation or suspension of a company permit 
shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1) ?The failure of the company to maintain any of the general qualifications applicable to the initial 
granting of the company permit as set forth in section 82-50 or maintaining a company permit as 
set forth in section 82-51. 
(2) ?Obtaining a company permit by providing false information. 
(3) ?Conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction of any shareholder, officer, partner, member, 
principal or owner of any corporation, partnership, firm or association holding a five percent 
interest or more in the entity, of any of the following: criminal homicide, rape, sexual battery, 
aggravated battery, burglary, aggravated assault, kidnapping, robbery, child molestation, lewd 
and lascivious acts, armed trespassing, carrying a concealed firearm, criminal solicitation to 
commit any of the above, criminal attempt to commit any of the above, or possession, sale or 
distribution of narcotic drugs, barbituric acid derivatives and/or central nervous system 
stimulants, if such violations are related to the operation of the company, or violation of any 
ordinance of the city governing the conduct of a company. 
(4) ?Allowing any person to operate a company's designated vehicle for hire, or operate on the 
company's digital platform, without an active driver permit or credential, or when said person's 
permit or credential has been suspended or revoked because of a positive drug test, pursuant 
to section 82-81. 
(c) ?Right of appeal. Any company whose permit is revoked or suspended by the vehicle for hire 
administrator or his designee may appeal such decision to the city council. Such appeal shall be 
taken by filing written notice thereof, in duplicate, with the city administrator's office within five days 
after the decision of the vehicles for hire administrator or his designee. The notice of the appeal shall 
contain the grounds for the appeal and shall contain information that either the finding is contrary to 
the law or is not supported by competent substantial evidence. The vehicle for hire administrator or 
his designee shall forthwith transmit copies of the appeal to the city council along with all papers 
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from is based. The filing of a notice of appeal 
will not delay the effectiveness of any suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2511 , § 1(86-33), 12-21-2016) 


Secs. 82-53—82-77. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - VEHICLE FOR HIRE DRIVERS 


Sec. 82-78. - Prohibition against unauthorized operation. 
(a) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate on behalf of a taxicab company, transportation 
service, or other vehicle for hire for the transportation of passengers within the city, or on a TNC's 
digital platform, or to cause or permit any other person to drive or operate a vehicle for hire: 
(1) ?Without first obtaining a written permit for the operation of a motor vehicle for hire from the 
vehicle for hire administrator or his designee; 
(2) ?Without having been certified to operate a motor vehicle for hire on behalf of a company or on 
the company's digital platform; or 
(3) ?When the company permit has previously been revoked pursuant to section 82-52. 
(b) ?Any person found to have violated this section shall be punished by the following: 
(1) ?A fine of $150.00 for the first citation; 
(2) ?A fine of $250.00 for the second citation; and 
(3) ?A fine of $500.00 for the third or subsequent citation. 
(Ord. No. 2511 , § 1(86-60), 12-21-2016) 


Sec. 82-79. - Application for driver permit. 
(a) ?In order to secure a driver permit or to obtain certification from a company, an applicant must: 
(1) ?Be at least 18 years of age; 
(2) ?Possess a valid state driver's license; 
(3) ?For a period of three years prior to the date of application, not have been convicted of: 
a. ?Driving under the influence of intoxicating beverages or drugs; or 
b. ?Violation of any ordinance or law, other than minor traffic offenses, in connection with the 
operation of a motor vehicle. 
(4) ?For a period of three years prior to the date of application, not have more than three moving 
violations; 
(5) ?Not have been convicted within the seven years previous to the date of application for the 
violation of any of the following criminal offenses of the state or any other state or of the United 
States: aggravated battery, burglary, aggravated assault, kidnapping, robbery, lewd and 
lascivious acts, armed trespassing, carrying a concealed firearm, criminal solicitation to commit 
any of the above, criminal attempt to commit any of the offenses listed in this subsection; or 
been convicted within the last seven years of any felony, in the commission of which a motor 
vehicle was used, perjury or false swearing in making any statement under oath in connection 
with application for a driver permit, any felony involving theft, or possession, sale or distribution 
of narcotic drugs, barbituric acid derivatives and/or central nervous system stimulants. 
Applicants who have been convicted or served any time, probation, or parole for a criminal 
offense of homicide, rape, sexual battery, or child molestation must have their complete criminal 
histories reviewed and approved by the vehicle for hire administrator; 
(6) ?Be able to communicate in the English language. 
(b) ?An applicant may apply for a permit or credential by completing a form provided by the vehicle for 
hire administrator establishing that the applicant meets the requirements of this section. 
(c) ?Upon approval by the vehicle for hire administrator or his designee, or certification by the taxicab 
company, transportation service, or TNC, the driver shall be issued: 
(1) ?A permit from the vehicle for hire administrator or his designee; or 
(2) ?Credentials from the taxicab company, transportation service, or TNC, which may be digital 
credentials, indicating that the driver was certified by the company, and the credential shall 
include the following information: 
a. ?The name or logo of the company. 
b. ?The name of the driver. 
c. ?The license plate number associated with the vehicle that the driver has been authorized to 
use. 
(d) ?The driver shall display the permit or credential in a manner that it is visible to the passengers of the 
vehicle while the vehicle is operating, or make available, at a minimum, the driver's first name, 
photograph, and make, model, and license plate number to the passenger through the company's 
digital platform. The driver shall present the permit or credential upon request to a law enforcement 
officer, the vehicle for hire administrator or his designee, or designated airport personnel, upon 
request. If the driver maintains a digital credential, upon a traffic stop, a driver shall provide law 
enforcement with access to a device containing the information required to be maintained as part of 
the driver's digital credential and an electronic record sufficient to establish that the trip in question 
was pre-arranged through a digital platform. 
(e) ?An applicant must pay an annual driver application fee of $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 2511 , § 1(86-61), 12-21-2016) 


Sec. 82-80. - Maintaining driver permit. 
    In order to maintain a valid permit or credential to drive a taxicab, transportation service, or other 
vehicle for hire, a driver must: 
(1) ?Wear proper dress while operating a vehicle for hire. 
(2) ?Maintain a neat appearance. 
(3) ?Not smoke while carrying passengers. 
(4) ?Maintain a log upon which are recorded all trips made each day, showing the time and place of 
origin and destination of each trip and the amount of the fare. Such logs must be maintained by 
the company or the vehicle owner, if not maintained by the driver, and shall be made available 
to the vehicle for hire administrator or his designee for a compliance inquiry if the administrator 
has a reasonable basis to suspect that a company or driver is violating the requirements of this 
chapter. 
(5) ?Renew his driver permit or credential during the month of the driver permit or credential 
expiration date. 
(6) ?Wear a seatbelt at all times while operating a vehicle for hire or providing transportation 
network services. 
(Ord. No. 2511 , § 1(86-62), 12-21-2016) 


Sec. 82-81. - Revocation or suspension of driver permits; grounds; right of appeal. 
(a) ?Revocation or suspension of driver permits or credentials. Upon a finding of due cause, as defined 
in subsection (b) of this section, the vehicle for hire administrator or his designee shall have the 
authority to revoke or suspend any driver's permit or credential which has been issued or which may 
hereinafter be issued by the city. Before a driver permit or credential shall be denied, suspended or 
revoked, notice of intention thereof shall be served upon the driver either by registered mail or 
personal service; however, such notice shall not be necessary for a denial of an original permit or 
credential. However, any such applicant or driver shall be given an opportunity to be heard by the 
vehicle for hire administrator or his designee. 
(b) ?Causes for revocation or suspension. Due cause for revocation or suspension of a driver permit or 
credential shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1) ?The failure of the driver to maintain any and all of the general qualifications as applicable to the 
initial issuance of a permit, as set forth in section 82-79. 
(2) ?Obtaining a permit or credential by providing false information. 
(3) ?Violation by a driver of any of the following offenses: 
a. ?Driving under the influence of intoxicating beverages or drugs. A driver shall be required to 
submit to a drug and/or alcohol test at the request of the vehicle for hire administrator or 
his designee. 
b. ?Where reasonable suspicion exists that a driver is abusing alcohol or misusing prescription 
drugs or controlled substances. 
c. ?Where a driver has been involved in a crash with serious injury or serious property damage 
while operating a vehicle for hire or providing transportation network services. The term 
"serious injury" is defined as a physical condition that creates a substantial risk of death, 
serious personal disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any 
bodily member or organ. The term "serious property damage" is defined as one or more of 
the motor vehicles involved in the crash is "totaled," or one or more of the vehicles sustains 
significant disabling damage to public and/or private property which equals or exceeds an 
apparent damage of $5,000.00 or more, as estimated by the law enforcement officer 
conducting the investigation at the scene of the traffic crash. 
d. ?Refusing or failing to submit to a drug test at the request of the vehicle for hire 
administrator or his designee shall be due cause for revocation of the driver's permit or 
credential with no re-application for one year. Failing a drug or alcohol test shall be due 
cause for revocation of the driver's permit or credential with no re-application for one year. 
e. ?Criminal homicide, rape, sexual battery, aggravated battery, burglary, aggravated assault, 
kidnapping, robbery, child molestation, lewd and lascivious acts, armed trespassing, 
carrying a concealed firearm, criminal solicitation to commit any of the above, criminal 
attempt to commit any of the above, or possession, sale or distribution of narcotic drugs, 
barbituric acid derivatives and/or central nervous system stimulants, or violation of any 
ordinance of the city governing the conduct of drivers of a vehicle for hire. 
(4) ?Charging a fare contrary to any fares established and approved by the city council pursuant to 
section 82-21. 
(5) ?Violation of any ordinances or laws, other than minor traffic offenses, in connection with the 
operation of a taxicab, transportation service, TNC, or other vehicle for hire. 
(6) ?Whenever it shall appear that a driver has disorders characterized by lapses of consciousness 
or other mental or physical disabilities affecting his ability to drive safely. 
(7) ?Accumulating nine or more points within a six-month period as outlined in F.S. § 322.27(3)d. 
(8) ?Violating the requirements of section 82-21. 
(Ord. No. 2511 , § 1(86-63), 12-21-2016) 


Sec. 82-82. - Duration of driver permit. 
    Each driver permit or credential issued pursuant to section 82-79 above shall be valid for one year 
from the date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 2511 , § 1(86-64), 12-21-2016) 


Secs. 82-83—82-107. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE V. - SIGNS AND OTHER OPERATION REQUIREMENTS OF VEHICLES FOR HIRE 


Sec. 82-108. - Identifying signs, monograms and insignias. 
(a) ?Taxicabs. Each taxicab shall be readily identifiable as a taxicab and shall bear on the outside of 
each rear or front door, in letters not less than two inches in height, the name of the person or 
corporation to whom the franchise is issued. Each such taxicab shall also be numbered 
consecutively, with such numbers being placed conspicuously on each vehicle, with such numerals 
being not less than 4½ inches nor more than six inches in height. 
(b) ?Transportation services. 
(1) ?Each vehicle operated by a transportation service shall be readily identifiable as a 
transportation service and shall bear on the outside of each rear or front door, in letters not less 
than two inches in height, the name of the person or corporation by whom the vehicle is owned 
or operated. 
(2) ?No transportation service shall have any insignia or sign that identifies itself as a "taxi" or "cab" 
or otherwise gives the impression that it is a taxicab. 
(c) ?Transportation network application (TNC)/transportation network operator. 
(1) ?Each vehicle operated by a TNC or transportation network operator shall display a consistent 
signage or emblem on the transportation network operator's personal vehicle at all times while 
the transportation network operator is active on the TNC's network. The signage or emblem 
shall be sufficiently large or color-contrasted to be readable during daylight hours from a 
distance of 50 feet, reflective, illuminated, or otherwise visible in darkness, and capable of 
sufficiently identifying a personal vehicle as being associated with the TNC. 
(2) ?No transportation network operator vehicle shall have any insignia or sign that identifies itself 
as a "taxi" or "cab" or otherwise gives the impression that it is a taxicab, or otherwise gives the 
impression that the operator is available to solicit passengers other than through the digital 
platform. 
(3) ?No transportation network operator shall place any type or form of light device or other device 
on the roof, commonly known as a top light or top hat, whether or not permanently or 
temporarily affixed to the vehicle, or have such within the interior of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2511 , § 1(86-91), 12-21-2016) 


Sec. 82-109. - Taximeter. 
(a) ?All taxicabs operated under the authority of this chapter shall be equipped with taximeters fastened 
in a manner so that the face thereof shall be visible and readable to passengers at all times both day 
and night. The face of the taximeter shall be set so that it will register and compute, on a mileage 
basis while such taxicab is moving and on a time basis while such taxicab is standing and while the 
service is being rendered, the fare to be charged. Such taximeter shall be operated mechanically by 
a mechanism of standard design and construction, driven either from the transmission or from one of 
the front wheels by a flexible and permanently attached driving mechanism. 
(b) ?No vehicle for hire other than a taxicab is authorized to install or be equipped with a taximeter. 
(Ord. No. 2511 , § 1(86-92), 12-21-2016) 


Sec. 82-110. - Liability insurance required. 
    No vehicle for hire shall be placed in service unless such vehicle is in compliance with state law for 
liability insurance purposes. Proof of such insurance coverage, which may be provided on a blanket 
basis, shall be filed annually with and approved by the vehicle for hire administrator or his designee for 
the carrying of passengers. 
(Ord. No. 2511 , § 1(86-93), 12-21-2016) 
State Law reference— Financial responsibility, F.S. § 324.031. 


Sec. 82-111. - Seat belts required. 
    All vehicles for hire covered by this chapter shall be equipped with operational seat belts for each 
passenger. 
(Ord. No. 2511 , § 1(86-94), 12-21-2016) 


Chapter 86 - WATERWAYS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Vessel safety law, F.S. § 327.01 et seq. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 86-1—86-18. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - BOATS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Vessel safety, F.S. § 327.01 et seq. 


Sec. 86-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Boat means all rafts, skiffs, dredges, canoes, dugouts, dinghies, rowboats, sailboats and motorboats. 
Sailboards are specifically excluded from this definition. 
    Motorboat means a vessel equipped with machinery for propulsion, irrespective of whether the 
propulsion machinery is in actual operation. 
    Operator means any person in charge of or having immediate control over a boat, whether such 
person is the owner of the boat, or a permitted or an unauthorized user of the boat. Vessel is synonymous 
with the term "boat" as referenced in section 1(b), article VII of the state constitution, and includes every 
description of watercraft, barge, and airboat, other than a seaplane on the water, used or capable of 
being used as a means of transportation on water. 
    Waterway means any waters, lakes, canals, streams, lagoons or connecting waters, whether natural 
or manmade, partially or wholly within the boundaries of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 5.5-2; Code 1993, § 90-36) 


Sec. 86-20. - Statutory authority; findings. 
(a) ?This article is adopted pursuant to the city's home rule authority to adopt ordinances to protect the 
health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(b) ?Boats having been declared dangerous instrumentalities, the city council hereby determines that the 
rules and regulations set out in this article are necessary in order to protect the health, safety and 
general welfare of the citizens of the city using the lakes of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 5.5-1(a), (b); Code 1993, § 90-37) 
State Law reference— Definitions, F.S. § 327.02. 


Sec. 86-21. - Applicability of article. 
    This article shall apply to all waterways in the city. 
(Code 1983, § 5.5-1(c); Code 1993, § 90-38) 


Sec. 86-22. - Enforcement of article. 
    Violations of this article shall be prosecuted in the manner provided by F.S. § 327.72. 
(Code 1983, § 5.5-7; Code 1993, § 90-39) 


Sec. 86-23. - Compliance with federal and state law. 
    All boats operating on or about the waterways of the city shall comply with all applicable federal and 
state laws, rules and regulations. The provisions of this article are supplementary to such federal and 
state laws, rules and regulations. 
(Code 1983, § 5.5-3; Code 1993, § 90-40) 


Sec. 86-24. - Operation generally. 
(a) ?All boats and motorboats shall, whenever possible, keep at least 300 feet behind any boat towing a 
skier, and shall stay clear of, by at least 100 feet, any boat or motorboat anchored or used for fishing. 
When a ski jump is in use, all other boats shall, whenever possible, stay at least 100 feet away on 
either side, and 500 feet behind the ski jump. 
(b) ?No person shall operate any boat recklessly, overload any boat, indulge in any motorboat race, 
make sudden turns at excessive speed, follow too closely to other boats, or operate any boat in such 
a way that it may endanger other boats, life or property. 
(c) ?All motorboat operators shall sit within the confines of the boat and shall require that their 
passengers do likewise. Bow-riding and gunwale-riding are strictly prohibited. 
(d) ?Care shall be taken by the operators of all motorboats to prevent damage from their wash, bow 
waves or stern waves, or from objects towed by such boats, to other boats, docks, piers, shorelines 
and boathouses. Boats and motorboats shall not operate at more than five miles per hour within 100 
feet of the shoreline, docks, piers or boathouses, except when picking up or dropping off a water 
skier. Boats being operated in canals shall observe the posted speed limit in such canals. 
(Code 1983, § 5.5-5; Code 1993, § 90-41) 


Sec. 86-25. - Speed limits. 
    The city may, by resolution, impose a speed limit on any waterway when it is determined that a 
speed limit is necessary to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city. Such 
speed limit shall be lawfully posted in or near the waterway in a location visible to the public. 
(Code 1983, § 5.5-6; Code 1993, § 90-42) 

City of Apopka, FL
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
STUDIO
Adopted March 6, 2019

Table of Contents
Article 1
: General Provisions
.........................................................................
1-1
Section 1.1. Title
....................................................................................................................................
1-1
Section 1.2. Authority
............................................................................................................................
1-1
1.2.1.
General
................................................................................................................
1-1
1.2.2.
References to Florida Law
...................................................................................
1-1
Section 1.3. General Purpose and Intent
..............................................................................................
1-2
Section 1.4. Applicability
.......................................................................................................................
1-3
1.4.1.
General Applicability
...........................................................................................
1-3
1.4.2.
Application to Governmental Units.
...................................................................
1-3
1.4.3.
Compliance Required
..........................................................................................
1-3
Section 1.5. Consistency with the Comprehensive plan
.......................................................................
1-3
Section 1.6. Relationship with Other Laws, Covenants, or Other Private Agreements
........................
1-3
1.6.1.
Conflicts with Other City Regulations
.................................................................
1-3
1.6.2.
Conflicts with State or Federal Law
....................................................................
1-3
1.6.3.
Relationship to Private Agreements/ Conflicts with Private Agreements
..........
1-4
1.6.4.
Existing Vested Rights
.........................................................................................
1-4
Section 1.7. Official Zoning District Map
...............................................................................................
1-4
1.7.1.
Establishment and Maintenance
........................................................................
1-4
1.7.2.
Incorporated by Reference
.................................................................................
1-4
1.7.3.
Changes to Official Zoning District Map
.............................................................
1-4
1.7.4.
Zoning Classification of Annexed Land
...............................................................
1-5
Section 1.8. Transitional Provisions
......................................................................................................
1-5
1.8.1.
Transitions to New Zoning Districts
....................................................................
1-5
1.8.2.
Zoning District Compatibility with Future Land Use Designation
.......................
1-7
1.8.3.
Violations Continue
.............................................................................................
1-8
1.8.4.
Nonconformities
.................................................................................................
1-9
1.8.5.
Issuance of Development Orders While Amendments Pending
........................
1-9
1.8.6.
Applications for Which No Final Action Taken
...................................................
1-9
1.8.7.
Development Approvals and Permits Under Prior Land Development Code
..
1-10
Section 1.9. Severability
......................................................................................................................
1-10
Section 1.10. Effective Date
..................................................................................................................
1-10
Article 2
: Administration
..............................................................................
2-1
Section 2.1. Purpose and Organization
.................................................................................................
2-1
2.1.1.
Purpose
...............................................................................................................
2-1
2.1.2.
Organization
........................................................................................................
2-1
Section 2.2. Summary Table of Development Review Responsibilities
................................................
2-1
2.2.1.
Summary Table
...................................................................................................
2-1
Section 2.3. Advisory and Decision-Making Bodies and Persons
..........................................................
2-3
2.3.1.
City Council
.........................................................................................................
2-3
2.3.2.
Planning Commission
..........................................................................................
2-4
2.3.3.
Development Review Committee (DRC)
.............................................................
2-7
2.3.4.
Community Development Department
..............................................................
2-7
2.3.5.
Code Enforcement Officer
..................................................................................
2-8
2.3.6.
Code Enforcement Hearing Officer
.....................................................................
2-9
2.3.7.
Concurrency-Management Official
...................................................................
2-10
Section 2.4. Standard Review Procedures
..........................................................................................
2-10
2.4.1.
Informational Meeting
......................................................................................
2-10
2.4.2.
Pre-Application Community Meeting
...............................................................
2-12
2.4.3.
Application Submission
.....................................................................................
2-14
2.4.4.
Determination of Completeness
.......................................................................
2-15
2.4.5.
Application Amendment or Withdrawal
...........................................................
2-15
2.4.6.
Staff Review and Action
....................................................................................
2-16
2.4.7.
Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification
.......................................
2-17
2.4.8.
Deferral of Public Hearing
.................................................................................
2-22
2.4.9.
Public Hearing Procedures
................................................................................
2-22
2.4.10.
Advisory Body Review and Recommendation
..................................................
2-25
2.4.11.
Decision-Making Body Hearing, Review, and Decision
.....................................
2-26
2.4.12.
Post Decision-Making Actions
...........................................................................
2-27
Section 2.5. Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
..................................
2-28
2.5.1.
Discretionary Approvals
....................................................................................
2-29
2.5.2.
Site Development and Platting
.........................................................................
2-45
2.5.3.
Concurrency
......................................................................................................
2-58
2.5.4.
Permits
..............................................................................................................
2-58
2.5.5.
Relief
.................................................................................................................
2-72
2.5.6.
Interpretation
...................................................................................................
2-87
Article 3
: Zoning Districts
..............................................................................
3-1
Section 3.1. General Provisions
.............................................................................................................
3-1
3.1.1.
Compliance With Zoning District Standards
.......................................................
3-1
3.1.2.
Establishment of Zoning Districts
.......................................................................
3-1
3.1.3.
Organization of Zoning Districts
.........................................................................
3-2
Section 3.2. Agricultural and Transitional Base Zoning Districts
...........................................................
3-5
3.2.1.
General Purposes of Agricultural and Transitional Base Zoning Districts
..........
3-5
3.2.2.
Established Agricultural and Transitional Base Zoning Districts
.........................
3-5
3.2.3.
AG: Agriculture District
.......................................................................................
3-6
3.2.4.
T: Transitional District
.........................................................................................
3-9
Section 3.3. Residential Base Zoning Districts
.....................................................................................
3-11
3.3.1.
General Purposes Of Residential Base Zoning Districts
....................................
3-11
3.3.2.
Established Residential Base Zoning Districts
...................................................
3-11
3.3.3.
RCE: Residential Country Estate District
...........................................................
3-12
3.3.4.
RSF-1A: Residential Single-Family Estate District
.............................................
3-14
3.3.5.
RSF-1B: Residential Single-Family District – Large Lot
......................................
3-16
3.3.6.
RTF: Residential Two-Family District
................................................................
3-18
3.3.7.
RMF: Residential Multi-Family District
.............................................................
3-20
3.3.8.
RMU: Residential Mixed-Use District
...............................................................
3-22
3.3.9.
MHP: Mobile Home Park District
......................................................................
3-24
Section 3.4. Commercial Base Zoning Districts
...................................................................................
3-27
3.4.1.
General Purposes of Commercial Zoning Districts
...........................................
3-27
3.4.2.
Established Commercial Base Zoning Districts
.................................................
3-27
3.4.3.
C-N: Neighborhood Commercial District
..........................................................
3-28
3.4.4.
C-C: Community Commercial District
...............................................................
3-30
3.4.5.
C-R: Regional Commercial District
....................................................................
3-32
3.4.6.
O: Office District
................................................................................................
3-34
3.4.7.
C-COR: Corridor Commercial District
................................................................
3-36
Section 3.5. Industrial Base Zoning Districts
.......................................................................................
3-38
3.5.1.
General Purposes of Industrial Districts
...........................................................
3-38
3.5.2.
Established Industrial Districts
..........................................................................
3-38
3.5.3.
I-L: Light Industrial District
................................................................................
3-40
3.5.4.
I-H: Heavy Industrial District
.............................................................................
3-42
Section 3.6. Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts
.............................................................................
3-45
3.6.1.
General Purpose Of Special Purpose Districts
..................................................
3-45
3.6.2.
Established Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts
...........................................
3-45
3.6.3.
MU-D: Mixed-Use Downtown District
..............................................................
3-46
3.6.4.
MU-ES: Mixed-Use East Shore District
.............................................................
3-50
3.6.5.
MU-ES-RTE: Mixed Use East Shore-Research/Technology/Education Subdistrict.3-52
3.6.6.
MU-ES-NM: Mixed Use East Shore-New Market Subdistrict
............................
3-56
3.6.7.
MU-ES-GT: Mixed-Use East Shore-Gateway Subdistrict
...................................
3-60
3.6.8.
MU-KPI: Kelly Park Interchange District Mixed-Use
.........................................
3-64
3.6.9.
INST: Institutional District
.................................................................................
3-66
3.6.10.
PR: Parks and Recreation District
.....................................................................
3-68
3.6.11.
AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District
................................................................
3-70
Section 3.7. Planned Development District
.........................................................................................
3-83
3.7.1.
Established Planned Development Zoning District
...........................................
3-83
3.7.2.
Planned Development District
..........................................................................
3-83
Section 3.8. Overlay Districts
..............................................................................................................
3-89
3.8.1.
General Purposes of Overlay Districts
..............................................................
3-89
3.8.2.
Established Overlay Zoning Districts
.................................................................
3-89
3.8.3.
Conflicting Standards
........................................................................................
3-89
3.8.4.
Classification of Overlay Districts
......................................................................
3-90
3.8.5.
NC-O: Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District
........................................
3-90
3.8.6.
H-O: Historic Overlay District
............................................................................
3-92
Article 4
: Use Regulations
.............................................................................
4-1
Section 4.1. General Provisions
.............................................................................................................
4-1
Section 4.2. Principal Uses
....................................................................................................................
4-1
4.2.1.
General
................................................................................................................
4-1
4.2.2.
Principal Use Table
..............................................................................................
4-1
4.2.3.
Standards Specific to Principal Uses
.................................................................
4-15
Section 4.3. Accessory Uses and Structures
........................................................................................
4-36
4.3.1.
General
..............................................................................................................
4-36
4.3.2.
Accessory Uses and Structure Table
.................................................................
4-36
4.3.3.
General Standards for all Accessory Uses and Structures
................................
4-41
4.3.4.
Standards Specific to Accessory Uses and Structures
.....................................
4-41
Section 4.4. Temporary Uses and Structures
......................................................................................
4-52
4.4.1.
General
..............................................................................................................
4-52
4.4.2.
Temporary Uses and Structures Table
..............................................................
4-53
4.4.3.
General Standards for All Temporary Uses and Structures
..............................
4-57
4.4.4.
Standards Specific to Temporary Uses and Structures
.....................................
4-57
Article 5
: Development Standards
................................................................
5-1
Section 5.1. Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
.............................................
5-1
5.1.1.
Purpose and Intent
.............................................................................................
5-1
5.1.2.
Applicability
........................................................................................................
5-1
5.1.3.
Timing of Review
.................................................................................................
5-1
5.1.4.
Parking Plan Required
.........................................................................................
5-1
5.1.5.
General Standards for Off-Street Vehicular Parking and Loading Areas
............
5-2
5.1.6.
Off-Street Vehicular Parking Space Standards
....................................................
5-7
5.1.7.
Dimensional Standards for Vehicular Parking Spaces and Aisles
.....................
5-16
5.1.8.
Off-Street Parking Alternatives
.........................................................................
5-18
5.1.9.
Reduced Parking Standards for Parking Demand Reduction Strategies
...........
5-23
5.1.10.
Vehicle Stacking Spaces and Lanes
...................................................................
5-26
5.1.11.
Bicycle Parking Standards
.................................................................................
5-28
5.1.12.
Loading Area Standards
....................................................................................
5-33
Section 5.2. Landscaping and Buffer Standards
..................................................................................
5-36
5.2.1.
Purpose
.............................................................................................................
5-36
5.2.2.
Applicability
......................................................................................................
5-36
5.2.3.
Timing of Review
...............................................................................................
5-37
5.2.4.
Landscape Plan
.................................................................................................
5-37
5.2.5.
Landscaping and Buffer Standards
...................................................................
5-37
5.2.6.
Alternative Landscape Plan
...............................................................................
5-51
Section 5.3. Tree Protection Standards
...............................................................................................
5-53
5.3.1.
Purpose
.............................................................................................................
5-53
5.3.2.
Applicability
......................................................................................................
5-53
5.3.3.
Arbor Permit Required
......................................................................................
5-54
5.3.4.
Timing of Review
...............................................................................................
5-54
5.3.5.
Responsibility for Compliance
..........................................................................
5-54
5.3.6.
Existing Tree Canopy Defined
...........................................................................
5-54
5.3.7.
Retention of Existing Canopy
............................................................................
5-55
5.3.8.
Retention of Specimen Trees
............................................................................
5-59
5.3.9.
Tree Protection During Construction
................................................................
5-61
5.3.10.
Deferral of Tree Replacement
..........................................................................
5-62
Section 5.4. Open Space Set-Aside Standards
....................................................................................
5-63
5.4.1.
Purpose
.............................................................................................................
5-63
5.4.2.
Applicability
......................................................................................................
5-63
5.4.3.
Timing of Review
...............................................................................................
5-63
5.4.4.
Amount of Open Space Set-Asides Required
....................................................
5-63
5.4.5.
Areas Counted as Open Space Set-Asides
........................................................
5-64
5.4.6.
Areas Not Counted as Open Space Set-Asides
.................................................
5-67
5.4.7.
Design Standards for Open Space Set-Asides
...................................................
5-68
5.4.8.
Development in Open Space Set-Asides
...........................................................
5-69
5.4.9.
Ownership, Management, and Maintenance of Open Space Set-Asides
.........
5-69
Section 5.5. Fences and Walls
.............................................................................................................
5-71
5.5.1.
Purpose
.............................................................................................................
5-71
5.5.2.
Applicability
......................................................................................................
5-71
5.5.3.
Timing of Review
...............................................................................................
5-71
5.5.4.
General Standards
............................................................................................
5-71
5.5.5.
Height Standards
...............................................................................................
5-72
5.5.6.
Materials Standards
..........................................................................................
5-75
5.5.7.
Perimeter Fences and Walls Abutting Street Right-of-Way
.............................
5-76
5.5.8.
Appearance
.......................................................................................................
5-77
5.5.9.
Fence and Wall Construction
............................................................................
5-79
5.5.10.
Gates
.................................................................................................................
5-79
5.5.11.
Retaining Walls
.................................................................................................
5-79
5.5.12.
Security Exemption Plan
...................................................................................
5-79
Section 5.6. Exterior Lighting
..............................................................................................................
5-80
5.6.1.
Purpose and Intent
...........................................................................................
5-80
5.6.2.
Applicability
......................................................................................................
5-80
5.6.3.
Timing of Review
...............................................................................................
5-81
5.6.4.
Lighting Plan
......................................................................................................
5-81
5.6.5.
Prohibited Lighting
............................................................................................
5-81
5.6.6.
Street Lighting
...................................................................................................
5-82
5.6.7.
General Standards for Exterior Lighting
...........................................................
5-82
5.6.8.
Lighting Design Standards for Specific Uses and Site Features
........................
5-84
5.6.9.
Measurement
...................................................................................................
5-86
5.6.10.
Exemptions for a Security Plan
.........................................................................
5-87
Section 5.7. Development Design Guidelines
.....................................................................................
5-87
Section 5.8. Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
..........................................................................
5-88
5.8.1.
Purpose and Intent
...........................................................................................
5-88
5.8.2.
Applicability
......................................................................................................
5-88
5.8.3.
Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
...........................................................
5-89
Section 5.9. Agricultural Compatibility Standards
..............................................................................
5-94
5.9.1.
Purpose and Intent
...........................................................................................
5-94
5.9.2.
Applicability
......................................................................................................
5-94
5.9.3.
Agricultural Compatibility Standards
................................................................
5-94
Section 5.10. Signs
.................................................................................................................................
5-98
5.10.1.
Purpose and Intent
...........................................................................................
5-98
5.10.2.
No Defense of Nuisance Action
........................................................................
5-98
5.10.3.
Maintenance
.....................................................................................................
5-98
5.10.4.
Permitting Requirements
..................................................................................
5-99
5.10.5.
Development Plan Application Contents
..........................................................
5-99
5.10.6.
Prohibited Signs
..............................................................................................
5-100
5.10.7.
General Standards for Permanent Signs
.........................................................
5-101
5.10.8.
Standards for Specific Sign Types
...................................................................
5-105
5.10.9.
Standards for Special Purpose Signs
...............................................................
5-117
5.10.10.
Temporary Signs
.............................................................................................
5-121
5.10.11.
Illegal Signs
......................................................................................................
5-125
Section 5.11. Green Building Standards
..............................................................................................
5-126
5.11.1.
Purpose and Intent
.........................................................................................
5-126
5.11.2.
Applicability
....................................................................................................
5-126
5.11.3.
Timing of Review
.............................................................................................
5-127
5.11.4.
Green Building Standards
...............................................................................
5-127
5.11.5.
Failure to Install or Maintain Green Building Elements for Compliance
........
5-130
Section 5.12. Green Building Incentives
..............................................................................................
5-131
5.12.1.
Purpose and Intent
.........................................................................................
5-131
5.12.2.
Incentives
........................................................................................................
5-131
5.12.3.
Applicability
....................................................................................................
5-131
5.12.4.
Conflict with Neighborhood Compatibility
.....................................................
5-132
5.12.5.
Procedure
........................................................................................................
5-132
5.12.6.
Menu of Green Building Features
...................................................................
5-133
5.12.7.
Failure to Install or Maintain Green Building Practices
..................................
5-135
Section 5.13. Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
......................................................................
5-136
5.13.1.
Mobility, Circulation, and Connectivity Standards
.........................................
5-136
5.13.2.
Minimum Street Design and Construction Standards
....................................
5-143
5.13.3.
Street and Road Access
...................................................................................
5-149
5.13.4.
Streets
.............................................................................................................
5-155
5.13.5.
Private Streets
.................................................................................................
5-159
5.13.6.
Sidewalks and Bikeways
..................................................................................
5-162
5.13.7.
Rights-of-way
..................................................................................................
5-163
5.13.8.
Transit Stops
...................................................................................................
5-165
5.13.9.
Numbering of Buildings
..................................................................................
5-165
5.13.10.
Complete Streets
............................................................................................
5-168
Section 5.14. Utilities
...........................................................................................................................
5-173
5.14.1.
General Standards
..........................................................................................
5-173
5.14.2.
Utility Easements
............................................................................................
5-175
5.14.3.
Utility Excavation, Trenching, and Backfilling
.................................................
5-176
5.14.4.
Water Distribution Systems
............................................................................
5-176
5.14.5.
Sanitary Sewer
................................................................................................
5-177
5.14.6.
Reclaimed Water System
................................................................................
5-178
Section 5.15. Guarantees and Sureties
...............................................................................................
5-179
5.15.1.
Applicability
....................................................................................................
5-179
5.15.2.
Improvements Agreement Required
..............................................................
5-179
5.15.3.
Amount and Type of Security
.........................................................................
5-180
5.15.4.
Completion of Improvements
.........................................................................
5-180
5.15.5.
Maintenance of Improvements.
.....................................................................
5-180
Section 5.16. Miscellaneous Standards
...............................................................................................
5-182
5.16.1.
Noise Standards
..............................................................................................
5-182
5.16.2.
Air Pollution Standards
...................................................................................
5-183
5.16.3.
Fire and Explosive Hazards Standards
............................................................
5-183
5.16.4.
Electromagnetic Interference Standards
........................................................
5-183
5.16.5.
Traffic Impact Analysis(TIA)
............................................................................
5-184
Article 6
: Environmental Standards
..............................................................
6-1
Section 6.1. General Provisions
.............................................................................................................
6-1
6.1.1.
Purpose
...............................................................................................................
6-1
6.1.2.
Controlling Standards
.........................................................................................
6-1
6.1.3.
Development in Protected Environmentally Sensitive Areas
.............................
6-1
Section 6.2. Wetlands
............................................................................................................................
6-2
6.2.1.
Purpose
...............................................................................................................
6-2
6.2.2.
Applicability
........................................................................................................
6-2
6.2.3.
Conservation District Determination
..................................................................
6-3
6.2.4.
Development Within Conservation District
........................................................
6-3
6.2.5.
Peat Excavation in Conservation District
............................................................
6-3
Section 6.3. Habitat for Listed Species
..................................................................................................
6-4
6.3.1.
Purpose
...............................................................................................................
6-4
6.3.2.
Development Application Requirements
...........................................................
6-5
6.3.3.
Management Plan
...............................................................................................
6-6
6.3.4.
Mitigation of Adverse Effects
.............................................................................
6-7
Section 6.4. Wekiva Protection Area
.....................................................................................................
6-8
6.4.1.
Purpose
...............................................................................................................
6-8
6.4.2.
Wekiva Protection Area Established
...................................................................
6-8
6.4.3.
Applicability
........................................................................................................
6-8
6.4.4.
Standards
............................................................................................................
6-8
Section 6.5. Groundwater for Wellheads
..............................................................................................
6-9
6.5.1.
Purpose
...............................................................................................................
6-9
6.5.2.
Applicability
........................................................................................................
6-9
6.5.3.
Wellhead Protection Zone Established
...............................................................
6-9
Section 6.6. Floodplains
......................................................................................................................
6-10
6.6.1.
General
..............................................................................................................
6-10
6.6.2.
Applicability
......................................................................................................
6-11
6.6.3.
Duties and Powers of the Floodplain Administrator
........................................
6-12
6.6.4.
Permits
..............................................................................................................
6-15
6.6.5.
Site Plans and Construction Documents
...........................................................
6-17
6.6.6.
Inspections
........................................................................................................
6-19
6.6.7.
Variances and Appeals
......................................................................................
6-20
6.6.8.
Violations
..........................................................................................................
6-23
6.6.9.
Buildings and Structures
...................................................................................
6-23
6.6.10.
Subdivisions
......................................................................................................
6-23
6.6.11.
Site Improvements, Utilities and Limitations
...................................................
6-24
6.6.12.
Manufactured Homes
.......................................................................................
6-25
6.6.13.
Recreational Vehicles and Park Trailers
............................................................
6-26
6.6.14.
Tanks
.................................................................................................................
6-26
6.6.15.
Other Development
..........................................................................................
6-27
Section 6.7. Stormwater Management Systems
.................................................................................
6-28
6.7.1.
General
..............................................................................................................
6-28
6.7.2.
Design Base
.......................................................................................................
6-28
6.7.3.
Soil Reports
.......................................................................................................
6-30
6.7.4.
Slopes
................................................................................................................
6-30
6.7.5.
Development Within Special Flood Hazard Area (100-Year Flood)
..................
6-31
6.7.6.
Storm Sewer Design
..........................................................................................
6-31
6.7.7.
Hydraulic Gradient Line Computations
.............................................................
6-32
Article 7
: Concurrency Management System
................................................
7-1
Section 7.1. Consistency and Concurrency Determinations
.................................................................
7-1
7.1.1.
Purpose
...............................................................................................................
7-1
7.1.2.
Consistency and Concurrency
............................................................................
7-1
7.1.3.
Exemptions
.........................................................................................................
7-1
7.1.4.
Change of Use
.....................................................................................................
7-2
7.1.5.
Level of Service (LOS) Standards
........................................................................
7-3
Section 7.2. Concurrency Administration
.............................................................................................
7-5
7.2.1.
Capacity Banks
....................................................................................................
7-5
Section 7.3. Concurrency Verification Letter
........................................................................................
7-8
7.3.1.
Purpose
...............................................................................................................
7-8
7.3.2.
Application
..........................................................................................................
7-8
7.3.3.
Processing
...........................................................................................................
7-9
7.3.4.
Content
...............................................................................................................
7-9
Section 7.4. Concurrency Encumbrance Letter (CEL)
............................................................................
7-9
7.4.1.
Purpose
...............................................................................................................
7-9
7.4.2.
Application for CEL
..............................................................................................
7-9
7.4.3.
Processing
.........................................................................................................
7-10
7.4.4.
Approval of Concurrency Encumbrance Letter
................................................
7-11
7.4.5.
Denial of concurrency Encumbrance Letter
.....................................................
7-12
Section 7.5. Concurrency Evaluation
...................................................................................................
7-13
7.5.1.
Requirement for Concurrency Evaluation
........................................................
7-13
7.5.2.
Burden of Showing Compliance on Applicant
..................................................
7-14
7.5.3.
Determination of Capacity
................................................................................
7-14
Section 7.6. Capacity Reservation Certificate (CRC)
............................................................................
7-16
7.6.1.
Purpose
.............................................................................................................
7-16
7.6.2.
Application
........................................................................................................
7-16
7.6.3.
Processing
.........................................................................................................
7-16
7.6.4.
Time Period
.......................................................................................................
7-16
7.6.5.
Time Extension
..................................................................................................
7-17
7.6.6.
Expiration
..........................................................................................................
7-17
7.6.7.
Transfer of Certificates
.....................................................................................
7-17
7.6.8.
Capacity Reservation Fees
................................................................................
7-17
Section 7.7. Concurrency Resolution Process
.....................................................................................
7-18
7.7.1.
Purpose
.............................................................................................................
7-18
7.7.2.
Applicability
......................................................................................................
7-18
7.7.3.
Review Process
.................................................................................................
7-18
Article 8
: Nonconformities
............................................................................
8-1
Section 8.1. General Applicability
.........................................................................................................
8-1
8.1.1.
Purpose and Scope
.............................................................................................
8-1
8.1.2.
Authority to Continue
.........................................................................................
8-1
8.1.3.
Determination of Nonconformity Status
............................................................
8-1
8.1.4.
Minor Repairs and Maintenance
........................................................................
8-1
8.1.5.
Change of Tenancy or Ownership
.......................................................................
8-1
Section 8.2. Nonconforming Uses
.........................................................................................................
8-2
8.2.1.
General
................................................................................................................
8-2
8.2.2.
Extension, Expansion, or Relocation
...................................................................
8-2
8.2.3.
Change in Use
.....................................................................................................
8-2
8.2.4.
Discontinuance or Abandonment of Nonconforming Use
.................................
8-2
8.2.5.
Structures Used for Nonconforming Use
............................................................
8-2
Section 8.3. Nonconforming Structures
................................................................................................
8-3
8.3.1.
General
................................................................................................................
8-3
8.3.2.
Relationship with Conforming and Nonconforming Uses
..................................
8-3
8.3.3.
Enlargement or Alteration
..................................................................................
8-3
8.3.4.
Relocation
...........................................................................................................
8-4
8.3.5.
Reconstruction or Repair after Casualty Damage
...............................................
8-4
Section 8.4. Nonconforming Lots of Record
.........................................................................................
8-5
8.4.1.
General
................................................................................................................
8-5
8.4.2.
Structures on Nonconforming Lots
.....................................................................
8-5
8.4.3.
Combination of Lots to Eliminate Nonconformity
..............................................
8-5
8.4.4.
Governmental Acquisition of a Portion of Lot
....................................................
8-5
Section 8.5. Nonconforming Signs
........................................................................................................
8-5
8.5.1.
General
................................................................................................................
8-5
8.5.2.
Exemptions
.........................................................................................................
8-5
8.5.3.
Enlargement or Alteration
..................................................................................
8-5
8.5.4.
Reconstruction or Repair after Damage
.............................................................
8-6
8.5.5.
Abandonment or Discontinuance of a Sign
........................................................
8-6
8.5.6.
Nonconforming Signs Along Federal Highways
..................................................
8-6
Section 8.6. Nonconforming Site Features
............................................................................................
8-6
8.6.1.
Purpose
...............................................................................................................
8-6
8.6.2.
Applicability
........................................................................................................
8-6
8.6.3.
Interior and Exterior Remodeling of Structures
.................................................
8-7
8.6.4.
Compliance to Maximum Extent Practicable on Constrained Properties
..........
8-9
Article 9
: Enforcement
..................................................................................
9-1
Section 9.1. Purpose
..............................................................................................................................
9-1
Section 9.2. Compliance Required
........................................................................................................
9-1
9.2.1.
General
................................................................................................................
9-1
9.2.2.
Receipt of Development Approval or Permit Required
......................................
9-1
9.2.3.
Development Approval or Permit Only Authorizes Development Approved
....
9-1
Section 9.3. Violations
...........................................................................................................................
9-1
9.3.1.
General Violations
...............................................................................................
9-1
9.3.2.
Specific Violations
...............................................................................................
9-1
Section 9.4. Responsible Persons
..........................................................................................................
9-2
Section 9.5. Enforcement Generally
......................................................................................................
9-2
9.5.1.
Responsibility for Enforcement
..........................................................................
9-2
9.5.2.
Code Enforcement Hearing Officer
.....................................................................
9-3
9.5.3.
Remedies and Penalties
......................................................................................
9-4
Article 10
: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
........................................
10-1
Section 10.1. General Rules for Construction and Interpretation
........................................................
10-1
10.1.1.
Meanings and Intent
.........................................................................................
10-1
10.1.2.
Headings, Illustrations, and Text
.......................................................................
10-1
10.1.3.
Lists and Examples
............................................................................................
10-1
10.1.4.
Computation of Time
........................................................................................
10-1
10.1.5.
References to Other Regulations/Publications
.................................................
10-2
10.1.6.
Delegation of Authority
....................................................................................
10-2
10.1.7.
Public Officials and Agencies
............................................................................
10-2
10.1.8.
Mandatory and Discretionary Terms
................................................................
10-2
10.1.9.
Conjunctions
.....................................................................................................
10-2
10.1.10.
Tenses and Plurals
............................................................................................
10-2
10.1.11.
Term Not Defined
.............................................................................................
10-2
Section 10.2. Rules of Measurement
....................................................................................................
10-3
10.2.1.
Buildings
............................................................................................................
10-3
10.2.2.
Density and Area
...............................................................................................
10-3
10.2.3.
Lots and Yards
...................................................................................................
10-4
10.2.4.
Exceptions and Variations
.................................................................................
10-6
Section 10.3. Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
.....
10-9
10.3.1.
Principal Use Classification System
...................................................................
10-9
10.3.2.
Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
....................
10-43
Section 10.4. Definitions
.....................................................................................................................
10-46
Appendices ........................................................................................................ A
Appendix A. Mixed Use Kelly Park Interchange (MU-KPI) Form Based Code...........................................A Appendix B. Drought Tolerant Grasses List ..............................................................................................B Appendix C. Prohibited Plants List............................................................................................................C Appendix D. Development Design Guidelines ..........................................................................................D Appendix E. Airport District and Regulation Maps................................................................................... E Appendix F. Downtown Overlay............................................................................................................... F
GeneralProvisions

Article 1
: General Provisions
.........................................................................
1-1
Section 1.1. Title
....................................................................................................................................
1-1
Section 1.2. Authority
............................................................................................................................
1-1
1.2.1.
General
................................................................................................................
1-1
1.2.2.
References to Florida Law
...................................................................................
1-1
Section 1.3. General Purpose and Intent
..............................................................................................
1-2
Section 1.4. Applicability
.......................................................................................................................
1-3
1.4.1.
General Applicability
...........................................................................................
1-3
1.4.2.
Application to Governmental Units.
...................................................................
1-3
1.4.3.
Compliance Required
..........................................................................................
1-3
Section 1.5. Consistency with the Comprehensive plan
.......................................................................
1-3
Section 1.6. Relationship with Other Laws, Covenants, or Other Private Agreements
........................
1-3
1.6.1.
Conflicts with Other City Regulations
.................................................................
1-3
1.6.2.
Conflicts with State or Federal Law
....................................................................
1-3
1.6.3.
Relationship to Private Agreements/ Conflicts with Private Agreements
..........
1-4
1.6.4.
Existing Vested Rights
.........................................................................................
1-4
Section 1.7. Official Zoning District Map
...............................................................................................
1-4
1.7.1.
Establishment and Maintenance
........................................................................
1-4
1.7.2.
Incorporated by Reference
.................................................................................
1-4
1.7.3.
Changes to Official Zoning District Map
.............................................................
1-4
1.7.4.
Zoning Classification of Annexed Land
...............................................................
1-5
Section 1.8. Transitional Provisions
......................................................................................................
1-5
1.8.1.
Transitions to New Zoning Districts
....................................................................
1-5
1.8.2.
Zoning District Compatibility with Future Land Use Designation
.......................
1-7
1.8.3.
Violations Continue
.............................................................................................
1-8
1.8.4.
Nonconformities
.................................................................................................
1-9
1.8.5.
Issuance of Development Orders While Amendments Pending
........................
1-9
1.8.6.
Applications for Which No Final Action Taken
...................................................
1-9
1.8.7.
Development Approvals and Permits Under Prior Land Development Code
..
1-10
Section 1.9. Severability
......................................................................................................................
1-10
Section 1.10. Effective Date
..................................................................................................................
1-10

-
Article 1: General Provisions
Section 1.1 Title
1.2.1 General
Article 1: General Provisions
Section 1.1. TITLE
This code shall be officially entitled the “Land Development Code (LDC) of the City of Apopka, Florida,” and may be referred to as the “Apopka Land Development Code,” the “Land Development Code,” “LDC,” or “this code.”
Section 1.2. AUTHORITY
1.2.1. GENERAL
The Apopka City Council is authorized to adopt this LDC in accordance with Article VIII, Section 2(b) of the Florida Constitution, the charter of the City of Apopka (effective September 9, 1882, amended March 1919), Chapter 166 of the Florida Statutes (the Municipal Home Rules Powers Act, Section 163.3202, Fla. Stat., and all other relevant laws of the State of Florida.
1.2.2. REFERENCES TO FLORIDA LAW
Whenever any provision of this LDC refers to or cites a section of the Florida Statutes (Fla. Stat.) or Florida Administrative Code (FAC), and that section is later amended or superseded, this LDC shall be deemed amended to refer to the amended section or the section that most nearly corresponds to the superseded section.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 1 1
-
Article 1: General Provisions
Section 1.3 General Purpose and Intent
1.2.2 References to Florida Law
Section 1.3. GENERAL PURPOSE AND INTENT
The general purpose of this LDC is to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to implement the goals, objectives, and policies of the City’s adopted comprehensive plan and other adopted plans. More specifically, this LDC is intended to do the following, consistent with the goals, objectives, and policies of the comprehensive plan and other adopted plans:
1.3.1. Establish comprehensive, consistent, effective, efficient, and equitable standards and procedures for the review and approval of development that implement the comprehensive plan and other adopted plans, respect the rights of landowners, and consider the interests of the City’s citizens.
1.3.2. Provide a sufficient supply of land to meet the City’s growth and development.
1.3.3. Ensure that land uses and development are organized and located in a rational and efficient manner.
1.3.4. Provide a diversity of housing opportunities.
1.3.5. Protect the character of existing residential neighborhoods from incompatible development.
1.3.6. Support economic development in ways that are consistent with the City’s desire to maintain its small-town character.
1.3.7. Support and encourage vibrant, pedestrian-friendly, and higher density mixed-use development in the Downtown.
1.3.8. Support and encourage higher density, pedestrian-friendly, mixed use development in the East Shore area and the Kelly Park Interchange area.
1.3.9. Support and encourage redevelopment and revitalization of neighborhoods and the City’s commercial corridors that is consistent with its context.
1.3.10. Ensure the form and design of new development is consistent with the City’s desired character.
1.3.11. Support and encourage green building practices.
1.3.12. Establish standards to protect the City’s natural resources, including natural lands, Lake Apopka, wetlands, and other smaller lakes and waterways, as well as the drinking water source of the City.
Land Development Code Page 1 2 Apopka, FL
-
Article 1: General Provisions
Section 1.4 Applicability
1.4.1 General Applicability
1.3.13. Provide specific procedures to ensure that development orders are conditioned on the availability of public facilities and services to adequately accommodate that development (concurrency).
Section 1.4. APPLICABILITY
1.4.1. GENERAL APPLICABILITY
The provisions of this LDC shall apply to the development of all land within the corporate limits of the City of Apopka.
1.4.2. APPLICATION TO GOVERNMENTAL UNITS.
A. The provisions of this LDC shall apply to development by the City or its departments, and to land owned by the City.
B. To the extent allowed by law, the provisions of this LDC shall also apply to development by any county, the School Board, the State of Florida, or its agencies, the federal government or its agencies or departments.
1.4.3. COMPLIANCE REQUIRED
No land in the City shall be developed without compliance with the requirements of this LDC, and all other city, county, state, and federal laws and regulations.
Section 1.5. CONSISTENCY WITH THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
This LDC is intended to ensure that all development within the City is consistent with the goals, objectives, and policies of the adopted comprehensive plan, and all other adopted plans of the City.
Section 1.6. RELATIONSHIP WITH OTHER LAWS, COVENANTS, OR OTHER PRIVATE AGREEMENTS
1.6.1. CONFLICTS WITH OTHER CITY REGULATIONS
If a provision of this LDC is inconsistent with another provision of this LDC, or with a provision found in other codes or ordinances of the City, the more restrictive provision shall govern unless the terms of the more restrictive provision specify otherwise. The more restrictive provision is the one that imposes greater restrictions or burdens, or more stringent controls.
1.6.2. CONFLICTS WITH STATE OR FEDERAL LAW
If a provision of this LDC is inconsistent with a provision found in the law or regulations of the state or federal government, the more restrictive provision shall control, to the extent permitted by law.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 1 3
-
Article 1: General Provisions
Section 1.7 Official Zoning District Map
1.6.3 Relationship to Private Agreements/ Conflicts with Private Agreements
1.6.3. RELATIONSHIP TO PRIVATE AGREEMENTS/ CONFLICTS WITH PRIVATE AGREEMENTS
Nothing in this LDC is intended to supersede, annul, or interfere with any deed restriction, covenant, easement, or other agreement between private parties, but such deed restrictions, covenants, easements and other private agreements shall not excuse any failure to comply with this LDC. The City shall not be responsible for monitoring or enforcing any such private agreements.
1.6.4. EXISTING VESTED RIGHTS
Nothing in this LDC is intended to repeal, supersede, annul, impair, or interfere with any vested rights under applicable law, provided such rights are lawfully established and remain in effect.
Section 1.7. OFFICIAL ZONING DISTRICT MAP
1.7.1. ESTABLISHMENT AND MAINTENANCE
The Official Zoning District Map is established by this LDC. It designates the location and boundaries of the various base zoning districts, special purpose zoning districts, overlay zoning districts, and planned development districts under the LDC.
1.7.2. INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
The Official Zoning District Map, including its entire notation, is incorporated into this LDC by reference and is on file in the office of the Director for public inspection during normal business hours. The City may maintain the Official Zoning District Map as an electronic map layer in the city’s Geographic Information System (GIS) database. The official copy of the electronic version of an Official Zoning District Map shall be recorded onto permanent media to ensure all the electronic information is protected.
1.7.3. CHANGES TO OFFICIAL ZONING DISTRICT MAP
A. Changes made in zoning district boundaries on the Official Zoning District Map shall be considered an amendment to this LDC and are made in accordance with Sec. 2.5.1.D, General Map Amendment, Sec.2.5.1.E, Site-Specific Map Amendment (Rezoning), or Sec. 2.5.1.F, Planned Development, as appropriate
B. The Director shall enter changes on the Official Zoning District Map within a reasonable period of time after the amendment is approved by City Council. Where the ordinance enacting a zoning district boundary change contains wording explaining or clarifying the location of the new boundary, the Director may enter notations reflecting the ordinance wording on the Official Zoning District Map.
Land Development Code Page 1 4 Apopka, FL
-
Article 1: General Provisions
Section 1.8 Transitional Provisions
1.7.4 Zoning Classification of Annexed Land
1.7.4. ZONING CLASSIFICATION OF ANNEXED LAND
A. Any lands annexed into the City shall immediately be placed in the T: Transitional District until a zoning district map amendment for the land is adopted by City Council.
B. Within one year of the effective date of annexation, the Planning Commission shall conduct an evaluation of the land uses and zoning patterns on and surrounding the annexed land, analysis of the comprehensive plan and any applicable City plans, as appropriate, and recommend a zoning district classification for the annexed land to City Council.
C. The City Council shall take action on the Planning Commission’s recommendation on a zoning district classification for the annexed land as promptly as reasonably possible in consideration of the interests of the landowner(s), affected parties, and citizens of the City.
Section 1.8. TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
1.8.1. TRANSITIONS TO NEW ZONING DISTRICTS
On March 6, 2019, land zoned with a zoning district classification from the previous LDC shall be translated to one of the zoning district classification in this LDC, as set forth in Article 3: Zoning Districts. Table 1.8.1: Transition to New Zoning Districts, summarizes the transition of the zoning districts used in the previous zoning regulations to the zoning districts used in this LDC. If a new zoning district is established, or a zoning district from the previous LDC is deleted, it is also shown in the table. (For example, Table 1.8.1 shows that all lands classified RCE-1: Residential Country Estates-1 in the previous LDC (under the column titled “Zoning District in Previous LDC”) are classified as RCE: Residential Country Estate in this LDC (under the column titled “Zoning District in This LDC”))
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 1 5
-
Article 1: General Provisions
Section 1.8 Transitional Provisions
1.8.1 Transitions to New Zoning Districts TABLE 1.8.1: TRANSITION TO NEW ZONING DISTRICTS ZONING DISTRICT IN PREVIOUS LDC ZONING DISTRICT IN THIS LDC Residential T: Transitional [NEW] AG: Agriculture AG: Agriculture AG-E: Agricultural Estate RCE-1: Residential Country Estates 1 RCE: Residential County Estate RCE-2: Residential Country Estate 2 R-1AA: Residential Single-Family RSF-1A: Residential Single-Family– Estate R-1AAA: Residential Single-Family R-1: Residential Single-Family RSF-1B: Residential Single-Family– Large Lot R-1A: Residential Single-Family R-2: Residential One-and Two-family RTF: Residential Two-Family R-3: Residential Multiple-Family RMF-Residential Multi-Family RMU: Residential Mixed Use [NEW] MHP: Mobile Home Park District MHP: Mobile Home Park MHS: Mobile Home Subdivision Commercial Districts CN: Commercial Neighborhood C-N: Neighborhood Commercial C-1: Retail Commercial C-C: Community Commercial PO/I: Professional Office/Institutional O: Office [NEW] C-COR: Corridor Commercial [NEW] C-2: General Commercial C-R: Regional Commercial Industrial Districts C-3 Wholesale Commercial I-L: Light Industrial I-1: Restricted Industrial I-2: General Industrial I-H: Heavy Industrial Special Purpose Districts MU-D: Mixed Use-Downtown [NEW] MU-ES-RTE: Mixed Use-East Shore-Research/Technology/Education[NEW] MU-ES-NM: Mixed Use-East Shore-New Market[NEW] Mixed-CC: Mixed-Use Community Center MU-ES-GT: Mixed Use-East Shore-Gateway[NEW] Mixed-EC: Mixed-Use Employment Center MU-KPI: Mixed Use-Kelly Park Interchange [NEW] INST: Institutional [NEW] PR: Parks and Recreation PR: Parks and Recreation AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport [NEW} Planned Development Districts PUD: Planned Unit Development PD: Planned Development Overlay Districts Historic District H-O Historic Overlay Downtown Development Overlay Zoning District [DELETED] NC-O Neighborhood Conservation Overlay [NEW] Land Development Code Page 1 6 Apopka, FL
-
Article 1: General Provisions
Section 1.8 Transitional Provisions
1.8.2 Zoning District Compatibility with Future Land Use Designation
1.8.2. ZONING DISTRICT COMPATIBILITY WITH FUTURE LAND USE DESIGNATION
Zoning districts in this LDC are compatible with and implement future land use designations in the Future Land Use Map (FLUM) in the comprehensive plan. The land use designation in the FLUM that each zoning district implements are in Table 1.8.2: Future Land Use Map (FLUM) Compatibility. (For example, RCE: Residential County Estates is a district that implements the AG Homestead and AG land use designations).
TABLE 1.8.2: FUTURE LAND USE MAP (FLUM) COMPATIBILITY
ZONING DISTRICT IN PREVIOUS LDC
ZONING DISTRICT IN THIS LDC
APOPKA COMPREHENSIVE PLAN 2030 FLUM LAND USE DESIGNATION IMPLEMENTED BY DISTRICT
Residential Districts
T: Transitional (NEW)
TBD-to be determined
AG: Agriculture
AG: Agriculture (CONSOLIDATED)
AG Homestead; AG
AG-E: Agriculture Estate
RCE-1: Residential Country Estates 1
RCE: Residential Country Estate (CONSOLIDATED)
AG Estates; Res Estates; VLS; LS; L; ML; M; H
RCE-2: Residential Country Estate 2
R-1AA: Residential Single-Family
RSF-1A: Residential Single-Family – Estate (CONSOLIDATED)
VLS; LS; L; ML; M; H
R-1AAA: Residential Single-Family
R-1: Residential Single-Family
RSF-1B: Residential Single-Family – Large Lot (CONSOLIDATED)
VLS; LS; L; ML; M; H
R-1A: Residential Single-Family
R-2: Residential One-and Two-family
RTF: Residential Two-Family
L; ML; M; H
R-3: Residential Multiple-Family
RMF: Residential Multi-Family
ML; M; H
RMU: Residential Mixed-Use (NEW)
MU
MHP: Mobile Home Park District
MHP: Mobile Home Park (CONSOLIDATED)
ML; CBD
MHS: Mobile Home Subdivision
Commercial Districts
CN: Commercial Neighborhood
C-N: Neighborhood Commercial
COMM; CBD
C-1: Retail Commercial
C-C: Community Commercial
COMM; CBD
C-R: Regional Commercial (NEW)
COMM
PO/I: Professional Office/Institutional
O: Office
OFF; CBD
C -COR: Corridor Commercial (NEW)
COMM
C-2: General Commercial
DELETE / REPLACED BY C-R
Mixed-CC: Mixed-Use
DELETE / MOVE TO SPECIAL
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 1 7
-
Article 1: General Provisions
Section 1.8 Transitional Provisions
1.8.3 Violations Continue
TABLE 1.8.2: FUTURE LAND USE MAP (FLUM) COMPATIBILITY
ZONING DISTRICT IN PREVIOUS LDC
ZONING DISTRICT IN THIS LDC
APOPKA COMPREHENSIVE PLAN 2030 FLUM LAND USE DESIGNATION IMPLEMENTED BY DISTRICT
Community Center
PURPOSE DISTRICT CATEGORY / REPLACED BY MU-ES
Mixed-EC: Mixed-Use Employment Center
Industrial Districts
C-3: Wholesale Commercial
I-L: Light Industrial (CONSOLIDATED)
COMM; IND; CBD
I-1: Restricted Industrial
I-2: General Industrial
I-H: Heavy Industrial
IND; CBD
Special Purpose Districts
MU-D: Mixed Use -Downtown (NEW)
COMM; OFF; RH; RL; RLS; RM; INST/PU; MU; IND; REC; CBD
Mixed-CC: Mixed-Use Community Center
MU-ES: Mixed Use – East Shore (NEW)
MU
Mixed-EC: Mixed-Use Employment Center
MU-KPI: Mixed-Use – Kelly Park Interchange (NEW)
MU
INST: Institutional (Split from PO/I)
INST
PR: Parks And Recreation
PR: Parks and Recreation
AG; INST; REC; CBD
AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport (NEW )
INST
Planned Development Districts
PUD: Planned Unit Development
PD: Planned Development
AG Estates; Res Estates; VLS; LS; L; ML; M; H; OFF MU; IND; INST; CBD
Overlay Districts
Historic District
H-O: Historic Overlay
COMM; IND; OFF
Downtown Development Overlay Zoning District
DELETE
Small Lot Overlay Zoning District
DELETE
NC-O: Neighborhood Conservation Overlay (NEW)
TBD
1.8.3. VIOLATIONS CONTINUE
Any violation of the previous LDC and other regulations replaced by this LDC shall continue to be a violation under this LDC, and subject to the penalties set forth in Article 9: Enforcement, unless the development complies with the express terms of this LDC.
Land Development Code Page 1 8 Apopka, FL
-
Article 1: General Provisions
Section 1.8 Transitional Provisions
1.8.4 Nonconformities
1.8.4. NONCONFORMITIES
If any use, structure, lot of record, sign, or site feature was legally established on the date of its development, but does not fully comply with the standards of this LDC, that use, structure, lot of record, sign, or site feature shall be considered nonconforming and subject to the provisions of Article 8: Nonconformities. If a use, structure, lot of record, sign, or site feature that was legally nonconforming under the previous Land Development Code becomes conforming under this LDC, it shall no longer be deemed nonconforming and subject to the provisions of Article 8: Nonconformities.
1.8.5. ISSUANCE OF DEVELOPMENT ORDERS WHILE AMENDMENTS PENDING
No development order shall be issued when an amendment to this LDC is pending before the Planning Commission or City Council, which amendment, if adopted, would render the proposed development nonconforming.
1.8.6. APPLICATIONS FOR WHICH NO FINAL ACTION TAKEN
A. Any development application submitted and accepted as complete before March 6, 2019, but still pending final action as of that date, shall be reviewed and decided in accordance with the regulations in effect when the application was accepted.
B. Completed applications shall be processed in good faith and shall comply with any time frames for review, approval, and completion as established in the regulations in effect at the time of application acceptance. If the application fails to comply with the required time frames, it shall expire and future development shall be subject to the requirements of this LDC.
C. An applicant with a pending application accepted before March 6, 2019 may opt to have the proposed development reviewed and decided under the standards of this LDC by withdrawing the pending application and submitting a new application in accordance with the standards of this LDC. The application submittal fees will be waived for this new application.
D. To the extent an application approved under this section proposes development that does not comply with this LDC, the development, although permitted, shall be nonconforming and subject to the provisions of Article 8: Nonconformities
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 1 9
-
Article 1: General Provisions
Section 1.9 Severability
1.8.7 Development Approvals and Permits Under Prior Land Development Code
1.8.7. DEVELOPMENT APPROVALS AND PERMITS UNDER PRIOR LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
A. All development approvals or permits approved before March 6, 2019 remain valid until their expiration date, and may be carried out in accordance with the terms and conditions of their approval, and the development standards in effect at the time of approval, as long as they remain valid and have not expired or been revoked or substantially modified. If the approval or permit expires or is revoked (e.g., for failure to comply with the terms and conditions of approval) or substantially modified, all subsequent development of the site shall comply with the procedures and standards of this LDC.
B. No provision of this LDC requires any change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any structure for which a building permit was issued prior to March 6, 2019.
C. To the extent a prior-approved application proposes development that does not comply with this LDC, the subsequent development, although permitted, shall be nonconforming and subject to the provisions of Article 8: Nonconformities.
D. Any re-application for an expired development approval or permit shall comply with the standards in effect at the time of re-application.
Section 1.9. SEVERABILITY
It is the legislative intent of the City Council in adopting this LDC that all provisions shall be construed to implement the comprehensive plan and other adopted City plans, and guide development in accordance with the existing and future needs of the City as established in this LDC, and promote the public health, safety, and welfare of landowners and residents of the City. It is also the legislative intent of the City Council that if any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this LDC is for any reason held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity and continued enforcement of any other provision of this LDC. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted this LDC and any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases of the LDC is declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction.
Section 1.10. EFFECTIVE DATE
This LDC shall become effective on March 6, 2019, and repeals and replaces in its entirety the Land Development Code as originally adopted on August 19, 1992, and subsequently amended.
Land Development Code Page 1 10 Apopka, FL
Administration

Article 2
: Administration
..............................................................................
2-1
Section 2.1. Purpose and Organization
.................................................................................................
2-1
2.1.1.
Purpose
...............................................................................................................
2-1
2.1.2.
Organization
........................................................................................................
2-1
Section 2.2. Summary Table of Development Review Responsibilities
................................................
2-1
2.2.1.
Summary Table
...................................................................................................
2-1
Section 2.3. Advisory and Decision-Making Bodies and Persons
..........................................................
2-3
2.3.1.
City Council
.........................................................................................................
2-3
2.3.2.
Planning Commission
..........................................................................................
2-4
2.3.3.
Development Review Committee (DRC)
.............................................................
2-7
2.3.4.
Community Development Department
..............................................................
2-7
2.3.5.
Code Enforcement Officer
..................................................................................
2-8
2.3.6.
Code Enforcement Hearing Officer
.....................................................................
2-9
2.3.7.
Concurrency-Management Official
...................................................................
2-10
Section 2.4. Standard Review Procedures
..........................................................................................
2-10
2.4.1.
Informational Meeting
......................................................................................
2-10
2.4.2.
Pre-Application Community Meeting
...............................................................
2-12
2.4.3.
Application Submission
.....................................................................................
2-14
2.4.4.
Determination of Completeness
.......................................................................
2-15
2.4.5.
Application Amendment or Withdrawal
...........................................................
2-15
2.4.6.
Staff Review and Action
....................................................................................
2-16
2.4.7.
Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification
.......................................
2-17
2.4.8.
Deferral of Public Hearing
.................................................................................
2-22
2.4.9.
Public Hearing Procedures
................................................................................
2-22
2.4.10.
Advisory Body Review and Recommendation
..................................................
2-25
2.4.11.
Decision-Making Body Hearing, Review, and Decision
.....................................
2-26
2.4.12.
Post Decision-Making Actions
...........................................................................
2-27
Section 2.5. Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
..................................
2-28
2.5.1.
Discretionary Approvals
....................................................................................
2-29
2.5.2.
Site Development and Platting
.........................................................................
2-45
2.5.3.
Concurrency
......................................................................................................
2-58
2.5.4.
Permits
..............................................................................................................
2-58
2.5.5.
Relief
.................................................................................................................
2-72
2.5.6.
Interpretation
...................................................................................................
2-87

-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.1 Purpose and Organization
2.1.1 Purpose
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.1. PURPOSE AND ORGANIZATION
2.1.1. PURPOSE
This article sets forth the review and approval procedures and standards for all development applications under this LDC.
2.1.2. ORGANIZATION
A. Sec.2.1 Purpose and Organization
Sec. 2.1, Purpose and Organization, summarizes the purpose of the article and the article’s organization.
B. Sec. 2.2, Summary Table of Development Review Responsibilities
Sec. 2.2, Summary Table of Development Review Responsibilities, provides a summary of the actions required of each advising and decision-making body and person for each type of development application.
C. Sec. 2.3, Advisory and Decision-making Bodies and Persons
Sec. 2.3, Advisory and Decision-Making Bodies and Persons, describes the powers and duties of the various bodies and persons that review and make decisions on development applications.
D. Sec. 2.4, Standard Review Procedures
Sec. 2.4, Standard Review Procedures, describes procedures that generally apply to all development applications.
E. Sec. 2.5, Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
Sec. 2.5, Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards, contains specific information for each type of development application, including applicable additions or modifications to the standard review procedures, and standards for making a decision on the application.
Section 2.2. SUMMARY TABLE OF DEVELOPMENT REVIEW RESPONSIBILITIES
2.2.1. SUMMARY TABLE
Table 2.2.1: Summary Table of Development Review Responsibilities identifies the various development approvals and permits authorized by this LDC and indicates the role City boards and staff have in making recommendations or decisions on applications for each type of development approval or permit. It also identifies those applications that require a public hearing, and notes whether an informational meeting or pre-application community meeting is required.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 1
-
- - - -
- -
- -
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.2 Summary Table of Development Review Responsibilities
2.2.1 Summary Table
TABLE 2.2.1: SUMMARY TABLE OF DEVELOPMENT REVIEW RESPONSIBILITIES
A APPEAL; D DECISION; R RECOMMENDATION; S STAFF REVIEW; <> PUBLIC HEARING * INFORMATIONAL MEETING REQUIRED # PRE APPLICATION COMMUNITY MEETING REQUIRED
REVIEW PROCEDURE
REVIEW AUTHORITY
CITY COUNCIL
PLANNING COMMISSION
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR
STAFF
Discretionary Approvals
Annexation
See Ch. 171,Fla. Stat.
Comprehensive Plan Amendment
See Ch. 163, Fla. Stat.
Text Amendment
<D>
<R>
S
Map Amendment
General *#
<D>
<R>
S
Site Specific * #
<D>
<R>
S
Planned Development * #
<D>
<R>
S
Special Exception * #
<A>
<D>
S
Site Development and Platting
Development Plan
Minor
<A>
D
Major
Site Plan *
<D>
<R>
S
Construction Site Plan
<D>
Plat
Plat (Subdivision)
<D>
<R>
S
Plat Vacation
<D>
S
Minor Replat
D
Concurrency
Concurrency Letter (Verification letter, Encumbrance Letter, or Encumbrance Denial)
D
Concurrency Resolution Agreement
<D>
S
Capacity Reservation Certificate
D
Permits
Arbor Permit
D
Sign Permit
D
Floodplain Permit
D1
Fence Permit
D
Driveway and Sidewalk Permit
D
Temporary Use Permit
D
Relief
Zoning Variance
<A>
<D>
S
Administrative Adjustment
<A>
D
Vested Rights Determination
<A>
D2
S
Appeal
<D>
Interpretations
Interpretation
<A>
D
S
Land Development Code Page 2 2 Apopka, FL
-
- - - -
- -
- -
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.3 Advisory and Decision-Making Bodies and Persons
2.3.1 City Council
TABLE 2.2.1: SUMMARY TABLE OF DEVELOPMENT REVIEW RESPONSIBILITIES
A APPEAL; D DECISION; R RECOMMENDATION; S STAFF REVIEW; <> PUBLIC HEARING * INFORMATIONAL MEETING REQUIRED # PRE APPLICATION COMMUNITY MEETING REQUIRED
REVIEW PROCEDURE
REVIEW AUTHORITY
CITY COUNCIL
PLANNING COMMISSION
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR
STAFF
Notes 1 Actual decision by the Floodplain Coordinator, as determined by the Mayor, with review by City Engineer within the Community Development Department 2Actual decision by the City Attorney
Section 2.3. ADVISORY AND DECISION-MAKING BODIES AND PERSONS
2.3.1. CITY COUNCIL
A. Powers and Duties
In addition to other authority granted to City Council by the Florida Constitution and State law, the City Council has the following powers and duties under this LDC:
1. To review and decide the following:
a.
Text amendments (See 2.5.1.C, Text Amendments);
b.
General map amendments (See 2.5.1.D, General Map Amendment);
c.
Site-specific map amendments (See 2.5.1.E, Site-Specific Map Amendment (Rezoning));
d.
Planned developments (See 2.5.1.F, Planned Development);
e.
Development plans
1.
Site plans (See 2.5.2.A.4.b.1, Site Plan Procedure);
2.
Construction site plans (See 2.5.2.A.4.b.2, Construction Site Plan Procedure); and
f.
Plats (subdivision) (See 2.5.2.B, Plat (Subdivision));
g.
Concurrency resolution agreements (See 2.5.3, Concurrency);
2. To hear and decide appeals for the following:
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 3
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.3 Advisory and Decision-Making Bodies and Persons
2.3.2 Planning Commission
a.
Special exception permits (See 2.5.1.G, Special Exception Permit);
b.
Minor development plans (See 2.5.2.A.4.a, Minor Development Plan Procedure);
c.
Zoning variances (See 2.5.5.A, Zoning Variance);
d.
Administrative adjustments (See 2.5.5.B, Administrative Adjustment)
e.
Vested rights determinations (See 2.5.5.C, Vested Rights Determination); and
f.
Interpretations (See 2.5.6 Interpretation).
3.
To establish a schedule of fees for the applications for development applications reviewed under this LDC. The schedule of fees shall be placed in a Procedures Manual.
4.
To appoint and remove in accordance with State law members of the Planning Commission.
5.
To take any other action authorized by law.
2.3.2. PLANNING COMMISSION
A. Establishment
The Apopka Planning Commission is hereby established in accordance with State law.
B. Powers and Duties under LDC
The Planning Commission shall have the following powers under this LDC.
1. To make decisions on the following:
a.
Special exception permits (See 2.5.1.G, Special Exception Permit);
b.
Plat vacations (See 2.5.2.D, Plat Vacation ); and
c.
Zoning variances (See 2.5.5.A, Zoning Variance).
2. To review and make recommendations to the City Council on the following :
a.
Text amendments (See 2.5.1.C, Text Amendments);
b.
General map amendments (See 2.5.1.D, General Map Amendment);
c.
Site-specific map amendments (See 2.5.1.E, Site-Specific Map Amendment (Rezoning)):
d.
Planned developments (See 2.5.1.F, Planned Development);
e.
Site plans for major development (See 2.5.2.A.4.b.1, Site Plan Procedure).; and
f.
Plats (subdivision) (See 2.5.2.B, Plat (Subdivision));
Land Development Code Page 2 4 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.3 Advisory and Decision-Making Bodies and Persons
2.3.2 Planning Commission
3. Other Powers and Duties
In addition, the Planning Commission shall have the following additional powers and duties.
a. To act as the Local Planning Agency for the City under State law, and as the Local Planning Agency:
1.
Prepare the City’s comprehensive plan and any amendments to the comprehensive plan;
2.
Monitor and oversee the effectiveness and status of the comprehensive plan and recommend to the City Council such changes in the comprehensive plan as may be required from time to time;
3.
Recommend comprehensive plan or elements or portions thereof to the City Council for adoption;
4.
Conduct public hearings on proposed amendments to and evaluation of the comprehensive plan;
5.
Seek to obtain citizen and public input into all phases and elements of the development of the comprehensive plan and amendments;
6.
Prepare, through the Apopka Community Development Department any studies required by the City Council with respect to the Comprehensive Plan; and
7.
Perform such other duties as from time to time may be assigned by the City Council.
C. Membership
1.
The Planning Commission shall have seven members appointed by the Mayor and approved by City Council. An additional member shall be a non-voting, ex officio representative of the Orange County School Board.
2.
The seven members of the Planning Commission shall reside within the City limits.
3.
Each member shall be appointed to a three-year term. Any member may be reappointed by the City Council from term to term.
4.
Any interested citizen may be appointed to the Planning Commission, but those with experience or interest in the field of land use regulation shall receive special consideration. Whenever possible, the Planning Commission shall include:
a.
At least one member with a background as an architect or landscape architect;
b.
At least one member with a background as an engineer;
c.
At least one member with a background engaged in real estate sales or development; and
d.
At least one member with a background as a natural or environmental scientist.
5.
When a position becomes vacant before the end of the term, the City Council shall appoint a substitute member to fill the vacancy for the duration of the vacated term.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 5
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.3 Advisory and Decision-Making Bodies and Persons
2.3.2 Planning Commission
A member whose term expires may continue to serve until a successor is appointed and qualified.
6.
Members may be removed without notice and without assignment of cause by a majority vote of the City Council.
7.
The members of the Planning Commission shall annually elect, during the first regularly scheduled meeting of each calendar year, a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson from among its members, and may create and fill other officers as the Planning Commission deems needed.
8.
The Planning Commission may create whatever subcommittees it deems needed to carry out the purposes of the Planning Commission.
9.
The Chairperson of the Planning Commission may appoint as needed, the membership of each subcommittee from the members of the Planning Commission.
10.
The City Council shall provide clerical and administrative support to the Planning Commission as may be reasonably required to complete the functions of the Planning Commission.
11.
The City shall provide a City employee to serve as secretary to the Planning Commission, recorder, and custodian of all Planning Commission records.
12.
Members shall not be compensated, but may be paid for travel and other expenses incurred on Planning Commission business under procedures prescribed in advance by the City Council.
13.
The City Council shall appropriate funds to permit the Planning Commission to perform its prescribed functions.
14.
If any member fails to attend two successive meetings without cause and without prior consent of the Chairperson, the Planning Commission shall formally consider the status of that Planning Commission position at the next meeting immediately following the second consecutive unexcused absence.
D. Meetings
1.
The Planning Commission shall meet at least once each calendar month, unless canceled by the Community Development Director, the Planning Commission, or its Chairperson, and more often at the call of the Chairperson or the City Council.
2.
The Planning Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, indicating the attendance of each member, and the decision on every question.
3.
Four members shall constitute a quorum.
4.
Each decision of the Planning Commission must be approved by a majority vote of the members present at a meeting in which a quorum is in attendance and voting.
E. Continuing Body
The Planning Commission shall be a continuing body and no measure pending before the Planning Commission shall abate or be discontinued by reason of the change in the number or terms of Planning Commission members as provided in this section.
Land Development Code Page 2 6 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.3 Advisory and Decision-Making Bodies and Persons
2.3.3 Development Review Committee (DRC)
2.3.3. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE (DRC)
A. Establishment
The Development Review Committee (DRC) is hereby established by this LDC.
B. Powers and Duties
The DRC shall have the following powers and duties under this LDC:
1.
To review and decide minor development plans (See See2.5.2.A.4.a, Minor Development Plan Procedure).
2.
To review and prepare Technical Staff Reports on the following:
a.
Text amendments (See 2.5.1.C, Text Amendments);
b.
General map amendments (See 2.5.1.D, General Map Amendment);
c.
Site-specific map amendments (See 2.5.1.E, Site-Specific Map Amendment (Rezoning));
d.
Planned developments (See 2.5.1.F, Planned Development);
e.
Special exception permits (See 2.5.1.G, Special Exception Permit);
f.
Development plans
1.
site plans (See 2.5.2.A.4.b.1, Site Plan Procedure); and
2.
Construction site plans (See 2.5.2.A.4.b.2, Construction Site Plan Procedure);
g.
Plats (subdivisions) (See 2.5.2.B, Plat (Subdivision));
h.
Plat vacations (See 2.5.2.D, Plat Vacation ); and
i.
Zoning variances (See 2.5.5.A, Zoning Variance);
C. Chairperson
The Community Development Director shall serve as the Chairperson of the DRC.
D. Membership
The department head of each City department shall serve as a member to the DRC. Department heads may designate a representative from their department to serve as the department member representative on the DRC. The City Attorney is not considered a department head for this purpose and is not a member of the DRC.
2.3.4. COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
A. Powers and Duties
1. The Community Development Department is responsible for the planning functions of the City, and for administering this LDC. The Community Development Director (Director) serves as the head of the Community Development Department. The Community Development Department, through the Director, has the following general powers and duties under this LDC:
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 7
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.3 Advisory and Decision-Making Bodies and Persons
2.3.5 Code Enforcement Officer
a.
To conduct informational meetings (See 2.4.1, Informational Meeting);
b.
To establish requirements for the contents of the applications review under this LDC (see Sec. 2.4, Standard Review Procedures, and Sec. 2.5Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards), and a submittal schedule for review of applications;
c.
To compile and maintain a Procedures Manual;
d.
To serve as professional staff liaison to the City Council and Planning Commission, and to provide technical assistance, as needed;
e.
To maintain a record of all applications reviewed under this LDC.
2. The Community Development Director (Director) has the following additional powers and duties under this LDC:
a.
To review and decide the following::
1.
Minor replats (See 2.5.2.C, Minor Replat);
2.
Concurrency letters (See Article 7: Concurrency Management System);
3.
Capacity reservation certificates (See Article 7: Concurrency Management System);
4.
Arbor permits (See 2.5.4.A, Arbor Permit);
5.
Sign permits (See 2.5.4.B, Sign Permit);
6.
Floodplain permits, with the Floodplain Coordinator (See 2.5.4.C, Floodplain Permit);
7.
Fence permits (See 2.5.4.D, Fence Permit);
8.
Driveway and sidewalk permits (See 2.5.4.E, Driveway and Sidewalk Permit); and
9.
Temporary use permits (See 2.5.4.F, Temporary Use Permit)
10.
Administrative adjustments (See 2.5.5.B, Administrative Adjustment).
b.
To make interpretations (See 2.5.6, Interpretation)
c.
To prepare a Technical Staff Report on Concurrency reservation certificates (See Sec. 2.4.6.B.1, Technical Staff Report)
2.3.5. CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
A. Code Enforcement Officer
1. Establishment
The Mayor is hereby authorized in accordance with State law to appoint one or more Code Enforcement Officers as authorized agents or employees of the City to take action to enforce this LDC and other authorized City codes and ordinances. A Code Enforcement Officer may be referred to as an “Enforcement Officer” in this LDC.
Land Development Code Page 2 8 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.3 Advisory and Decision-Making Bodies and Persons
2.3.6 Code Enforcement Hearing Officer
2. Powers and Duties
A Code Enforcement Officer shall have the following powers and duties under this LDC.
a.
To initiate enforcement proceedings of this LDC and the other codes and ordinances of the City. This power is separate from the powers of the Code Enforcement Hearing Officer, who do not have the power to initiate enforcement proceedings
b.
To present cases to the Code Enforcement Hearing Officer.
c.
To empower code inspectors to ensure code compliance.
2.3.6. CODE ENFORCEMENT HEARING OFFICER
1. Establishment
The City Council is authorized in accordance with State law to appoint one or more Code Enforcement Hearing Officers to provide an equitable, expeditious, effective, and inexpensive method of enforcing this LDC and other authorized City codes and ordinances. A Code Enforcement Hearing Officer may be referred to as a “Hearing Officer” in this LDC.
2. Powers and Duties
A Code Enforcement Hearing Officer shall have all the powers and duties granted to the Code Enforcement Board by State law, including the power to:
a.
Conduct administrative hearings concerning alleged violations of this LDC and other authorized city codes and ordinances—including authority to subpoena alleged violators, witnesses, and evidence to such hearings and to take testimony under oath;
b.
Issue orders having the force of law to command whatever steps are necessary to bring a violation into compliance;
c.
Impose fines, or fines plus enforcement and repair costs, for repeat violations or noncompliance with orders;
d.
Authorize the City Attorney to foreclose on a lien arising from a fine imposed or to sue to recover a money judgment for the amount of the lien; and
e.
Carry out any other powers and duties delegated by the City Council, in accordance with State law
3. Appointment and Terms of Office
a.
The City Council shall appoint, by resolution, at least one qualified person to serve as a Code Enforcement Hearing Officer on an annual basis, and from time to time, based on the City Attorney’s recommendation, City Council may appoint, by resolution, additional Code Enforcement Hearing Officers.
b.
Each Hearing Officer shall serve for a term of one year, though a Hearing Officer may be reappointed for consecutive one-year terms. Although appointed for a
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 9
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.4 Standard Review Procedures
2.3.7 Concurrency-Management Official
one-year term a Hearing Officer shall be subject to removal by the City Council with or without cause from their positions at any time during their term.
c.
Every Hearing Officer shall be an attorney duly licensed to practice law in the State of Florida and a member of good standing with the Florida Bar.
d.
Because only attorneys may hold the position of Hearing Officer, the City Council shall not be required to retain an attorney to represent the Hearing Officer. The City Attorney shall act as Counsel to the Code Enforcement Officers.
e.
No Hearing Officer shall be a city employee.
f.
Conditions of appointment fixed by the appointing resolution may include compensation for the Hearing Officer’s services, and costs such as travel, mileage, and per diem expenses, subject to compliance with the City’s record-keeping and other documentation requirements.
2.3.7. CONCURRENCY-MANAGEMENT OFFICIAL
A. Establishment
The Chief Engineer serves as the Concurrency Management Official to administer Article
7: Concurrency Management System, and related procedures. The Concurrency Management Official may be referred to as “CMO” in this LDC.
B. Powers and Duties
The CMO shall have the following powers and duties under this LDC:
1.
Administer Article 7: Concurrency Management System, and all related procedures;
2.
Solicit appropriate department heads for technical advice necessary to evaluate the capacity of the respective facilities and services in a manner consistent with the time limits established by this LDC; and
3.
Maintain records of the capacity banks of the Concurrency Management System in accordance with Article 7: Concurrency Management System. Only the CMO or a designee shall be authorized to transfer capacity between banks.
Section 2.4. STANDARD REVIEW PROCEDURES
This section sets forth the standard procedures that generally apply to the review of applications for development approval and permit under this LDC. Not all procedures in this section apply to every application. Each subsection in Sec. 2.5, Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards, identifies for a specific type of application, which standard procedures are required, including any additions or modifications that apply.
2.4.1. INFORMATIONAL MEETING
A. Purpose
The purpose of an informational meeting is to provide an opportunity for:
Land Development Code Page 2 10 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.4 Standard Review Procedures
2.4.1 Informational Meeting
1.
The applicant to determine the submittal requirements and the procedures and standards applicable to an anticipated application for a development approval or permit; and
2.
The Director and City staff to become familiar with, and offer the applicant preliminary comments about the scope, features, and impacts of the proposed development, as it relates to LDC requirements.
B. Applicability
1. Informational Meeting Required
An informational meeting between the applicant and the Director and other relevant City staff shall be held before submittal of the following applications:
a.
Zoning district map amendments, except city-initiated amendments (Secs. 2.5.1.D, General Map Amendment, and 2.5.1.E, Site-Specific Map Amendment (Rezoning));
b.
Planned developments (Sec.2.5.1.F, Planned Development);
c.
Preliminary plans for major development plans (Sec. 2.5.2.A, Development Plan); and
d.
Special exceptions (Sec. 2.5.1.G, Special Exception Permit)
2. Informational Meeting Optional
An informational meeting is optional for any other type of application.
C. Informational Meeting Procedure
1. Submission of Materials Prior to Conference
Before an informational meeting is held, the applicant shall request an informational meeting and submit to the Director a narrative describing the general nature and scope of the development proposed in the application, a conceptual plan of the proposed development (if appropriate), and any other information reasonably requested by the Director.
2. Scheduling
Within a reasonable period of time after receipt of a request for an informational meeting, the Director shall schedule the informational meeting time and location.
3. Conference Proceedings
The Director and appropriate City staff shall review the materials submitted by the applicant prior to the conference. At the time of the conference, the Director and appropriate City staff shall seek any needed clarification from the applicant regarding the proposed application, and identify any concerns, problems, or other factors the applicant should consider regarding the proposed application.
4. Effect of Conference
a. The informational meeting is intended to facilitate the application review process. Discussions at the informational meeting are not binding on the City,
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 11
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.4 Standard Review Procedures
2.4.2 Pre-Application Community Meeting
and consequently no final or binding decision is made at an informational meeting.
b. An informational meeting request does not constitute the filing of an application. Processing times for application review do not begin until an application is submitted and determined to be complete in accordance with Sec. 2.3.4, Determination of Completeness.
5. Informational Meeting Waived
The requirement for a informational meeting may be waived by the Director
2.4.2. PRE-APPLICATION COMMUNITY MEETING
A. Purpose
The purpose of the pre-application community meeting is to educate owners and residents of nearby lands about a proposed application that is reviewed under this LDC, and to provide the applicant an opportunity to hear comments and concerns about the proposal and resolve conflicts and outstanding issues where possible, before formally submitting an application. A pre-application community meeting serves as an opportunity for informal communication between the applicant and owners and residents of nearby land, and other residents affected by a development proposal.
B. Applicability
1. Community Meeting Required
A pre-application community meeting is required before any of the following
applications are submitted:
a.
Zoning district map amendments, except city-initiated amendments (Sec. 2.5.1.D, General Map Amendment and Sec. 2.5.1.E, Site-Specific Map Amendment (Rezoning));
b.
Planned developments, (Sec. 2.5.1.F Planned Development); and
c.
Special exceptions (Sec. 2.5.1.G Special Exception Permit).
d.
Additional applications as required by the Director.
2. Community Meeting Optional
A pre-application community meeting may also be held at the applicant’s option before the submission of any development application not identified in Sec. 2.4.2.B.1, Community Meeting Required, above. Pre-application community meetings are particularly encouraged as opportunities for informal communication before submitting any application requiring a public hearing in accordance with Table 2.2.1, Summary Table of Development Review Responsibilities.
3. Community Meeting Waived
The requirement for a community meeting may be waived by the Director.
Land Development Code Page 2 12 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.4 Standard Review Procedures
2.4.2 Pre-Application Community Meeting
C. Pre-Application Community Meeting Procedure
If a pre-application community meeting is conducted, it shall comply with the following requirements.
1. Meeting Location and Time
The meeting shall be held at a place that is convenient and accessible to neighbors residing in close proximity to the land subject to the application. It shall be scheduled to start between 6:00 P.M. and 8:00 P.M. on a weekday, or between 1:00PM and 8:00PM on a weekend It shall be completed before the application is submitted.
2. Notification
a. Mailed Notice
The applicant shall mail notice of the meeting a minimum of 14 days in advance
of the meeting, in a form and manner established by the Procedures Manual, to:
1.
The Director;
2.
The owner of land subject to the application (if different from the applicant);
3.
Any persons to whom mailed notice of a public hearing on the application is required by Sec. 2.4.7.C.2, Mailed Notice Requirements; and
4.
Any organization or person who have registered to receive notice in accordance with Sec. 2.4.7.C.8, Registration to Receive Notice by Mail.
b. Posted Notice
The applicant shall also post notice of the pre-application community meeting on the land subject to an application at least 14 days before the date of the meeting, in a form established by the Procedures Manual.
c. Notice Content
The mailed and posted notices shall state the time and place of the meeting, the purpose of the meeting, include a basic map identifying the land associated with the development, summarize the general nature of the development proposal, and the type of development approval or permit sought.
3. Conduct of Meeting
The meeting shall be open to the public. At the meeting, the applicant shall explain the development proposal and application, inform attendees about the application review process, respond to questions and concerns attendees raise about the proposed application, and discuss ways to resolve conflicts or concerns.
4. Written Summary of Meeting
The applicant shall prepare a written summary of the meeting that includes a list of meeting attendees, a summary of attendee comments and issues discussed related to the development proposal, and any other information the applicant deems appropriate. The meeting summary shall be included with the application materials and be made available to the public for inspection in accordance with Sec. 2.4.3.G, Examination and Copying of Application/Other Documents.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 13
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.4 Standard Review Procedures
2.4.3 Application Submission
5. Response to Summary
Any person attending the community meeting may submit a written response to the applicant’s meeting summary to the Director after the application is determined complete. The response may state that person’s understanding of attendee comments, discuss issues related to the development proposal, and include any other information deemed appropriate. All written responses to the applicant’s summary of the community meeting shall be included with the application materials, and made available for public inspection in accordance with Sec. 2.4.3.G, Examination and Copying of Application/Other Documents.
2.4.3. APPLICATION SUBMISSION
A. Authority to Submit
1. Applications shall be submitted by:
a.
The land owner, or an authorized agent; or
b.
Any other person or entity having a recognized property interest in the land upon which the development is proposed, or their authorized agent.
2.
If the applicant is not the owner of the land, or is a contract purchaser of the land, an affidavit signed by the owner consenting to submission of the application is required.
3.
If the applicant is not the sole owner of the land, an affidavit signed by the other owners consenting to or joining in the application.
B. Application Contents and Form
The Director is authorized to and shall establish the requirements for the content and form for each type of application reviewed under this LDC and place them in a Procedures Manual. The Director may amend and update these application requirements as is determined necessary to ensure effective and efficient development review.
C. Fees
The City Council shall establish the fees required for each type of application submitted under this LDC. The fees shall be included in the Procedures Manual. No application is complete until all required fees are paid in full.
D. Submittal and Schedule
The Director is authorized to and shall establish the application submittal and review schedule (including time frames for review) for the various types of applications. The Director may amend and update these requirements as determined necessary to ensure effective and efficient review under this LDC. The application submittal and review schedule shall be included in the Procedures Manual.
E. Simultaneous Processing of Applications
Whenever two or more forms of review and approval are required under this LDC, the applications may, at the discretion of the Director, be processed simultaneously, so long as all applicable state and local requirements are satisfied. Simultaneous processing of applications may result in additional fees to the applicant.
Land Development Code Page 2 14 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.4 Standard Review Procedures
2.4.4 Determination of Completeness
F. Application Submittal
All applications shall be submitted to the Director, along with the fees required for the application.
G. Examination and Copying of Application/Other Documents
At any time, upon reasonable request and during normal business hours, any person may request to examine a development application, a final Technical Staff Report, and materials submitted at the Director’s office in accordance with Ch. 119, Fla. Stat.
2.4.4. DETERMINATION OF COMPLETENESS
A. Completeness Review
Upon submittal of an application, the Director shall determine whether the application is complete or incomplete within five business days. A complete application is one that:
1.
Contains all application content requirements established for the particular type of application in accordance with Sec. 2.4.3.B, Application Contents;
2.
Is in the form required for submittal of the particular type of application in accordance with Sec. 2.4.3.B, Application Contents;
3.
Includes information in sufficient detail to evaluate the application to determine whether it complies with the appropriate substantive standards of this LDC; and
4.
Is accompanied by the fees established for the particular type of application in accordance with Sec. 2.4.3.C, Fees.
B. Application Incomplete
1.
If it is determined the application is incomplete, the Director shall send written notice to the applicant of the submittal deficiencies and review of the application shall not proceed. The applicant may correct the deficiencies and resubmit the application for completeness determination.
2.
If the applicant fails to resubmit an incomplete application within 45 days after being notified of submittal deficiencies, the application shall be considered withdrawn.
3.
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this subsection, after an application is determined to be incomplete three times, the applicant may request, and the Director shall undertake, processing and review of the application.
C. Application Complete
If the application is determined complete, or if the applicant has requested that the application be processed in accordance with Sec. 2.4.4.B.3, above, the application shall be reviewed in accordance with the procedures and standards of this subsection and this LDC.
2.4.5. APPLICATION AMENDMENT OR WITHDRAWAL
A. Application Amendment
1. An applicant may submit a revised application to the Director after receiving initial staff review comments on the application or on requesting and receiving permission
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 15
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.4 Standard Review Procedures
2.4.6 Staff Review and Action
from an advisory or decision-making body after that body has reviewed but not yet taken action on the application. Revisions shall be limited to changes that directly respond to specific requests or suggestions made by the Director or the advisory or decision-making body, as long as they constitute only minor additions, deletions, or corrections, and do not include significant substantive changes to the plan for development proposed in the application.
2. Any other revisions to the application may be submitted at any time during the review procedure, but the revised application shall be submitted and reviewed as if it were a new application, and may be subject to additional application fees to defray the additional costs of processing the revised application.
B. Application Withdrawal
1.
An applicant may withdraw an application at any time by submitting a letter of withdrawal to the Director.
2.
Applications withdrawn after required notice of any public hearing scheduled for the application shall be subject to limitations on the subsequent submittal of similar applications in accordance with Sec. 2.4.12.D, Limit on Subsequent Similar Applications.
3.
If an application is withdrawn by the applicant, no further review of the application shall take place unless or until a new application (including new application fees) is submitted and determined to be complete. Application fees shall not be refunded for withdrawn applications.
2.4.6. STAFF REVIEW AND ACTION
A. Staff Review and Opportunity to Revise Application
1.
When an application is determined complete, the Director shall distribute the application to City staff, and review agencies, as appropriate, for review and comment.
2.
If there are deficiencies in complying with applicable review standards, the Director shall notify the applicant of these deficiencies and provide the applicant a reasonable opportunity to discuss the deficiencies and revise the application to address them.
B. Application Subject to Staff Recommendation
1. Technical Staff Report
If an application is subject to recommendation to an advisory or decision-making body by the Director or DRC in accordance with Table 2.2.1: Summary Table of Development Review Responsibilities, the Director or Development Review Coordinator of the DRC, as appropriate, shall, following completion of staff review, prepare a Technical Staff Report that:
Land Development Code Page 2 16 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.4 Standard Review Procedures
2.4.7 Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification
a.
Identifies the location of the land for which the application is sought;
b.
Identifies the current development on the land (if any exists), and on surrounding lands, along with the existing zoning district classification(s);
c.
Summarizes the application sought, and the plan of development proposed;
d.
Analyzes whether the application complies with the applicable review standards; and
e.
Recommends action on the application, including any recommended conditions of approval.
2. Distribution and Availability of Staff Report
After completion of the Technical Staff Report, the Director shall transmit the application and report to all advisory or decision-making bodies and persons that review or make a decision on the application in accordance with Table 2.2.1: Summary Table of Development Review Responsibilities. The Director shall also provide the applicant a copy of the Technical Staff Report and make a copy of the report available for examination by the public in accordance with Sec. 2.4.3.G, Examination and Copying of Application/Other Documents, within a reasonable period of time before a public hearing or meeting at which the application is to be considered, if appropriate.
C. Application Subject to Decision by the Director or DRC
1. General
If an application is subject to a final decision by the Director or the DRC in accordance with Table 2.2.1 Summary Table of Development Review Responsibilities, the Director or DRC, as appropriate, shall make a decision on the application, consisting of one of the allowed decisions in, and based on the review standards in Sec. 2.5, Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards, for the specific type of application.
2. Conditions of Approval
If permitted for the particular type of application in accordance with Sec. 2.5, Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards, approval of an application may be subject to conditions of approval. Any conditions of approval shall be expressly set forth in the approval, shall be limited to conditions deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the requirements and standards of the particular application, and shall relate in both type and scope to the anticipated impacts of the proposed development.
2.4.7. SCHEDULING OF PUBLIC HEARING AND PUBLIC NOTIFICATION
A. Public Hearing Scheduling
1. Table 2.4.7.A, Required Public Hearings, identifies the types of applications that require public hearings under this LDC, the review bodies responsible for conducting those public hearings, and the type of required public hearing (standard or quasi-judicial).
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 17
-
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.4 Standard Review Procedures
2.4.7 Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification TABLE2.4.7.A: REQUIRED PUBLIC HEARINGS S:STANDARD PUBLIC HEARING Q: QUASI JUDICIAL PUBLIC HEARING PROCEDURE BOARD CONDUCTING PUBLIC HEARING CITY COUNCIL PLANNING COMMISSION Discretionary Approvals Text Amendment S S Map Amendment General S S Site Specific Q S Planned Development Q S Special Exception -Q Site Development and Platting Major Development Plan Preliminary Q S Final Q -Plat Q S Plat Vacation -Q Relief Variance (Zoning) -Q Appeal Q -
2.
If an application is subject to a public hearing in accordance with Table 2.4.7.A: Required Public Hearings, the Director shall ensure that the public hearing on the application is scheduled for a regularly scheduled meeting of the body conducting the hearing or a meeting specially called for that purpose by such body.
3.
The public hearing on the application shall be scheduled so there is sufficient time for any required Technical Staff Report to be prepared and distributed in accordance with Sec. 2.4.6.B.1, Technical Staff Report, and for public notification in accordance with this subsection.
B. Public Notification
Notification of a public hearing on an application shall be as required by the Florida Statutes, and as shown in Table 2.4.7.B, Summary of Public Notification Requirements, below. Computation of the required time periods shall be according to Sec. 10.1.4, Computation of Time.
Land Development Code Page 2 18 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.4 Standard Review Procedures
2.4.7 Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification
TABLE 2.4.7.B: SUMMARY OF PUBLIC NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS
APPLICATION TYPE
NOTICE REQUIRED
PUBLISHED
WRITTEN
POSTED
Discretionary Approvals
Text Amendment
Publish notice of public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation at least ten calendar days before first hearing of both the Planning Commission and City Council.
None
None
City initiated General and Site-Specific Map Amendments, and Planned Development involving less than 10 contiguous acres
Publish notice of public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation at least 30 calendar days before first public hearing of both the first Planning Commission and City Council.
Mail notice of public hearing at least 14 calendar days before first hearing of both Planning Commission and City Council.
Post notice of public hearing on site at least 14 calendar days before first Planning Commission hearing.
City initiated General and Site-Specific Map Amendments, Planned Development involving 10 contiguous acres or more, and Text Amendment to revise Principal Use
Publish notice of first Planning Commission public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation at least ten calendar days before the hearing. Publish notice of first City Council hearing in a newspaper of general circulation at least seven calendar days before first hearing.
Mail notice of public hearing at least 14 calendar days before first hearing of both the Planning Commission and City Council.
Post notice of public hearing on site at least 14 calendar days before first Planning Commission hearing.
Table
Publish notice of second City Council public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation at least five days before hearing.
General, Site-
Publish notice of
Applicant mails notice
Applicant posts notice
Specific Amendment
public hearing in a
of public hearing at
of public hearing on
initiated by any
newspaper of general
least 14 calendar days
site at least 14
person other than
circulation at least ten
before first hearing of
calendar days before
the City
calendar days before
both the Planning
first Planning
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 19
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.4 Standard Review Procedures
2.4.7 Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification
TABLE 2.4.7.B: SUMMARY OF PUBLIC NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS
APPLICATION TYPE
NOTICE REQUIRED
PUBLISHED
WRITTEN
POSTED
Planned Development
first hearing of both the Planning Commission and City Council.
Commission and City Council.
Commission hearing.
Special Exception Permit
Publish notice of public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation at least ten calendar days before first hearing of the Planning Commission.
Applicant mails notice of public hearing at least 14 calendar days before first hearing of the Planning Commission.
Applicant posts notice of public hearing on site at least 14 calendar days before first Planning Commission hearing.
Relief
Variance
-Applicant
mails notice of public hearing at least 14 calendar days before first Planning Commission hearing.
Applicant posts notice of public hearing on site at least 14 calendar days before first Planning Commission hearing.
Appeal
Applicant mails notice of public hearing at least 14 calendar days before first City Council hearing.
Applicant posts notice of public hearing on site at least 14 calendar days before first City Council hearing.
C. Public Notice Requirements
1. Published Notice Requirements
a.
The Director shall cause a required notice of a public hearing on an application to be prepared and published in a newspaper having general circulation in the City.
b.
Where a published notice is required in accordance with Ch. 166 Fla. Stat., the size and format of the notice shall comply with the requirements of that statute.
2. Mailed Notice Requirements
The applicant shall mail required notice of a public hearing on an application by first class mail, return receipt requested, to the following:
1.
Owner(s) of land subject to the application (if other than the applicant);
2.
Owners of real property within 300 feet of the land subject to an application; and
3.
Organizations and persons who have registered to receive notification of development application public hearings in accordance with Sec. 2.4.7.C.8, Registration to Receive Notice by Mail.
Land Development Code Page 2 20 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.4 Standard Review Procedures
2.4.7 Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification
b.
The owner names and addresses used to mail required notice to owners of neighboring property shall be those shown on the current ad valorem tax rolls of Orange County.
c.
Where neighboring property is part of a townhome, condominium, or timeshare development, the notice may be mailed to the president or manager of the development’s property owners association instead of individual owners.
3. Posted Notice Requirements
a.
The applicant shall place a required posted notice on the land subject to the application, at a location adjacent to each abutting street that is clearly visible to traffic along the street. If no part of the subject land abuts a street, then the notice shall be posted in the right-of-way of the nearest street, and in a manner consistent with the intent of the provisions of this LDC.
b.
Posted notice shall be in a manner established by the Director.
c.
The applicant shall ensure that posted notice is maintained in place until after a final decision on the subject application is rendered by the decision-making body.
d.
The posted notice shall be removed by the applicant within 14 days after a final decision on the application is rendered by the decision-making body.
4. Notice Content
Required public notice shall, at a minimum:
a.
Identify the application;
b.
Describe the nature and scope of the proposed development or action;
c.
Identify the location of land subject to the application (not applicable to notices posted on the subject property);
d.
Identify the date, time, and location of the public hearing(s) being noticed;
e.
Indicate how and where written comments on the application may be submitted before the hearing;
f.
Indicate how and where additional information about the application and review process may be obtained; and
g.
Comply with any other notice content requirements established by State law.
5. Affidavit of Notice
The applicant shall sign an affidavit affirming that any required published, mailed, or posted notices of a public hearing for which they are responsible for providing were provided in accordance with the requirements of this subsection and State law. The affidavit, along with any documentation proving compliance with notice requirements, shall be submitted to the Director no later than 5:00PM on the Friday before the hearing date. The affidavit shall be in a form established by the Director. An application that does not comply with this subsection will not be placed on the agenda or heard at the requested hearing.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 21
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.4 Standard Review Procedures
2.4.8 Deferral of Public Hearing
6. Availability of Hearing Notice for Public Inspection
The Director shall keep a copy of the required published and mailed notices of a public hearing and make them available for inspection by the public during normal business hours.
7. Responsibility for Cost of Notice
The applicant shall be responsible for all costs of providing required notices.
8. Registration to Receive Notice by Mail
Any person in the City may register with the Director to receive mailed written notice of all applications subject to public hearings in accordance with Sec. 2.4.7.C.2 Mailed Notice Requirements. To be eligible for registration, the person shall provide the Director information in a form established by the Director, along with a fee to defray registration and mailing costs. To continue to receive such notice, a person shall reregister every two years (biennially).
2.4.8. DEFERRAL OF PUBLIC HEARING
A. Before Public Hearing Notice
If an application is subject to a public hearing and required notice of the hearing has not yet been provided, the applicant may submit a written request to the Director to defer the public hearing. The Director may grant the request to defer consideration of the application, for good cause.
B. After Public Hearing Notice
If an application is subject to a public hearing and required notice of the hearing has already been provided, the applicant may request that the hearing be deferred by submitting a written request for deferral to the body scheduled to hold the hearing. On receiving such a request, the body may grant the request for good cause, or if finding no good cause for deferral, may proceed to hold the hearing. If the body grants the request for deferral, it shall concurrently set a new hearing date for the application. If a deferral is granted, the application may be subject to additional application fees to defray the additional costs of processing the application.
2.4.9. PUBLIC HEARING PROCEDURES
If the application is subject to a public hearing by an advisory or decision-making body (See Table 2.4.7.A: Required Public Hearings.), the advisory or decision-making body shall hold the public hearing in accordance with the following procedures, as appropriate to the type of hearing.
A. General
1. Rights of All Persons
Any person may appear at the public hearing and submit documents, materials, and other written or oral testimony, either individually or as a representative of an organization. Persons speaking at the hearing shall identify themselves, state their
Land Development Code Page 2 22 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.4 Standard Review Procedures
2.4.9 Public Hearing Procedures
home or business address, and if appearing on behalf of a person or organization,
state the name and mailing address of the person or organization they represent.
2. Restrictions on Presentations
The body conducting the public hearing may place reasonable and equitable time restrictions on the presentation of testimony and the submittal of documents and other materials.
3. Continuance of Hearing
The body conducting the public hearing may, on its own motion or at the request of any person, continue the public hearing to a fixed date, time, and place, for good cause.
4. Record of Hearing Proceedings
The body conducting the public hearing shall record the proceedings by any appropriate means. If a sound recording is made, any person shall be entitled to listen to the recording at a reasonable time.
5. Burden of Proof and Persuasion
The applicant bears the burden of demonstrating that an application complies with applicable review standards. The burden is not on the City or other parties to show that the standards are not met by the applicant.
B. Standard Public Hearings
If the public hearing is a standard hearing (See Table 2.4.7.A: Required Public Hearings), the hearing shall be subject to the following order of proceedings:
1. Opening of Hearing
The person chairing the body conducting the hearing shall open the public hearing.
2. Staff Presentation
The Director shall provide a brief introductory narrative and/or graphic description of the application and present the Technical Staff Report and any prior advisory body findings and recommendations. Members of the body conducting the hearing may ask questions.
3. Applicant Presentation
The applicant or the applicant’s representative shall present any information the applicant deems appropriate, including statements of participants. Members of the body conducting the hearing may ask questions of the applicant, the applicant’s representative, or the witnesses.
4. Public Comment
Any person other than the applicant or the applicant’s representatives or witnesses may be permitted to speak in support of or in opposition to the application.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 23
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.4 Standard Review Procedures
2.4.9 Public Hearing Procedures
5. Response to Presentations and Comments
a.
The applicant may respond to any comments, documents, or materials presented by the public.
b.
The Director may respond to any comments, documents, or materials presented by the applicant or the public.
6. Close of Hearing
The person chairing the body conducting the hearing shall close the public hearing.
C. Quasi-Judicial Hearing Procedures
1. Order of Proceedings
If the public hearing is a quasi-judicial hearing (See Table See Table 2.4.7.A: Required Public Hearings), the hearing shall be subject to the following order of proceedings:
a. Opening of Hearing
The person chairing the body conducting the hearing shall open the public
hearing.
b. Swearing in or Affirmation of Witnesses
The person chairing the body conducting the hearing shall swear in or affirm all
persons who will testify at the hearing, if requested by any party.
c. Staff Presentation
The Director shall provide a brief introductory narrative and/or graphic description of the application and present the Technical Staff Report and any prior advisory body findings and recommendations, including testimony of witnesses. Members of the body conducting the hearing may ask questions of each witness after the witness’s presentation. The applicant and affected parties may also ask questions of each witness.
d. Applicant Presentation
The applicant or the applicant’s representatives shall present any information the applicant deems appropriate, including testimony of witnesses. Members of the body conducting the hearing may ask questions of each witness after the witness’s presentation. The Director and affected parties may also ask questions of each witness.
e. Affected Parties Presentation
Parties affected by the proposed application may present any information the affected party deems appropriate, including testimony of witnesses. Members of the body conducting the hearing may ask questions of each witness after the witness’s presentation. The Director and the applicant may also ask questions of each witness.
f. Public Comment
Any person other than the applicant or the applicant’s representatives or
witnesses may be permitted to speak in support of or in opposition to the
Land Development Code Page 2 24 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.4 Standard Review Procedures
2.4.10 Advisory Body Review and Recommendation
application. Members of the body conducting the hearing may ask questions of each witness after the witness’s presentation. The Director, the applicant, and affected parties may also ask questions of each witness.
g.
Responses to Presentations and Comments
1.
The applicant may respond to any testimony, comments, documents, or materials presented by the Director, affected parties, or the public.
2.
Affected parties may respond to any testimony, comments, documents, or materials presented by the Director, the applicant, or the public.
3.
The Director may respond to any testimony, comments, documents, or materials presented by the applicant, affected parties, or the public.
h.
Conclusions
Affected parties, the applicant, and the Director may present brief conclusionary
statements.
i. Close of Hearings
The person chairing the body conducting the hearing shall close the public
hearing.
2. Evidence
The body conducting the hearing may consider all testimony and evidence it deems competent and material to the application, and may exclude testimony or evidence it determines to be irrelevant, immaterial, incompetent, unreliable, or unduly repetitious.
3. Cross-Examination
Any inquiry under cross-examination shall be limited to matters raised in the direct examination of the witness. No re-direct or re-cross shall be allowed unless requested by the applicant, an affected party, or the Director along with a statement of the desired area of inquiry, and the request is approved by the person chairing the body conducting the hearing. If re-direct or re-cross is allowed, it shall be limited to questions of the witness on issues raised in the cross-examination.
4. Public Hearing Record
The public hearing record shall include the application, the Technical Staff Report, this LDC, any advisory body proceedings and recommendations on the application, all testimony offered at the hearing, and all written materials concerning the application presented or entered into the record at the hearing by the Director, the applicant, affected parties, or the public.
2.4.10. ADVISORY BODY REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION
If an application is subject to a recommendation by the Planning Commission (See Table 2.2.1 Summary Table of Development Review Responsibilities), the Planning Commission shall review and act on the application in accordance with the following procedures:
A. The advisory body shall hold any required public hearing (See Table 2.4.7.A: Required Public Hearings) in accordance with Sec. 2.2.9 Public Hearing Procedures, and consider
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 25
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.4 Standard Review Procedures
2.4.11 Decision-Making Body Hearing, Review, and Decision
the application, relevant support materials, the Technical Staff Report, and any public comments. It shall then recommend one of the decisions authorized for the particular type of application, based on the review standards applicable to the application type, as set forth in Sec. 2.5, Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards. The Planning Commission’s recommendation shall state the factors considered in making the recommendation and the basis or rationale for the recommended decision.
B. If permitted for the particular type of application in accordance with 2.5, Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards, for the particular type of application, the advisory body may recommend conditions of approval. Conditions of approval must relate in both type and extent to the anticipated impacts of the proposed development.
C. The advisory body shall take action as promptly as possible in consideration of the interests of the applicant, affected parties, and citizens of the City.
2.4.11. DECISION-MAKING BODY HEARING, REVIEW, AND DECISION
If an application is subject to a final decision by the City Council or the Planning Commission, the decision-making body shall review and decide the application in accordance with the following procedures.
A. Review and Decision
1. General
a.
The decision-making body shall hold any required public hearing (See Table
2.4.7.A: Required Public Hearings) in accordance with Sec. 2.2.9, Public Hearing Procedures, and consider the application, relevant support materials, the Technical Staff Report, any advisory body recommendations, and any public comments, materials, information, and testimony entered into the record at the hearing. It shall then make one of the decisions authorized for the particular type of application, based on the review standards applicable to the application type, as set forth in Sec. 2.5, Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards. The decision-making body shall clearly state the factors considered in its decision and the basis or rationale for the decision.
b.
In addition, if the application is subject to a quasi–judicial public hearing (See Table 2.4.7.A: Required Public Hearings), the decision-making body’s review and decision shall be based on whether the application meets all applicable requirements of this LDC, based on the entirety of the record before the decision-making body.
c.
Before making its decision, the decision-making body may remand the application to the Planning Commission for further consideration of any issue.
d.
The decision-making body shall take action as promptly as possible in consideration of the interests of the applicant, affected parties, and the citizens of the City.
B. Conditions of Approval
If permitted for the particular type of application in accordance with Sec. 2.5, Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards, approval of an application may be
Land Development Code Page 2 26 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.4 Standard Review Procedures
2.4.12 Post Decision-Making Actions
with conditions. Conditions of approval must relate in both type and extent to the anticipated impacts of the proposed development.
C. Effect of Approval
Approval of an application and development order in accordance with the LDC authorizes only the particular use, plan, or other specific activity approved, and not any other development requiring separate application and approval. In the event that one development approval or permit is a prerequisite to another development approval or permit (e.g., variance approval prior to a development plan approval), development may not take place until all required approvals or permits are obtained. Approval of one development application does not necessarily guarantee approval of any subsequent development application.
D. Lapse of Development Order
1.
Development orders shall expire as provided in Sec. 2.5, Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards, for each type of application. If no expiration period is provided for the specific type of development order, and if no expiration period is imposed as part of the approval by the decision-making body, the development order shall expire if an approved permit authorizing the approved development is not obtained within two years.
2.
A change in ownership of the land that is the subject of a development order shall not affect the established expiration time period for the development order.
3.
A one-year extension of the expiration time period for a specific development order may be granted by the decision-making body that granted the development order upon the applicant’s submission of a written request for extension to the Director before the expiration date, and a showing of good cause.
E. Modification of Development Order
Except as otherwise provided in Sec. 2.5, Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards, for the particular type of application, any modifications of a development order shall require a new application for an amendment to the development order. It must be is submitted and reviewed in accordance with the procedures for its original approval.
2.4.12. POST DECISION-MAKING ACTIONS
A. Notification to Applicant of Decision
Within 14 calendar days after a final decision on an application, the Director shall provide the applicant written notice of the decision and make a copy of the decision available to the public in the Director’s office.
B. Appeal
1.
A party aggrieved or adversely affected by any decision for which no further administrative review procedure is provided by this LDC may seek review of the decision in the courts in accordance with applicable State law.
2.
A party aggrieved by other final decisions may appeal the decision in accordance with the procedures and standards in Sec. 2.5.5.D, Appeals to City Council.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 27
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.4.12 Post Decision-Making Actions
C. Extensions
Except as otherwise provided in Sec. 2.5, Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards, for the particular type of development order, the Director may, on receiving a written request for extension before the expiration date and on a showing of good cause, grant extensions of the expiration time period for up to a cumulative total of one year. Any further extensions shall be subject to approval by the authority that granted the development order, on submittal of a request for extension to the Director before the expiration date, and a showing of good cause.
D. Limit on Subsequent Similar Applications
1. Prior Application Denial
a.
If an application requiring a public hearing is denied, no application proposing the same or similar development on all or part of the same land shall be submitted within one year after the date of denial unless the decision-making body waives this time limit in accordance with Sec. 2.4.12.D.1.b, below.
b.
The owner of land subject to the time limit provided in 2.4.12.D.1.a, above, or the owner’s authorized agent, may submit a written request for waiver of the time limit, along with a fee to defray the cost of processing the request, to the Director, who shall transmit the request to the decision-making body. The decision-making body may grant a waiver of the time limit only on a finding by two-thirds of its membership that the owner or agent has demonstrated that:
1.
There is a substantial change in circumstances relevant to the issues or facts considered during review of the prior application that might reasonably affect the decision-making body’s application of the relevant review standards to the development proposed in the new application; or
2.
New or additional information is available that was not available at the time of review of the prior application and that might reasonably affect the decision-making body’s application of the relevant review standards to the development proposed in the new application; or
3.
The new application proposed to be submitted is materially different from the prior application; or
4.
The final decision on the prior application was based on a material mistake of fact.
2. Prior Application Withdrawal
If an application requiring a public hearing is withdrawn after required notice of the public hearing is provided, no application proposing the same or similar development on all or part of the same land shall be submitted within six months after the date of withdrawal.
Section 2.5. APPLICATION-SPECIFIC REVIEW PROCEDURES AND DECISION STANDARDS
This section establishes, for each type of application under the LDC, the specific review procedure and decision standards that apply, in accordance with Table 2.2.1, Summary Table of Development Review Responsibilities. The following sections identify, for each type of development application:
Land Development Code Page 2 28 Apopka, FL
-
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.1 Discretionary Approvals
•
The purpose of the type of development approval or permit;
•
In what situations application approval is necessary;
•
The standard procedures in Sec. 2.4 Standard Review Procedures, that are required, and applicable modifications of or additions to the standard procedures; and
•
The standards for making a decision on the application.
2.5.1. DISCRETIONARY APPROVALS
A. Annexations
See Ch. 171, Fla. Stat.
B. Comprehensive Plan Amendments
See Ch. 163, Fla. Stat., Process for Adoption of a Comprehensive Plan or Plan Amendment and Process for Adoption of Small-Scale Comprehensive Plan Amendment.
C. Text Amendments
1. Purpose
The purpose of this section is to provide a uniform mechanism for amending the text of the LDC whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, comprehensive plan, or appropriate land use practices justify or require doing so.
2. Text Amendment Procedure
This subsection identifies additions or modifications to the standard review procedures in Sec. 2.4, Standard Review Procedures, that apply to a text amendment. Figure 2.5.1.C.2 identifies key steps in the text amendment procedure. Figure 2.5.1.C.2: Text Amendments Procedure Determination of Completeness Staff Review and Action Pre-Application Community Meeting Optional Informational Meeting Optional Director makes determination Application Submission To Director Scheduling of Public Hearing and Notice Director schedules hearings and provides notice Decision Making Body Hearing, Review, and Decision City Council holds a standard public hearing, makes decision Advisory Body Review and Recommendation Planning Commission holds a standard public hearing, makes recommendation Sec. 2.4.1 Sec. 2.4.2 Sec. 2.4.3 Sec. 2.4.4 Sec. 2.4.10 Sec. 2.4.11 Sec. 2.4.6 Sec. 2.4.7 DRC prepares Technical Staff Report Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 29
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.1 Discretionary Approvals
a. Informational Meeting
Optional (See Sec. 2.4.1, Informational Meeting).
b. Pre-Application Community Meeting
Optional (See Sec. 2.4.2, Pre-Application Community Meeting).
c. Application Submission
Applicable (See 2.4.3, Application Submission). Except applications may be initiated by the City or any person who may submit applications in accordance with Sec. 2.4.3.A, Authority to Submit.
d. Determination of Completeness
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.4, Determination of Completeness).
e. Application Amendment or Withdrawal
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.5, Application Amendment or Withdrawal).
f. Staff Review and Action
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.6, Staff Review and Action). The DRC reviews the application, prepares a Technical Staff Report, and makes a recommendation on the application based on the review standards in Sec. 2.5.1.C.3, Text Amendment Review Standards.
g. Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.7, Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification).
h. Deferral of Public Hearing
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.8, Deferral of Public Hearing).
i. Public Hearing Procedures
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.9, Public Hearing Procedures).
j. Advisory Body Review and Recommendation
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.10, Advisory Body Review and Recommendation). The Planning Commission reviews the application at a standard public hearing and makes a recommendation based on the review standards in Sec. 2.5.1.C.3, Text Amendment Review Standards.
k. Decision-Making Body Hearing, Review and Decision
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.11, Decision-Making Body Hearing, Review, and Decision) The City Council reviews the application at a standard public hearing and makes a decision based on the review standards in Sec. 2.5.1.C.3, Text Amendment Review Standards.
l. Post Decision-Making Actions
Not applicable (See Sec. 2.4.12, Post Decision-Making Actions). If a text amendment is adopted by the City Council, the Director shall place the amendment in the LDC within a reasonable period of time after its adoption.
Land Development Code Page 2 30 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.1 Discretionary Approvals
Approval of a text amendment shall not expire, but the amended text of the LDC is subject to further amendment in accordance with the procedures and standards of this LDC.
3. Text Amendment Review Standards
The advisability of amending the text of the LDC is a matter committed to the legislative discretion of the City Council and is not controlled by any one factor. In determining whether to adopt or deny the proposed text amendment, the City Council shall weigh the relevance of and consider whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment:
a.
Is consistent with the comprehensive plan;
b.
Is in conflict with any provision of this LDC and the City’s Code of Ordinances;
c.
Is required by changed conditions;
d.
Addresses a demonstrated community need;
e.
Is consistent with the purpose and intent of the zoning districts, or would improve compatibility among uses;
f.
Would result in a logical and orderly development pattern;
g.
Would result in significantly adverse impacts on the natural environment, including but not limited to water, air, noise, storm water management, wildlife, vegetation, wetlands, and the natural functioning of the environment; and
h.
Would adversely impact the availability of public facilities to accommodate new growth and development.
D. General Map Amendment
1. Purpose
The purpose of this section is to provide a uniform mechanism for reviewing and deciding proposed general amendments to the Official Zoning District Map whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, comprehensive plan, or appropriate land use practices justify or require doing so.
2. General Map Amendment Procedure
This subsection identifies additions or modifications to the standard review procedures in Sec. 2.4, Standard Review Procedures, that apply to a general map amendment. Figure 2.5.1.D.2 identifies key steps in the general map amendment procedure.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 31
-
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.1 Discretionary Approvals Figure 2.5.1.D.2: General Map Amendments Procedure Determination of Completeness Staff Review and Action Sec. 2.4.12 (A) Pre-Application Community Meeting Required Informational Meeting Required Director makes determination Application Submission To Director Scheduling of Public Hearing and Notice Decision Making Body Hearing, Review, and Decision City Council holds a standard public hearing, makes decision Advisory Body Review and Recommendation Planning Commission holds a standard public hearing, makes recommendation Sec. 2.4.1 Sec. 2.4.2 Sec. 2.4.3 Sec. 2.4.4 Sec. 2.4.10 Sec. 2.4.11 Sec. 2.4.6 Sec. 2.4.7 Notification to Applicant of Decision Director notifies applicant DRC prepares Technical Staff Report Director schedules hearings; Director and Applicant provide notice
a. Informational Meeting
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.1, Informational Meeting).
b. Pre-Application Community Meeting
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.2, Pre-Application Community Meeting).
c. Application Submission
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.3, Application Submission). Except applications may be initiated by the City or any person who may submit applications in accordance with Section 2.4.3.A, Authority to Submit.
d. Determination of Completeness
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.4, Determination of Completeness).
e. Application Amendment or Withdrawal
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.5, Application Amendment or Withdrawal).
f. Staff Review and Action
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.6, Staff Review and Action) The DRC reviews the application, prepares a Technical Staff Report, and makes a recommendation on the application based on the review standards in Sec. 2.5.1.D.3, General Map Amendment Review Standards.
Land Development Code Page 2 32 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.1 Discretionary Approvals
g. Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.7, Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification).
h. Public Hearing Procedures
Applicable (See Sec2.4.9, Public Hearing Procedures).
i. Advisory Body Review and Recommendation
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.10, Advisory Body Review and Recommendation). The Planning Commission reviews the application at a standard public hearing and makes a recommendation based on the review standards in Sec. 2.5.1.D.3, General Map Amendment Review Standards.
j. Decision-Making Body Hearing, Review and Decision
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.11, Decision-Making Body Hearing, Review, and Decision). The City Council reviews the application at a standard public hearing and makes a decision based on the review standards in Sec. 2.5.1.D.3, General Map Amendment Review Standards. The City Council shall conduct two standard public hearings if the application is initiated by the City and proposes to rezone more than ten contiguous acres of land. The City Council’s decision shall be one of the following:
1.
Approval of the application as submitted;
2.
Approval of the application with a reduction of the area proposed to be rezoned;
3.
Approval of a rezoning to a base district that limits development to lower intensities than the base district initially proposed; or
4.
Denial of the application.
k. Post Decision-Making Action
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.12, Post Decision-Making Actions). Except if a general amendment to the Official Zoning District Map is adopted by the City Council, the Director shall place the amendment on the Official Zoning District Map within a reasonable period of time after its adoption. Designation of a zoning district on the Official Zoning District Map shall note the ordinance approving the zoning district classification. Approval of a general amendment to the Official Zoning District Map shall not expire, but the Official Zoning District Map of the LDC is subject to further amendment in accordance with the procedures and standards of this LDC.
3. General Map Amendment Review Standards
The advisability of a general amendment to the Official Zoning District Map is a matter committed to the legislative discretion of the City Council and is not controlled by any one factor. In determining whether to adopt or deny a proposed general zoning district map amendment, the Council shall weigh the relevance of and consider whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment:
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 33
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.1 Discretionary Approvals
a.
Is consistent with and furthers the goals, objectives and policies of the comprehensive plan and other adopted City plans;
b.
Is in conflict with any provisions of the LDC;
c.
Addresses a demonstrated community need;
d.
Is required by changed conditions;
e.
Is compatible with existing and proposed uses surrounding the subject land, and is the appropriate zoning district for the land;
f.
Would result in a logical and orderly development pattern;
g.
Would not result in significant adverse impacts on the natural environment— including, but not limited to, water, air, noise, stormwater management, wildlife, vegetation, wetlands, and the natural functioning of the environment.; and
h.
Would result in development that is adequately served by public facilities (e.g., streets, potable water, sewerage, stormwater management, solid waste collection and disposal, schools, parks, police, and fire and emergency medical facilities).
E. Site-Specific Map Amendment (Rezoning)
1. Purpose
The purpose of this section is to provide a uniform mechanism for amending the Official Zoning District Map whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, comprehensive plan, or appropriate land use practices justify or require doing so.
2. Site-Specific Map Amendment Procedure
This subsection identifies additions or modifications to the standard review procedures in Sec. 2.4, Standard Review Procedures, that apply to a site-specific (rezoning) map amendment. Figure 2.5.1.E.2 identifies key steps in the site-specific (rezoning) map amendment procedure.
Land Development Code Page 2 34 Apopka, FL
-
-
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.1 Discretionary Approvals Figure 2.5.1.E.2: Site-Specific Map Amendment (Rezoning) Procedure Determination of Completeness Staff Review and Action Sec. 2.4.12 (A) Pre-Application Community Meeting Required Informational Meeting Required Director makes determination Application Submission To Director Scheduling of Public Hearing and Notice Decision Making Body Hearing, Review, and Decision Advisory Body Review and Recommendation Planning Commission holds a standard public hearing, makes recommendation or decision City Council holds a quasi judicial public hearing, makes decision (conditions allowed) Sec. 2.4.1 Sec. 2.4.2 Sec. 2.4.3 Sec. 2.4.4 Sec. 2.4.10 Sec. 2.4.11 Sec. 2.4.6 Sec. 2.4.7 Notification to Applicant of Decision Director notifies applicant DRC prepares Technical Staff Report Director schedules hearings; Director and Applicant provide notice
a. Informational Meeting
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.1, Informational Meeting).
b. Pre-Application Community Meeting
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.2, Pre-Application Community Meeting).
c. Application Submission
Applicable (See 2.4.3, Application Submission).
d. Determination of Completeness
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.4, Determination of Completeness).
e. Application Amendment or Withdrawal
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.5, Application Amendment or Withdrawal).
f. Staff Review and Action
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.6, Staff Review and Action). The DRC reviews the application, prepares a Technical Staff Report, and makes a recommendation on the application based on the review standards in Sec. 2.5.1.E.3, Site-Specific Map Amendment (Rezoning) Review Standards.
g. Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.7, Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification).
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 35
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.1 Discretionary Approvals
h. Deferral of Public Hearing
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.8, Deferral of Public Hearing).
i. Public Hearing Procedures
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.9, Public Hearing Procedures).
j. Advisory Body Review and Recommendation
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.10, Advisory Body Review and Recommendation). The Planning Commission reviews the application at a standard hearing and makes a recommendation based on the review standards in Sec. 2.5.1.E.3, Site-Specific Map Amendment (Rezoning) Review Standards.
k. Decision-Making Body Review and Decision
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.11, Decision-Making Body Hearing, Review, and Decision). The City Council reviews the application at a quasi-judicial hearing and makes a decision based on the review standards in Sec. 2.5.1.E.3, Site-Specific Map Amendment (Rezoning) Review Standards. The City Council shall conduct two quasi-judicial public hearings if the application is initiated by the City and proposes to rezone more than ten contiguous acres of land. The City Council’s decision shall be one of the following:
1.
Approval of the application as submitted;
2.
Approval of the application with a reduction of the area proposed to be rezoned;
3.
Approval of a rezoning to a base district that limits development to lower intensities than the base district initially proposed; or
4.
Denial of the application.
l. Post Decision-Making Action
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.12, Post Decision-Making Actions). Except if a site-specific amendment (rezoning) to the Official Zoning District Map is adopted by the City Council, the Director shall place the amendment on the Official Zoning District Map within a reasonable period of time after its adoption. Designation of a zoning district on the Official Zoning District Map shall note the ordinance approving the zoning district classification. Approval of a site-specific amendment (Rezoning) to the Official Zoning District Map shall not expire, but the Official Zoning District Map of the LDC is subject to further amendment in accordance with the procedures and standards of this LDC.
3. Site-Specific Map Amendment (Rezoning) Review Standards
Site-specific amendments to the Official Zoning District Map are a matter subject to quasi-judicial review by the City Council and constitute the implementation of the general land use policies established in this LDC and the comprehensive plan. In determining whether to adopt or deny a proposed site-specific zoning district map amendment (Rezoning), the City shall consider:
Land Development Code Page 2 36 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.1 Discretionary Approvals
a.
Whether the applicant has provided, as part of the record of the public hearing(s) on the application, competent substantial evidence that the proposed amendment:
1.
Is consistent with and furthers the goals, objectives, and policies of the comprehensive plan and all other applicable City-adopted plans;
2.
Is not in conflict with any portion of this LDC;
3.
Addresses a demonstrated community need;
4.
Is compatible with existing and proposed uses surrounding the subject land, and is the appropriate zoning district for the land;
5.
Would result in a logical and orderly development pattern;
6.
Would not adversely affect the property values in the area;
7.
Would result in development that is adequately served by public facilities (roads, potable water, wastewater, solid waste, storm water, schools, parks, police, and fire and emergency medical facilities); and
8.
Would not result in significantly adverse impacts on the natural environment—including, but not limited to, water, air, noise, storm water management, wildlife, vegetation, wetlands, and the natural functioning of the environment; and
b.
If the applicant demonstrates that the proposed amendment meets the criteria in subsection a. above, whether the current zoning district designation accomplishes a legitimate public purpose.
F. Planned Development
1. Purpose
Planned developments are amendments to the Official Zoning District Map that are planned and developed under unified control and that allow for flexible standards and procedures that are conducive to creating more mixed-use, pedestrian-oriented, and otherwise higher quality development, as well as community benefits and amenities, than could be achieved through base zoning district regulations. The purpose of this subsection is to provide a uniform mechanism for amending the Official Zoning District Map to reclassify land to any of the Planned Development (PD) zoning districts established in Article 3: Zoning Districts.
2. Scope
A planned development is established by amendment of the Official Zoning District Map to rezone land to a planned development zoning district classification that is defined by a PD Plan and PD Agreement. Subsequent development within the PD district occurs through the approval of a development plan (major or minor) and plat review, as appropriate, which ensure compliance with the PD Plan/PD Agreement.
3. Planned Development Procedure
This subsection identifies additions or modifications to the standard review procedures in Sec. 2.4, Standard Review Procedures, that apply to a planned
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 37
-
-
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.1 Discretionary Approvals
development. Figure 2.5.1.F.3 identifies key steps in the planned development procedure. Figure 2.5.1.F.3: Planned Development Procedure Determination of Completeness Staff Review and Action Sec. 2.4.12 (A) Pre-Application Community Meeting Required Informational Meeting Required Director makes determination Application Submission To Director Scheduling of Public Hearing and Notice Decision Making Body Hearing, Review, and Decision City Council holds a quasi judicial public hearing, makes decision (conditions allowed) Advisory Body Review and Recommendation Planning Commission holds a standard hearing, makes recommendation Sec. 2.4.1 Sec. 2.4.2 Sec. 2.4.3 Sec. 2.4.4 Sec. 2.4.10 Sec. 2.4.11 Sec. 2.4.6 Sec. 2.4.7 Notification to Applicant of Decision Director notifies applicant DRC prepares Technical Staff Report Director schedules hearings; Director and Applicant provide notice
a. Informational Meeting
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.1, Informational Meeting).
b. Pre-Application Community Meeting
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.2, Pre-Application Community Meeting).
c. Application Submission
Applicable (See 2.4.3, Application Submission). Except applications may be initiated only by the owner(s) of all property included in the proposed planned development district. The application shall include a PD Plan and PD Agreement that:
1.
Depicts the general configuration and relationship of the principal elements of the proposed development in the PD district, including uses, general building types, density/intensity, resource protection, pedestrian and vehicular circulation, open space, public facilities, and phasing;
2.
Specifies terms and conditions defining development parameters (in the PD Agreement);
3.
Provides for environmental mitigation;
4.
Outlines how public facilities will be provided to serve the planned development; and
Land Development Code Page 2 38 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.1 Discretionary Approvals
5. Provides for management and maintenance of development incorporated in the PD Plan/PD Agreement.
d. Determination of Completeness
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.4, Determination of Completeness).
e. Application Amendment or Withdrawal
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.5, Application Amendment or Withdrawal).
f. Staff Review and Action
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.6, Staff Review and Action). The DRC reviews the application, prepares a Technical Staff Report, and makes a recommendation on the application based on the review standards in Sec. 2.5.1.F.4, Planned Development Review Standards.
g. Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.7, Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification).
h. Deferral of Public Hearing
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.8, Deferral of Public Hearing).
i. Public Hearing Procedures
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.9, Public Hearing Procedures).
j. Advisory Body Review and Recommendation
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.10, Advisory Body Review and Recommendation). The Planning Commission reviews the application at a standard hearing and makes a recommendation based on the review standards in Sec. 2.5.1.F.4, Planned Development Review Standards.
k. Decision-Making Body Review and Decision
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.11, Decision-Making Body Hearing, Review, and Decision). The City Council reviews the application at a quasi-judicial hearing and make a decision based on the review standards in Sec. 2.5.1.F.4, Planned Development Review Standards. The City Council’s decision shall be one of the following:
1.
Approval of the application subject to the PD Plan/PD Agreement included in the application;
2.
Approval of the application subject to additional or modified conditions related to the PD Plan/PD Agreement; or
3.
Denial of the application.
l. Post Decision-Making Action
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.12, Post Decision-Making Actions). Except for the following:
1. If a planned development Official Zoning District Map amendment is adopted by the City Council, the Director shall place the amendment on the Official
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 39
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.1 Discretionary Approvals
2.
3.
4.
Zoning District Map within a reasonable period of time after its adoption, with appropriate notations. Designation of a planned development district on the Official Zoning District Map shall note the ordinance approving the zoning district classification.
Lands rezoned to a PD zoning district shall be subject to the approved PD Plan/PD Agreement. The PD Plan/PD Agreement is binding on the land as an amendment to the Official Zoning District Map. The PD Plan/PD Agreement shall be binding on the landowners and their successors and assigns, and shall constitute the development regulations for the land. Development of the land shall be limited to the uses, intensity and density, configuration, and all other elements and conditions set forth in the PD Plan/PD Agreement. The applicant may apply for and obtain subsequent development approval and permits necessary to implement the PD Plan/PD Agreement in accordance with the appropriate procedures and standards set forth in this LDC. Any development approvals or permits shall be in substantial compliance with the PD Plan/PD Agreement.
Approval of the classification of land to a PD zoning district does not lapse, except approval of the PD Plan/PD Agreement shall automatically lapse if no application for a development plan (major or minor) or plat for any portion of the development described by the approved PD Plan/PD Agreement is submitted within five years after approval of the planned development district or any other expiration period approved as part of the PD Plan/PD Agreement—or an extension of such time period that is authorized in accordance with provisions in the PD Plan/PD Agreement. If a PD Plan/PD Agreement lapses, the owner of the PD-zoned land may apply to amend the planned development zoning classification to incorporate a new PD Plan/PD Agreement, or apply to reclassify the site to another base district.
Subsequent applications for a development approval or permit within an approved PD district may include minor deviations from the PD Plan/PD Agreement, without the need to amend the PD Plan/PD Agreement, provided such deviations are limited to changes that the Director determines:
(a)
Address technical considerations that could not reasonably be anticipated during the planned development approval process;
(b)
Comply with applicable City codes, rules, and regulations, without the need for a variance that is expressly authorized by the PD Agreement; and
(c)
Have no material effect on the character of the approved PD district, and the basic concept and terms of the PD Plan/PD Agreement. These may include, but are not limited to, the following:
i. Structural alterations that do not significantly affect the basic size, form, style, and appearance of principal structures;
ii. Minor changes in the location and configuration of streets and driveways that do not adversely affect vehicular access and circulation on or off the site of the change;
Land Development Code Page 2 40 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.1 Discretionary Approvals
iii. Minor changes in the location or configuration of buildings, parking areas, landscaping, or other site features;
iv.
Minor changes in the location and configuration of public infrastructure facilities that do not have a significant impact on the City’s utility and stormwater management systems; and
v.
Increases of five percent or less in the total number of parking spaces.
A development order for a planned development district and PD Plan/PD Agreement may be amended only in accordance with the procedures and standards for its original approval.
4. Planned Development Review Standards
Review of and the decision on an application for a planned development district shall be based on compliance of the proposed zoning reclassification and PD Plan/PD Agreement with the review standards in Sec. 2.5.1.E.3 Site-Specific Map Amendment (Rezoning) Review Standards, and the standards for the proposed type of PD district in Sec. Section 3.7, Planned Development District.
G. Special Exception Permit
1. Purpose
A use designated as a special exception in Table 4.2.2.C: Principal Use Table, in a particular zoning district, is a use that may be appropriate in the district, but because of its nature, extent, and external effects, requires special consideration of its location, design, and methods of operation before it can be deemed appropriate in the district and compatible with its surroundings. The purpose of this section is to establish a uniform mechanism for the review of special exceptions to ensure they are appropriate for the location and zoning district where they are proposed.
2. Applicability
A Special Exception Permit approved in accordance with this section is required before development of any use designated as a special exception in Table 4.2.2.C: Principal Use Table.
3. Special Exception Procedure
This subsection identifies additions or modifications to the standard review procedures in Sec. 2.4, Standard Review Procedures, that apply to a special exception permit. Figure 2.5.1.G.3 identifies key steps in the special exception permit procedure.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 41
-
-
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.1 Discretionary Approvals Figure 2.5.1.G.3: Special Exception Permit Procedure Determination of Completeness Staff Review and Action Sec. 2.4.12 (A) Pre-Application Community Meeting Required Informational Meeting Required Director makes determination Application Submission To Director Scheduling of Public Hearing and Notice Director schedules hearings; Director and Applicant provide notice Decision Making Body Hearing, Review, and Decision Planning Commission holds a quasi judicial public hearing, makes decision (conditions allowed) Sec. 2.4.1 Sec. 2.4.2 Sec. 2.4.3 Sec. 2.4.4 Sec. 2.4.11 Sec. 2.4.6 Sec. 2.4.7 Sec. 2.4.12 (B) Notification to Applicant of Decision Director notifies applicant DRC prepares Technical Staff Report Appeal to City Council Optional
a. Informational Meeting
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.1, Informational Meeting).
b. Pre-Application Community Meeting
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.2, Pre-Application Community Meeting).
c. Application Submission
Applicable (See 2.4.3, Application Submission).
d. Determination of Completeness
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.4, Determination of Completeness).
e. Application Amendment or Withdrawal
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.5, Application Amendment or Withdrawal).
f. Staff Review and Action
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.6, Staff Review and Action). The DRC reviews the application, prepares a Technical Staff Report, and makes a recommendation on the application based on the review standards in Sec. 2.5.1.G.4, Special Exception Permit Review Standards.
g. Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.7, Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification).
Land Development Code Page 2 42 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.1 Discretionary Approvals
h. Deferral of Public Hearing
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.8, Deferral of Public Hearing).
i. Public Hearing Procedures
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.9, Public Hearing Procedures).
j. Advisory Body Review and Recommendation
Not Applicable.
k. Decision-Making Body Hearing, Review and Recommendation
Applicable. (See Sec 2.4.11, Decision-Making Body Hearing, Review, and Decision). The Planning Commission reviews the application at a quasi-judicial hearing and makes a decision based on the review standards in Sec. 2.5.1.G.4, Special Exception Permit Review Standards. The Planning Commission’s decision shall be one of the following:
1.
Approval of the application;
2.
Approval of the application subject to conditions; or
3.
Denial of the application
l. Post Decision-Making Action
Applicable. (See Sec. 2.4.12 Post Decision-Making Actions). Except for the following:
1.
A development order approving a special exception permit authorizes the submittal of an application for any other applications that may be required before the development authorized by the special exception permit Is constructed or established.
2.
A development order approving a special exception permit shall automatically expire if the development authorized by the special exception permit is not established or substantially commenced within two years after the date of the development order approval, or an extension of this time period is authorized in accordance with Sec. 2.4.11.D, Lapse of Development Order.
3.
A development order approving a special exception permit shall automatically expire if the authorized development is discontinued and not resumed for a period of one year.
4.
Subsequent applications for other permits for the development authorized by a special exception permit may include minor deviations from the approved plans and conditions. Such deviations are limited to changes that the Director finds:
(a)
Address technical considerations that could not reasonably be anticipated during the special exception permit approval process; and
(b)
Would not:
i. Materially alter the drainage, streets, or other engineering design;
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 43
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.1 Discretionary Approvals
ii. Adversely impact the management of stormwater quality or stormwater quantity;
iii. Substantially affect the terms of the original approval; or
iv. Result in significant adverse impacts on the surrounding lands or the City at large.
5. A development order for a special exception permit may be amended only in accordance with the procedures and standards for its original approval.
4. Special Exception Permit Review Standards
A special exception permit shall be approved only on a finding there is competent substantial evidence in the record that the proposed special exception use:
a.
Will be consistent with the goals, objectives, and policies of the comprehensive plan;
b.
Will comply with all applicable zoning district standards;
c.
Will comply with all standards in Sec. 4.2.3, Standards Specific to Principal Uses, Standards for Specific Principal Uses;
d.
Will be appropriate for its location and is compatible with the general character of surrounding lands and the uses permitted in the zoning district;
e.
Will be located a minimum of 1,000 feet from any other existing like use in nonresidential districts, and 1,500 feet in residential districts. This distance requirement shall apply whether the existing like use is a permitted "use by right" or a special exception use;
f.
Will adequately screen, buffer, or otherwise minimize adverse visual impacts on adjacent lands;
g.
Will ensure that no site lighting source shall negatively impact adjacent properties and rights-of-way;
h.
Will maintain safe and convenient ingress and egress and traffic flow onto and through the site by vehicles and pedestrians, and safe road conditions around the site;
i.
Will avoid significant adverse odor, noise, glare, and vibration impacts on surrounding lands regarding refuse collection, service delivery, parking and loading, signs, lighting, and other site elements;
j.
Will not have an adverse impact on land values and the ability of neighboring lands to develop uses permitted in the zoning district;
k.
Will avoid significant deterioration of water and air resources, scenic resources, and other natural resources;
l.
Will not overburden existing public facilities and services, including, but not limited to, streets and other transportation facilities, schools, potable water facilities, sewage disposal, stormwater management, and police and fire protection facilities; and
m.
Will comply with all other relevant City, State, and federal laws and regulations.
Land Development Code Page 2 44 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.2 Site Development and Platting
2.5.2. SITE DEVELOPMENT AND PLATTING
A. Development Plan (Major and Minor)
1. Purpose
The purpose of this section is to establish a uniform mechanism to ensure that the layout, form, and design of proposed development complies with the standards of this LDC and all other City regulations.
2. Applicability
a. General
The procedures and standards in this section apply to the review of and decision on applications for major and minor development plans. Approval of a development plan (major or minor) is required prior to the issuance of a building permit, unless exempted in accordance with Sec. 2.5.2.A.2.b, Exemptions
b. Exemptions
The following types of development are exempt from the requirements of
development plan (major or minor) review:
1.
Permits for alteration or rehabilitation with no change in the gross floor area;
2.
Canopies attached to buildings or freestanding canopies;
3.
Fences and walls;
4.
Decks, gazebos, patios, or other improvements typically associated with residential development;
5.
Generators or other mechanical equipment for operation of a permitted use on site;
6.
Ordinary maintenance;
7.
Signage;
8.
Resurfacing, restriping, or adding landscaping and/or stormwater management facilities to existing parking and loading facilities;
9.
Restoration or reconstruction of a nonconforming building or structure;
10.
Development of single-family detached dwelling;
11.
Permits for grading that include the installation of infrastructure which is essential to the future development of a site with an approved development plan, including streets, utilities, or stormwater management facilities.
3. Major and Minor Development Plan Distinguished
There are two types of development plan review under this LDC: major development plans and minor development plans.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 45
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.2 Site Development and Platting
a.
Major Development Plan
1. The following development, unless exempted in accordance with 2.5.2.A.2.b, Exemptions , above, shall receive major development plan approval prior to the issuance of a building permit:
(a)
Developments of 25 or more residential dwelling units;
(b)
Development of 25,000 square feet or more of nonresidential floor area; and
(c)
Development of a mixed-use project with more than 25 residential dwelling units and/or more than 25,000 square feet of floor area.
(d)
Developments determined by the Director to have a potentially significant impact on the need for public facilities, or on environmentally sensitive lands.
b.
Minor Development Plan
1. All development that is not subject to major development plan approval in accordance with Sec. 2.5.2.A.3.a.1 above, or exempted in accordance with Sec. 2.5.2.A.2, above, shall receive approval of a minor development plan prior to the issuance of building permit.
4. Development Plan Procedures
a. Minor Development Plan Procedure
This subsection identifies additions or modifications to the standard review procedures in Sec. 2.4, Standard Review Procedures, that apply to a minor development plan. Figure 2.5.2.A.4.a identifies key steps in the minor development plan procedure. Figure 2.5.2.A.4.a: Minor Development Plan Procedure Determination of Completeness Staff Review and Action Sec. 2.4.12 (A) Informational Meeting Optional Director makes determination Sec. 2.4.1 Sec. 2.4.3 Sec. 2.4.4 Sec. 2.4.6 Sec. 2.4.12 (B) Application Submission To Director Notification to Applicant of Decision Director notifies applicant DRC prepares Technical Staff Report, makes a decision (conditions allowed) Appeal Optional Land Development Code Page 2 46 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.2 Site Development and Platting
1. Informational Meeting
Optional (See Sec. 2.4.1, Informational Meeting).
2. Pre-Application Community Meeting
Not Applicable.
3. Application Submission
Applicable (See 2.4.3, Application Submission).
4. Determination of Completeness
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.4, Determination of Completeness).
5. Application Amendment or Withdrawal
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.5, Application Amendment or Withdrawal).
6. Staff Review and Action
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.6, Staff Review and Action). The DRC reviews the application and makes a decision based on the review standards in Sec. 2.5.2.A.5, Development Plan (Major and Minor) Review Standards.
7. Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification
Not Applicable.
8. Public Hearing Procedures
Not Applicable.
9. Advisory Body Review and Recommendation
Not Applicable.
10. Decision-making Body Review and Decision
Not Applicable.
11. Post Decision-Making Action
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.12, Post Decision-Making Actions).
b. Major Development Plan
A major development plan has a two-step procedure: (1) a site plan and (2) a construction site plan.
1. Site Plan Procedure
This subsection identifies additions or modifications to the standard review procedures in Sec. 2.4, Standard Review Procedures, that apply to a site plan for major development plan. Figure 2.5.2.A.4.b.1 identifies key steps in the site plan for major development plan procedure.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 47
-
-
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.2 Site Development and Platting Figure 2.5.2.A.4.b.1: Site Plan for Major Development Plan Procedure Determination of Completeness Staff Review and Action Sec. 2.4.12 (A) Pre-Application Community Meeting Required Informational Meeting Required Director makes determination Application Submission To Director Scheduling of Public Hearing and Notice Decision Making Body Hearing, Review, and Decision City Council holds a quasi judicial public hearing, makes decision (conditions allowed) Advisory Body Review and Recommendation Planning Commission holds a standard public hearing, makes recommendation or decision Sec. 2.4.1 Sec. 2.4.2 Sec. 2.4.3 Sec. 2.4.4 Sec. 2.4.10 Sec. 2.4.11 Sec. 2.4.6 Sec. 2.4.7 Notification to Applicant of Decision Director notifies applicant DRC prepares Technical Staff Report Director schedules hearings; Director and Applicant provide notice
(a) Informational Meeting
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.1, Informational Meeting).
(b) Pre-Application Community Meeting
Optional (See Sec. 2.4.2, Pre-Application Community Meeting).
(c) Application Submission
Applicable (See 2.4.3, Application Submission).
(d) Determination of Completeness
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.4, Determination of Completeness).
(e) Application Amendment or Withdrawal
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.5, Application Amendment or Withdrawal).
(f) Staff Review and Action
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.6, Staff Review and Action). The DRC reviews the application and prepares a Technical Staff Report.
(g) Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.7, Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification).
Land Development Code Page 2 48 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.2 Site Development and Platting
(h) Deferral of Public Hearing
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.8, Deferral of Public Hearing).
(i) Public Hearing Procedures
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.9, Public Hearing Procedures).
(j) Advisory Body Review and Recommendation
Applicable, (See Sec 2.3.10, Advisory Body Review and Recommendation). The Planning Commission reviews the application at a standard hearing and makes a recommendation based on the review standards in Sec. 2.5.2.A.5, Development Plan (Major and Minor) Review Standards.
(k) Decision-Making Body Hearing, Review and Decision
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.11, Decision-Making Body Hearing, Review, and Decision). The City Council reviews the application at a quasi-judicial hearing and makes a decision based on the review standards in Sec. 2.5.2.A.5, Development Plan (Major and Minor) Review Standards. The City Council’s decision shall be one of the following:
i. Approval of the application;
ii. Approval of the application subject to modification and/or conditions; or
iii. Denial of the application.
(l) Post Decision-Making Actions
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.12, Post Decision-Making Actions).
2. Construction Site Plan Procedure
This subsection identifies additions or modifications to the standard review procedures in Sec. 2.4, Standard Review Procedures, that apply to a construction site plan for major development plan. Figure 2.5.2.A.4.b.2 identifies key steps in the construction site plan for major development plan procedure.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 49
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.2 Site Development and Platting Figure 2.5.2.A.4.b.2: Construction Site Plan for Major Development Plan Procedure Determination of Completeness Staff Review and Action Sec. 2.4.12 (A) Pre-Application Community Meeting Optional Sec. 2.4.1 Sec. 2.4.2 Sec. 2.4.3 Sec. 2.4.4 Sec. 2.4.6 Informational Meeting Optional Director makes determination Application Submission To Director Notification to Applicant of Decision Director notifies applicant DRC prepares Technical Staff Report and makes a decision.
(a) Informational Meeting
Optional (See Sec. 2.4.1, Informational Meeting).
(b) Pre-Application Community Meeting
Optional (See Sec. 2.4.2, Pre-Application Community Meeting).
(c) Application Submission
Applicable (See 2.4.3, Application Submission).
(d) Determination of Completeness
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.4, Determination of Completeness).
(e) Application Amendment or Withdrawal
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.5, Application Amendment or Withdrawal).
(f) Staff Review and Action
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.6, Staff Review and Action). The DRC reviews the application, prepares a Technical Staff Report based on the standards in 2.5.2.A.5, Development Plan (Major and Minor) Review Standards, and makes a decision. The DRC’s decision shall be one of the following:
i. Approval of the application;
ii. Denial of the application.
(g) Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification
Not Applicable.
(h) Deferral of Public Hearing
Not Applicable.
Land Development Code Page 2 50 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.2 Site Development and Platting
(i) Public Hearing Procedures
Not Applicable.
(j) Advisory Body Review and Recommendation
Not Applicable.
(k) Decision-Making Body Hearing, Review and Decision
Not Applicable.
(l) Post Decision-Making Actions
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.12, Post Decision-Making Actions).
5. Development Plan (Major and Minor) Review Standards
A development plan (major or minor) shall only be approved upon a finding that the applicant demonstrates there is competent substantial evidence in the record all of the following standards are met:
a.
The proposed development and uses in the development plan comply with Article 3: Zoning Districts, and Article 4: Use Regulations;
b.
The development proposed in the development plan and its general layout and design comply with all the standards in Article 5: Development Standards, and Article 6: Environmental Standards;
c.
The development proposed in the development plan complies with all conditions of approval in any development approval or permit to which the plan is subject; and
d.
The development proposed in the development plan complies with all other applicable standards in this LDC and all other City regulations; and
e.
If any part of the development plan requires a plat, the plat is approved in accordance with Sec. 2.5.2.B, Plat (Subdivision), and is in substantial conformance with the development plan.
B. Plat (Subdivision)
1. Purpose
The purpose of this section is to provide a uniform means for the approval of divisions of land and to ensure that plats (subdivisions) promote the health, safety, convenience, order, prosperity and welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the City by:
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 51
-
-
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.2 Site Development and Platting
a.
Providing for the orderly growth and development of the City;
b.
Coordinating streets and roads within proposed plat with the City’s street system and transportation plans, and with other public facilities;
c.
Providing rights-of-way for streets and utility easements;
d.
Avoiding congestion and overcrowding, and encouraging the proper arrangement of streets in relation to existing or planned streets;
e.
Ensuring there is adequate open space and recreation facilities to serve development; and
f.
Ensuring there is proper recordation of land ownership or property owner association records, where applicable.
2. Applicability
Approval of a plat in accordance with the provisions of this section is required before the division of land (whether improved or unimproved) into three or more lots, parcels, tracts, tiers, blocks, sites, units, or any other division of land.
3. Plat (Subdivision) Procedure
This subsection identifies additions or modifications to the standard review procedures in Sec. 2.4, Standard Review Procedures, that apply to a plat. Figure
2.5.2.B.3 identifies key steps in the plat procedure. Figure 2.5.2.B.3: Plat (Subdivision) Procedure Determination of Completeness Staff Review and Action Sec. 2.4.12 (A) Informational Meeting Optional Director makes determination Application Submission To Director Scheduling of Public Hearing and Notice Decision Making Body Hearing, Review, and Decision City Council holds a quasi judicial public hearing, makes decision (conditions allowed) Notification to Applicant of Decision Director notifies applicant Sec. 2.4.1 Sec. 2.4.3 Sec. 2.4.4 Sec. 2.4.11 Sec. 2.4.6 Sec. 2.4.7 Sec. 2.4.10 DRC prepares Technical Staff Report Director schedules hearings; Director and Applicant provide notice Advisory Body Review and Recommendation Planning Commission holds a standard public hearing, makes recommendation
a. Informational Meeting
Optional (See Sec. 2.4.1, Informational Meeting).
Land Development Code Page 2 52 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.2 Site Development and Platting
b. Pre –Application Community Meeting
Not Applicable.
c. Application Submission
Applicable (See Sec.2.4.3, Application Submission).
d. Determination of Completeness
Applicable (See Sec2.4.4, Determination of Completeness).
e. Application Amendment or Withdrawal
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.5, Application Amendment or Withdrawal).
f. Staff Review and Action
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.6, Staff Review and Action). The DRC reviews the
application and prepares a Technical Staff Report.
g. Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.7, Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification).
h. Deferral of Public Hearing
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.8, Deferral of Public Hearing).
i. Public Hearing Procedures
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.9, Public Hearing Procedures).
j. Advisory Body Review and Recommendation
Applicable (See Sec 2.3.10, Advisory Body Review and Recommendation). The Planning Commission reviews the application at a standard hearing and makes a recommendation based on the review standards in Sec. 2.5.2.B.4, Plat (Subdivision) Review Standards.
k. Decision-Making Body Hearing, Review and Decision
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.11, Decision-Making Body Hearing, Review, and Decision). The City Council reviews the application at a quasi-judicial hearing and makes a decision based on the review standards in Sec. 2.5.2.B.4, Plat (Subdivision) Review Standards. The City Council’s decision shall be one of the following:
1.
Approval of the application; or
2.
Denial of the application.
l. Post Decision-Making Actions
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.12, Post Decision-Making Actions).
4. Plat (Subdivision) Review Standards
A plat shall only be approved upon a finding the applicant demonstrates there is competent substantial evidence in the record all of the following standards are met:
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 53
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.2 Site Development and Platting
a.
The plat and its general layout and design comply with all applicable standards in Article 5: Development Standards, and Article 6: Environmental Standards;
b.
The plat complies with all conditions of approval in any development approval or permit to which it is subject;
c.
The plat conforms to the requirements of Chapter 177, Florida Statutes;
d.
The plat conforms to any development plan (major or minor) to which it is a part; and
e.
The plat complies with all other applicable standards in this LDC and all other City regulations.
C. Minor Replat
1. Purpose
The purpose of this section is to establish a uniform mechanism for the resubdivision of a lot or parcel of land which does not require the creation of a new street, or improvements for water, sewer, drainage or other public facilities other than those services normally provided for individual platted lots. All lots shall abut an existing dedicated right-of-way.
2. Applicability
Approval of a minor replat in accordance with this section is required before resubdivision of a lot or parcel of land which does not require the creation of a new street, or improvements for water, sewer, drainage or other public facilities other than those services normally provided for individual platted lots.
3. Minor Replat Procedure
This subsection identifies additions or modifications to the standard review procedures in Sec. 2.4, Standard Review Procedures, that apply to a minor replat. Figure 2.5.2.C.3 identifies key steps in the minor replat procedure. Figure 2.5.2.C.3: Minor Replat Procedure Determination of Completeness Staff Review and Action Sec. 2.4.12 (A) Informational Meeting Optional Sec. 2.4.1 Sec. 2.4.3 Sec. 2.4.4 Sec. 2.4.6 Director makes determination Application Submission To Director Notification to Applicant of Decision Director notifies applicant Director prepares Technical Staff Report , makes a decision Land Development Code Page 2 54 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.2 Site Development and Platting
a. Informational Meeting
Optional (See Sec. 2.4.1, Informational Meeting).
b. Pre –Application Community Meeting
Not Applicable.
c. Application Submission
Applicable (See Sec.2.4.3, Application Submission).
d. Determination of Completeness
Applicable (See Sec2.4.4, Determination of Completeness).
e. Application Amendment or Withdrawal
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.5, Application Amendment or Withdrawal).
f. Staff Review and Action
Applicable. (See Sec. 2.4.6, Staff Review and Action). The Director reviews the application and makes a decision on the application based on Sec. 2.5.2.C.4, Minor Replat Review Standards. The Director’s decision shall be one of the following:
1.
Approval of the application; or
2.
Denial of the application.
g. Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification
Not Applicable.
h. Deferral of Public Hearing
Not Applicable.
i. Public Hearing Procedures
Not Applicable.
j. Advisory Body Review and Recommendation
Not Applicable.
k. Decision-Making Body Hearing, Review and Decision
Not Applicable.
l. Post Decision-Making Actions
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.12, Post Decision-Making Actions). Except no further division of an approved minor replat is allowed in accordance with this LDC unless a development plan (major and minor) for which it is part is approved which requires modification to the approved minor replat.
4. Minor Replat Review Standards
A minor replat shall only be approved upon a finding the applicant demonstrates there is competent substantial evidence in the record all of the following standards are met:
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 55
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.2 Site Development and Platting
a.
The minor replat and its general layout and design comply with all applicable standards in Article 5: Development Standards, and Article 6: Environmental Standards;
b.
The minor replat complies with all conditions of approval in any development approval or permit to which it is subject; and
c.
The minor replat conforms to the requirements of Chapter 177, Florida Statutes;
d.
The minor replat conforms to any development plan (major or minor) to which it is a part;
e.
The minor replat does not require the creation of a new street, or improvements for water, sewer, drainage or other public facilities other than those services normally provided for individual platted lots; and
f.
The minor replat complies with all other applicable standards in this LDC and all other City regulations.
D. Plat Vacation
1. Purpose
The purpose of this section is to establish a uniform mechanism for vacating recorded plats.
2. Applicability
This section applies to the vacation of any recorded plat or part thereof. The plat, or part of the plat may be vacated in accordance with in this section.
3. Plat Vacation Procedure
This subsection identifies additions or modifications to the standard review
procedures in Sec. 2.4, Standard Review Procedures, that apply to a plat vacation.
Figure 2.5.2.D.3 identifies key steps in the plat vacation procedure.
Land Development Code Page 2 56 Apopka, FL
-
-
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.2 Site Development and Platting Figure 2.5.2.D.3: Plat Vacation Procedure Determination of Completeness Staff Review and Action Sec. 2.4.12 (A) Informational Meeting Optional Director makes determination Application Submission To Director Scheduling of Public Hearing and Notice Decision Making Body Hearing, Review, and Decision Planning Commission holds a quasi judicial public hearing, makes decision (conditions allowed) Sec. 2.4.1 Sec. 2.4.3 Sec. 2.4.4 Sec. 2.4.11 Sec. 2.4.6 Sec. 2.4.7 Notification to Applicant of Decision Director notifies applicant DRC prepares Technical Staff Report Director schedules hearings; Director and Applicant provide notice
a. Informational Meeting
Optional (See Sec. 2.4.1, Informational Meeting).
b. Pre –Application Community Meeting
Not Applicable.
c. Application Submission
Applicable (See Sec.2.4.3, Application Submission).
d. Determination of Completeness
Applicable (See Sec2.4.4, Determination of Completeness).
e. Application Amendment or Withdrawal
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.5, Application Amendment or Withdrawal).
f. Staff Review and Action
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.6, Staff Review and Action). The DRC reviews the application and prepares a Technical Staff Report based on Sec. 2.5.2.D.4, Plat Vacation Review Standards.
g.
Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.7, Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification).
h.
Deferral of Public Hearing
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.8, Deferral of Public Hearing).
i.
Public Hearing Procedures
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.9, Public Hearing Procedures).
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 57
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.3 Concurrency
j. Advisory Body Review and Recommendation
Not Applicable.
k. Decision-Making Body Hearing, Review and Decision
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.11, Decision-Making Body Hearing, Review, and Decision). The Planning Commission reviews the application at a quasi-judicial hearing and makes a decision based on the review standards in on Sec. 2.5.2.D.4, Plat Vacation Review Standards. The Planning Commission’s decision shall be one of the following:
1.
Approval of the application; or
2.
Denial of the application.
l. Post Decision-Making Actions
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.12, Post Decision-Making Actions).
4. Plat Vacation Review Standards
A plat shall not be vacated which has dedicated rights-of-way to public use or dedicated rights-of-way or easements for any public utility, storm drainage course, floodplain, public access roadway, or dedicated public facility, until:
a.
Consents have been provided by the public users of the easements;
b.
Each public utility, which is franchised to provide services within the area of the plat, is notified in writing of the proposed vacation, and has 30 calendar days to comment;
c.
Conditions of consent from any public agencies or utilities having rights in any land proposed to be vacated have the conditions incorporated into the vacation; and
d.
If any agency or utility having rights in any land proposed to be vacated objects, a finding is made that a specific public benefit will not be annulled if the vacation is granted.
e.
New plats assigned concurrently with a plat vacation may take into account previous dedications.
2.5.3. CONCURRENCY
See Procedures in Article VII: Concurrency.
2.5.4. PERMITS
A. Arbor Permit
1. Purpose
The purpose of this section is to establish a uniform mechanism for ensuring that all development complies with Sec.5.4, Tree Protection Standards, and the tree related provisions in Sec. 5.3, Landscaping and Buffer Standards.
Land Development Code Page 2 58 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.4 Permits
2. Applicability
a. General
Unless exempted in accordance with Sec.2.5.4.A.2.b, Exemptions, below, an arbor permit approved in accordance with this section is required before any land disturbing activities or the removal, relocation, or substantial alteration of a tree or native vegetation protected in Sec.5.4, Tree Protection Standards, and Sec. 5.3, Landscaping and Buffer Standards.
b. Exemptions
The following are exempt from the standards and requirements of this section:
1.
Utility operations: Tree removals by duly constituted communication, water, sewer, electrical or other utility companies or federal, state, county or City agencies, or engineers or surveyors working under a contract with such utility companies or agencies, provided the removal is limited to those areas necessary for maintenance of existing lines or facilities or for construction of new lines or facilities in furtherance of providing utility service to its customers, and provided that the activity is conducted so as to avoid any unnecessary removal and, in the case of aerial electrical utility lines, is not greater than that specified by the National Electrical Safety Codes as necessary to achieve safe electrical clearances;
2.
Surveyors: A Florida licensed land surveyor in the performance of the surveyor’s duties, provided such alteration is limited to a swath three feet or less in width;
3.
Commercial growers: All commercial nurseries, botanical gardens, tree farms, and grove operations, but only as to those trees which were planted for silvicultural or agricultural purposes, or for the sale or intended sale in the ordinary course of business;
4.
Emergencies: During emergencies caused by hurricane or other disaster, when the City suspends compliance with the applicable provisions of Sec.5.4, Tree Protection Standards, and Sec. 5.3, Landscaping and Buffer Standards:
(a)
In the event any tree endangers the health, safety or welfare of the community and requires immediate removal without delay due to hurricanes, windstorms, floods, freezes, or other disaster; and
(b)
In anticipation of an emergency situation such as a hurricane or other natural disaster.
5.
Maintenance by City crews for planting, pruning, maintaining, and removing trees, plants, and shrubs within the illumination lines of lights, streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds, and for the removal of any dead or diseased trees or the pruning of trees on public property within the City.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 59
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.4 Permits
3. Arbor Permit Procedure
This subsection identifies additions or modifications to the standard review procedures in Sec. 2.4, Standard Review Procedures, that apply to an arbor permit. Figure 2.5.4.A.3 identifies key steps in the arbor permit procedure. Figure 2.5.4.A.3: Arbor Permit Procedure Determination of Completeness Staff Review and Action Sec. 2.4.12 (A) Director makes determination Sec. 2.4.3 Sec. 2.4.4 Sec. 2.4.6 Application Submission To Director Notification to Applicant of Decision Director notifies applicant Director makes decision (conditions allowed)
a. Informational Meeting
Not Applicable.
b. Pre-Application Community Meeting
Not Applicable.
c. Application Submission
Applicable (See 2.4.3, Application Submission).
d. Determination of Completeness
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.4, Determination of Completeness).
e. Application Amendment or Withdrawal
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.5, Application Amendment or Withdrawal).
f. Staff Review and Action
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.6, Staff Review and Action). The Director reviews the application and makes a decision based on the review standards in Sec. 2.5.4.A.4, Arbor Permit Review Standards. The Director’s decision shall be one of the following:
1.
Approval of the application; or
2.
Denial of the application.
g. Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification
Not Applicable.
h. Deferral of Public Hearing
Not Applicable.
Land Development Code Page 2 60 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.4 Permits
i. Public Hearing Procedures
Not Applicable.
j. Advisory Body Review and Recommendation
Not Applicable.
k. Decision-Making Body Hearing, Review and Decision
Not Applicable.
l. Post Decision-Making Actions
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.12, Post Decision-Making Actions for notification of
decision to the applicant, appeals, and limits to subsequent applications).
4. Arbor Permit Review Standards
An application for an arbor permit shall be approved upon a finding that the applicant demonstrates by competent substantial evidence the proposed development complies with all applicable standards in Sec.5.4, Tree Protection Standards, and Sec. 5.3, Landscaping and Buffer Standards.
B. Sign Permit
1. Purpose
The purpose of this section is to establish a uniform mechanism for ensuring that all signs comply with the standards in Sec. 5.11, Signs.
2. Applicability
a. Unless exempted in accordance with Section 2.5.4.B.2.b, Exemptions, below, approval of a sign permit is required before any sign is erected, installed, displayed, structurally altered, or otherwise changed.
b. Exemptions
The following types of sign are exempt from the requirements for a sign permit
provided that they comply with the applicable standards in Sec. 5.11, Signs:
1.
Signs that are not designed or located so as to be visible from any street or adjoining property;
2.
Signs of two square feet or less that include no letters, symbols, logos or designs in excess of two inches in vertical or horizontal dimension, provided that the sign, or combination of signs, does not constitute a sign prohibited by this LDC;
3.
Non-advertising signs necessary to promote health, safety, and welfare, and other regulatory, statutory, traffic-control, or directional signs erected on public property with permission, as appropriate, from the State of Florida, the United States, Orange County, or the City;
4.
Legal notices and official instruments;
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 61
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.4 Permits
5.
Decorative flags and bunting for a celebration, convention, or commemoration of significance to the entire City when authorized by the City Council for a prescribed period of time;
6.
Maintenance and copy change;
7.
Merchandise displays behind storefront windows so long as no part of the display moves or contains flashing lights;
8.
Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and dates of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible materials and attached to the surface of a building;
9.
Signs incorporated into machinery or equipment by a manufacturer or distributor which identify or advertise only the product or service dispensed by the machine or equipment, such as signs customarily affixed to vending machines, newspaper racks, telephone booths, and gasoline pumps.
10.
Holiday decorations. Signs of a primarily decorative nature, clearly incidental and customary and commonly associated with any national, local or religious holiday; provided, that such signs are displayed for a period of no more than 30 consecutive days or no more than 60 days in any one year; such signs shall be set back ten feet from all boundary lines of the lot on which they are displayed; provided, that a clear area be maintained to a height of six feet within 55 feet of the intersection of two rights-of-way; holiday lights and decorations in windows shall not exceed 40 percent of window area for nonresidential buildings;
11.
Public warning signs to indicate, but not limited to, the dangers of trespassing, swimming, animals or similar hazards, not to exceed four square feet in area;
12.
Utility signs. Public utility signs that identify the location of underground utility lines and facilities, high voltage lines and facilities, and other utility facilities and appurtenances, provided they do not exceed three feet in height and provided the sign face does not exceed one-half square foot;
13.
Traffic-control devices (signs) including regulatory signs to be individually erected on separate posts; warning and guide signs not to exceed two signs per post and six square feet each in area; such signs shall be located so as to not obscure each other or be hidden from view by other roadside objects; signs requiring different decisions by the vehicle operator must be spaced sufficiently apart for the required decisions to be made safely.
3. Sign Permit Application Content
a. The City shall provide forms for application for sign permits, requiring furnishing the following information:
1. The name, address, telephone number, email address, and signature of the owner of the site granting permission for the construction, operation, maintenance or display of the sign or sign structure.
Land Development Code Page 2 62 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.4 Permits
2.
The name, address, telephone number, email address, and signature of the sign contractor, if any.
3.
The legal description and street address of the premises or property on which sign is to be located.
4.
The approximate value of the sign to be installed, including installation cost.
5.
The type of sign for which a permit is being sought.
6.
Two copies of a sketch, blueprint, blueline print or similar presentation drawn to scale and dimensioned, showing elevations of the sign as proposed on a building facade, awning or canopy, provided further the relationship to other existing adjacent signs is also shown. These sketches shall include a site plan showing the sign location and any existing landscaping which is affected by the sign.
7.
A landscape plan for freestanding signs, providing an island around the base of the sign at least five feet in width. (Pole signs are prohibited but may be allowed if a hardship is demonstrated and accepted by the Planning Commission in accordance with a variance.) Landscaping may include shrubs, at least 18 inches tall at time of planting; installed every three feet for the entire length of the landscaped strip; and shall be designed and placed consistent with other requirements of this section as well as the City's "waterwise" landscape standards. The remainder of the landscaped strip shall be maintained in approved understory and ground cover.
Where a monument sign is placed, landscaping shall comprise understory plants and shrubs designed in a manner that maintains sign visibility. The monument sign may partially extend beyond the landscaped area to promote visibility. The City may consider alternatives to the minimum standards, if it can be shown that equal or improved acceptable landscape can be achieved by an alternative method. Irrigation systems and landscape materials shall be installed in accordance with Article 6: Environmental Standards. The landscape plan shall be designed in a manner to promote visibility of the freestanding sign from adjacent streets and sidewalks. Placement of shrubs, understory plants and trees should be organized to create a view triangle extending into the street, taking into consideration potential height and coverage of trees and plants at their maturity.
8.
Copy of stress sheets and calculations shall be required indicating that the sign is properly designed for required loads and wind pressures in any direction, as may be required by the Building Division.
9.
A written inventory of all sign types located within a development or parcel, including a sign area calculation, to demonstrate compliance with the total allowable sign area.
10.
Identification of the name of the development plan which applies to the parcel, indicating whether an approved master sign plan or development plan establishes design standards for any proposed signs at the development, parcel, or building.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 63
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.4 Permits
11.
Sign permit applicants for electronic reader board signs shall include necessary information to demonstrate compliance with the standards set forth in Sec. 5.10.8.E, Electronic Reader Board Signs.
12.
Dimensions labeled on all renderings provided as a part of the application.
13.
Such other information as required by the Director which is necessary to secure full compliance with all applicable codes.
4. Sign Permit Procedures
This subsection identifies additions or modifications to the standard review procedures in Sec. 2.4, Standard Review Procedures, that apply to a sign permit. Figure 2.5.4.B.4 identifies key steps in the sign permit procedure. Figure 2.5.4.B.4: Sign Permit Procedure Determination of Completeness Staff Review and Action Sec. 2.4.12 (A) Informational Meeting Optional Sec. 2.4.1 Sec. 2.4.3 Sec. 2.4.4 Sec. 2.4.6 Director makes determination Application Submission To Director Notification to Applicant of Decision Director notifies applicant Director makes decision (conditions allowed)
a.
Informational Meeting
Optional (See Sec. 2.4.1, Informational Meeting).
b.
Pre-Application Community Meeting
Not Applicable.
c.
Application Submission
Applicable (See 2.4.3, Application Submission).
d.
Determination of Completeness
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.4, Determination of Completeness).
e.
Application Amendment or Withdrawal
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.5, Application Amendment or Withdrawal).
f.
Staff Review and Action
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.6, Staff Review and Action). The Director reviews the
application and makes a decision based on the review standards in Sec. 2.5.4.B.5,
Sign Permit Review Standards. The Director’s decision shall be one of the
following:
Land Development Code Page 2 64 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.4 Permits
1.
Approval of the application; or
2.
Denial of the application.
g. Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification
Not Applicable.
h. Deferral of Public Hearing
Not Applicable.
i. Public Hearing Procedures
Not Applicable.
j. Advisory Body Review and Recommendation
Not Applicable.
k. Decision-Making Body Hearing, Review and Decision
Not Applicable.
l. Post Decision-Making Actions
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.12, Post Decision-Making Actions for notification of
decision to the applicant, appeals, and limits to subsequent applications).
5. Sign Permit Review Standards
An application for a sign permit shall be approved upon a finding that the applicant demonstrates by competent substantial evidence the proposed sign complies with all applicable standards in Sec. 5.11, Signs.
C. Floodplain Permit
1. Purpose
The purpose of this section is to establish a uniform mechanism for ensuring that all development that proposes to locate within a special flood hazard area as shown on the flood insurance rate map for the City, complies with Sec. 6.6, Floodplains.
2. Applicability
All development that proposes to be located in a special flood hazard area as shown on the flood insurance rate map for the City, shall receive approval of a floodplain permit in accordance with this section, prior to receipt of a building permit
3. Floodplain Permit Procedures
This subsection identifies additions or modifications to the standard review procedures in Sec. 2.4, Standard Review Procedures, that apply to a floodplain permit. Figure 2.5.4.D.3 identifies key steps in the floodplain permit procedure.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 65
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.4 Permits Figure 2.5.4.D.3: Floodplain Permit Procedure Determination of Completeness Staff Review and Action Sec. 2.4.12 (A) Informational Meeting Optional Sec. 2.4.1 Sec. 2.4.3 Sec. 2.4.4 Sec. 2.4.6 Director makes determination Application Submission To Director Notification to Applicant of Decision Director notifies applicant Floodplain Coordinator makes decision (conditions allowed)
a. Informational Meeting
Optional (See Sec. 2.4.1, Informational Meeting).
b. Pre-Application Community Meeting
Optional (See Sec. 2.4.2, Pre-Application Community Meeting).
c. Application Submission
Applicable (See 2.4.3, Application Submission).
d. Determination of Completeness
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.4, Determination of Completeness).
e. Application Amendment or Withdrawal
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.5, Application Amendment or Withdrawal).
f. Staff Review and Action
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.6, Staff Review and Action). The Director reviews the application. The actual decision is made by the Floodplain Coordinator with the assistance of the City Engineer.
g. Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification
Not Applicable.
h. Deferral of Public Hearing
Not Applicable.
i. Public Hearing Procedures
Not Applicable.
j. Advisory Body Review and Recommendation
Not Applicable.
Land Development Code Page 2 66 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.4 Permits
k. Decision-Making Body Hearing, Review and Decision
Not Applicable.
l. Post Decision-Making Actions
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.12, Post Decision-Making Actions for notification of
decision to the applicant, appeals, and limits to subsequent applications).
4. Floodplain Permit Standards
An application for a floodplain permit shall be approved upon a finding that the applicant demonstrates by competent substantial evidence the proposed development within the special flood hazard area as shown on the flood insurance rate map for the City complies with Sec. 6.6, Floodplains.
D. Fence Permit
1. Purpose
The purpose of this section is to establish a uniform mechanism for ensuring that the construction and erection of all fences and walls comply with the standards in Sec. 5.6, Fences and Walls.
2. Applicability
Prior to the construction and erection of a fence or wall on land within the City, a fence permit shall be approved in accordance with the procedures and standards of this section.
3. Fence Permit Procedure
This subsection identifies additions or modifications to the standard review procedures in Sec. 2.4, Standard Review Procedures, that apply to a fence permit. Figure 2.5.4.D.3 identifies key steps in the fence permit procedure. Figure 2.5.4.D.3: Fence Permit Procedure Determination of Completeness Staff Review and Action Sec. 2.4.12 (A) Director makes determination Sec. 2.4.3 Sec. 2.4.4 Sec. 2.4.6 Application Submission To Director Notification to Applicant of Decision Director notifies applicant Director makes decision (conditions allowed)
a. Informational Meeting
Not Applicable.
b. Pre-Application Community Meeting
Not Applicable.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 67
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.4 Permits
c. Application Submission
Applicable (See 2.4.3, Application Submission).
d. Determination of Completeness
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.4, Determination of Completeness).
e. Application Amendment or Withdrawal
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.5, Application Amendment or Withdrawal).
f. Staff Review and Action
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.6 , Staff Review and Action). The Director reviews the application and makes a decision based on the review standards in Sec. 2.5.4.D.4, Fence Permit Standards. The Director’s decision shall be one of the following:
1.
Approval of the application; or
2.
Denial of the application.
g. Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification
Not Applicable.
h. Deferral of Public Hearing
Not Applicable.
i. Public Hearing Procedures
Not Applicable.
j. Advisory Body Review and Recommendation
Not Applicable.
k. Decision-Making Body Hearing, Review and Decision
Not Applicable.
l. Post Decision-Making Actions
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.12, Post Decision-Making Actions for notification of
decision to the applicant, appeals, and limits to subsequent applications).
4. Fence Permit Standards
An application for a fence permit shall be approved upon a finding the applicant demonstrates by competent substantial evidence that the proposed fence or wall complies with the standards in Sec. 5.6 Fences and Walls.
E. Driveway and Sidewalk Permit
1. Purpose
The purpose of this section is to establish a uniform mechanism for ensuring that all development complies with the driveway and sidewalk standards in Section 5.13Section 5.13, Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways.
Land Development Code Page 2 68 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.4 Permits
2. Applicability
Prior to the construction of a driveway or sidewalk, a driveway and sidewalk permit shall be approved in accordance with the procedures and standards of this section.
3. Driveway and Sidewalk Permit Procedure
This subsection identifies additions or modifications to the standard review procedures in Sec. 2.4, Standard Review Procedures, that apply to a driveway and sidewalk permit. Figure 2.5.4.E.3 identifies key steps in the driveway and sidewalk permit procedure. Figure 2.5.4.E.3: Driveway and Sidewalk Permit Procedure Determination of Completeness Staff Review and Action Sec. 2.4.12 (A) Informational Meeting Optional Sec. 2.4.1 Sec. 2.4.3 Sec. 2.4.4 Sec. 2.4.6 Director makes determination Application Submission To Director Notification to Applicant of Decision Director notifies applicant Director makes decision (conditions allowed)
a. Informational Meeting
Optional (See Sec. 2.4.1, Informational Meeting).
b. Pre-Application Community Meeting
Not Applicable.
c. Application Submission
Applicable (See 2.4.3, Application Submission).
d. Determination of Completeness
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.4, Determination of Completeness).
e. Application Amendment or Withdrawal
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.5, Application Amendment or Withdrawal).
f. Staff Review and Action
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.6, Staff Review and Action). The Director reviews the application and makes a decision based on the review standards in Sec. 2.5.4.E.4, Driveway and Sidewalk Review Standards. The Director’s decision shall be one of the following:
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 69
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.4 Permits
1.
Approval of the application; or
2.
Denial of the application.
g. Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification
Not Applicable.
h. Deferral of Public Hearing
Not Applicable.
i. Public Hearing Procedures
Not Applicable.
j. Advisory Body Review and Recommendation
Not Applicable.
k. Decision-Making Body Hearing, Review and Decision
Not Applicable.
l. Post Decision-Making Actions
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.12, Post Decision-Making Actions for notification of
decision to the applicant, appeals, and limits to subsequent applications).
4. Driveway and Sidewalk Review Standards
An application for a driveway and sidewalk permit shall be approved upon a finding the applicant demonstrates by competent substantial evidence the proposed fence or wall complies with all applicable standards in Section 5.5, Fences and Walls.
F. Temporary Use Permit
1. Purpose
The purpose of this section is to establish a uniform mechanism for ensuring that all development complies with the temporary uses and structures standards in Sec. 4.4, Temporary Uses and Structures.
2. Applicability
Prior to the establishment of a temporary use or structure, a temporary use permit shall be approved in accordance with the procedures and standards of this section.
3. Temporary Use Permit Procedure
This subsection identifies additions or modifications to the standard review procedures in Sec. 2.4, Standard Review Procedures, that apply to a temporary use permit. Figure 2.5.4.F.3 identifies key steps in the temporary use permit procedure.
Land Development Code Page 2 70 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.4 Permits Figure 2.5.4.F.3: Temporary Use Permit Procedure Determination of Completeness Staff Review and Action Sec. 2.4.12 (A) Informational Meeting Optional Sec. 2.4.1 Sec. 2.4.3 Sec. 2.4.4 Sec. 2.4.6 Director makes determination Application Submission To Director Notification to Applicant of Decision Director notifies applicant Director makes decision (conditions allowed)
a. Informational Meeting
Optional (See Sec. 2.4.1, Informational Meeting).
b. Pre-Application Community Meeting
Not Applicable.
c. Application Submission
Applicable (See 2.4.3, Application Submission).
d. Determination of Completeness
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.4, Determination of Completeness).
e. Application Amendment or Withdrawal
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.5, Application Amendment or Withdrawal).
f. Staff Review and Action
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.6, Staff Review and Action). The Director reviews the application and makes a decision based on the review standards in Sec. 4.4, Temporary Uses and Structures The Director’s decision shall be one of the following:
1.
Approval of the application;
2.
Approval of the application, subject to conditions; or
3.
Denial of the application.
g. Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification
Not Applicable.
h. Deferral of Public Hearing
Not Applicable.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 71
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.5 Relief
i. Public Hearing Procedures
Not Applicable.
j. Advisory Body Review and Recommendation
Not Applicable.
k. Decision-Making Body Hearing, Review and Decision
Not Applicable.
l. Post Decision-Making Actions
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.12, Post Decision-Making Actions for notification of
decision to the applicant, appeals, and limits to subsequent applications).
4. Temporary Use Permit Review Standards
An application for a temporary use permit shall be approved upon a finding the applicant demonstrates by competent substantial evidence the proposed temporary use or structure complies with all applicable standards in Sec. 4.4, Temporary Uses and Structures.
2.5.5. RELIEF
A. Zoning Variance
1. Purpose
The purpose of this section is to establish a uniform mechanism to allow certain variances from the dimensional standards (such as height, yard setback, and lot area) and certain development standards of this LDC (Article 5: Development Standards) when their strict application would result in unnecessary hardship.
2. Applicability
a. The procedures and standards in this section apply to the review of and decision on an application for a variance from the following standards:
1.
The dimensional standards in Article 3: Zoning Districts;
2.
The numerical use specific standards in Sec. 4.2.3, Standards Specific to Principal Uses, Standards Specific to Principal Uses, to the extent they do not result in allowing a variance for a use that is prohibited in the zoning district; and
3.
The following numerical standards in Article 5: Development Standards:
(a)
Sec. 5.13.1.C.2.c.2, Cross Access Between Adjoining Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Developments;
(b)
Sec. 5.13.1.C.2.c.3, Pedestrian Cross-Access
(c)
Sec.5.13.1.C.2.c.4, Bicycle Cross-Access
(d)
Sec. 5.13.1.C.2.c.5, Pedestrian Connections;
(e)
Sec. 5.1.10, Vehicle Stacking Spaces and Lanes ;
Land Development Code Page 2 72 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.5 Relief
(f)
Sec. 5.1.6, Off-Street Vehicular Parking Space Standards;
(g)
Sec. 5.1.7, Dimensional Standards for Vehicular Parking Spaces and Aisles ; and
(h)
Sec. 5.1.12, Loading Area Standards.
b.
Variances are not allowed for requests to:
1.
Amend the text of this LDC or the Official Zoning District Map;
2.
Permit a principal use or special exception use in a zoning district where it is prohibited;
3.
Waive or modify any procedural requirement or application submission fee;
4.
Waive or modify any condition(s) of approval specifically imposed as part of the approval for a development order;
5.
Waive a specific finding required to be made in taking action on any development order; or
6.
Increase density which would result in an increase in the maximum allowable number of dwelling units or intensity in a zoning district.
c.
Under no circumstance shall a variance be approved as part of a negotiation to grant a variance in exchange for any other land use alterations on the affected parcel or any other parcel of land.
d.
Applications for which a variance is requested that are decided by the Director shall be consolidated with the application for variance and reviewed and decided by the Planning Commission in accordance with the procedures of this section, along with the application for variance. In reviewing and deciding each application, the Planning Commission shall apply the relevant review standards for the respective application.
3. Zoning Variance Procedure
This subsection identifies additions or modifications to the standard review procedures in Sec. 2.4, Standard Review Procedures, that apply to a zoning variance. Figure 2.5.5.A.3 identifies key steps in the zoning variance procedure.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 73
-
-
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.5 Relief Figure 2.5.5.A.3: Zoning Variance Procedure Determination of Completeness Staff Review and Action Sec. 2.4.12 (A) Pre-Application Community Meeting Optional Informational Meeting Optional Director makes determination Application Submission To Director Scheduling of Public Hearing and Notice Director schedules hearings; Director and Applicant provide notice Decision Making Body Hearing, Review, and Decision Planning Commission holds a quasi judicial public hearing, makes decision (conditions allowed) Sec. 2.4.1 Sec. 2.4.2 Sec. 2.4.3 Sec. 2.4.4 Sec. 2.4.11 Sec. 2.4.6 Sec. 2.4.7 Sec. 2.5.6 Notification to Applicant of Decision Director notifies applicant Director prepares Technical Staff Report Appeal to City Council Optional
a. Informational Meeting
Optional (See Sec. 2.4.1, Informational Meeting).
b. Pre-Application Community Meeting
Optional (See Sec. 2.4.2, Pre-Application Community Meeting).
c. Application Submission
Applicable (See 2.4.3, Application Submission).
d. Determination of Completeness
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.4, Determination of Completeness).
e. Application Amendment or Withdrawal
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.5, Application Amendment or Withdrawal).
f. Staff Review and Action
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.6, Staff Review and Action). The Director reviews the application and prepares a Technical Staff Report based on the review standards in Sec. 2.5.5.A.5, Zoning Variance Review Standards.
g. Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.7, Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification).
Land Development Code Page 2 74 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.5 Relief
h. Deferral of Public Hearing
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.8, Deferral of Public Hearing).
i. Public Hearing Procedures
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.9, Public Hearing Procedures).
j. Advisory Body Review and Recommendation
Not Applicable.
k. Decision-Making Body Review and Decision
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.11, Decision-Making Body Hearing, Review, and Decision). The Planning Commission shall review the application at a quasi-judicial hearing and make a decision based on the review standards in Sec. 2.5.5.A.5, Standards. The Planning Commission decision shall be one of the following:
1.
Approval of the application;
2.
Approval of the application subject to modification and/or condition; or
3.
Denial of the application
l. Post Decision-Making Actions
Applicable. (See Sec. 2.4.12, Post Decision-Making Actions for notification of decision to the applicant, appeals, and limits to subsequent applications). A party aggrieved by a decision of the Planning Commission on a zoning variance may appeal the decision to the City Council in accordance with Sec. 2.5.5.D, Appeals to City Council.
4. Record of Variances to be Maintained
The Director shall maintain a record of all approved zoning variances, including the justification for their issuance.
5. Zoning Variance Review Standards
a. Initial Determination
1.
Prior to approving a zoning variance, the Planning Commission shall first determine whether the need for the proposed variance arises out of the physical surroundings, shape, topographical condition, or other physical or environmental conditions that are unique to the specific property involved. If so, the Planning Commission shall make the findings in subsection b., below, based on the granting of the variance for that site alone.
2.
If the condition is common to numerous sites so that requests for similar variances are likely to be received, the Planning Commission shall make the required findings based on the cumulative effect of granting the variance to all who may apply.
3.
No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in other zoning districts shall be considered grounds for the authorization of a zoning variance.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 75
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.5 Relief
b. Required Findings
A zoning variance shall be approved only on a finding the applicant
demonstrates there is competent substantial evidence in the record that:
1.
There are practical difficulties in carrying out the strict letter of the relevant requirements of the LDC in that the requested variance relates to a hardship due to characteristics of the land and not solely the needs of the land owner;
2.
The variance request is not based exclusively upon a desire to reduce the cost of developing the site;
3.
The proposed variance will not substantially increase congestion on surrounding public streets;
4.
The proposed variance will not substantially diminish property values in the area surrounding the site
5.
The proposed variance will not substantially alter the essential character of, the area surrounding the site;
6.
The effect of the proposed variance is in harmony with the general intent of the LDC and the specific standards for which the variance is granted;
7.
Special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant;
8.
The proposed variance will not create safety hazards and other detriments to the public; and
9.
The variance is the minimum variance which will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building or structure.
B. Administrative Adjustment
1. Purpose
The purpose of this section is to establish a uniform mechanism to allow minor adjustments or modifications from certain dimensional or development standards of the LDC, based on specific standards, in order to better accomplish the purposes of the LDC.
2. Applicability
Administrative adjustments may be requested and granted in accordance with this section for the standards identified in Table 2.3.5.C.2, Allowable Administrative Adjustments, up to the limits set forth in the table.
Land Development Code Page 2 76 Apopka, FL
-
ro
P cedure Determination of Completeness Staff Review and Action Sec. 2.4.12 (A) Pre-Application Community Meeting Optional Informational Meeting Optional Director makes determination Application Submission To Director Notification to Applicant of Decision Director notifies applicant Sec. 2.4.1 Sec. 2.4.2 Sec. 2.4.3 Sec. 2.4.4 Sec. 2.4.6 Director makes decision (conditions allowed) Sec. 2.5.6 Appeal to City Council Optional
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.5 Relief TABLE 2.5.5.B.2: ALLOWABLE ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUSTMENTS STANDARD MAXIMUM ADJUSTMENT (%) Lot Width and/or Depth (Minimum) 15 Front Yard Setback (Minimum) 15 Side Yard Setback (Minimum) 15 Rear Yard Setback (Minimum) 15 Lot Coverage Maximum) 15 Height (Maximum) 10 Setback Area Encroachment (Maximum) 15 Off-Street Parking, Loading, or Stacking Space Number (Minimum) 10 Administrative Adjustment Procedure 3. This subsection identifies additions or modifications to the standard review procedures in Sec. 2.4, Standard Review Procedures, that apply to an administrative adjustment. Figure 2.5.5.B.3 identifies key steps in the administrative adjustment procedure. Figure 2.5.5.B.3: Administrative Adjustment
a. Pre-Application Conference
Optional (See Sec. 2.4.1, Informational Meeting).
b. Pre-Application Community Meeting
Optional (See Sec 2.4.2, Pre-Application Community Meeting).
c. Application Submission
Applicable (See 2.4.3, Application Submission).
d. Determination of Completeness
Applicable (See Sec 2.4.4, Determination of Completeness).
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 77
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.5 Relief
e. Application Amendment or Withdrawal
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.5, Application Amendment or Withdrawal).
f. Staff Review and Action
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.6, Staff Review and Action).
1.
The Director reviews the application and makes a decision based on the review standards in Sec. 2.5.5.B.4, Administrative Adjustment Review Standards. Conditions of approval may include limiting the allowable adjustment to a lesser modification than the maximum allowed by this section or requested by an applicant.
2.
The Director’s decision shall be one of the following:
(a)
Approval of the application as submitted;
(b)
Approval of the application subject to conditions and/or modifications; or
(c)
Denial of the application
3.
In addition:
(a)
Approval of an administrative adjustment does not exempt the applicant from the responsibility to obtain all other development approvals and permits required by the LDC and any other applicable laws, and does not indicate that the development for which the administrative adjustment is granted should necessarily receive approval of other applications required under the LDC unless the relevant and applicable portions of the LDC or any other applicable laws are met.
(b)
Unless it expires (See Sec. 2.4.11.D, Lapse of Development Order), or is revoked (see Sec. 9.5.3.A.4, Revocation of Development Order), a recorded development order approving an administrative adjustment, including any conditions of approval, shall run with the land, shall be binding on the landowners and their successors and assigns, and shall not be affected by a change in ownership.
(c)
A development order approving an administrative adjustment shall automatically expire if the development incorporating the authorized adjustment is not commenced within two years after the date the development order is approved, or an extension of this time period is authorized in accordance with Sec. 2.2.12.C.2 Extension of Expiration Timeline.
g. Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification
Not Applicable.
h. Public Hearing Procedures
Not Applicable.
i. Advisory Body Review and Recommendation
Not Applicable.
Land Development Code Page 2 78 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.5 Relief
j. Decision-Making Body Review and Decision
Not Applicable.
k. Post Decision-Making Actions
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.12, Post Decision-Making Actions for notification of decision to the applicant, appeals, amendment and limits to subsequent applications). A party aggrieved by a decision of the Director may appeal the decision of the Director to the City Council in accordance with Sec. 2.5.5.D, Appeals to City Council.
4. Administrative Adjustment Review Standards
An application for an administrative adjustment shall be approved only on a finding the applicant demonstrates by competent substantial evidence the following standards are met:
a.
The proposed administrative adjustment complies with Table 2.5.5.B.2, Allowable Administrative Adjustments;
b.
The proposed administrative adjustment is either:
1.
Required to compensate for some unusual aspect of the development site;
2.
Supports an objective from the purpose statements of the zoning district where the adjustment is proposed to be located;
3.
Proposes to protect sensitive natural resources, protect water source quality, or manage water source demand; or
4.
Proposes to save healthy existing trees;
c.
The proposed administrative adjustment is consistent with the character of development in the surrounding area, and will not result in incompatible uses or development;
d.
Any adverse impacts resulting from the proposed administrative adjustment will be mitigated to the maximum extent practicable; and
e.
The proposed administrative adjustment will not substantially interfere with the convenient and enjoyable use and development of adjacent lands, and will not pose a danger to the public health or safety.
C. Vested Rights Determination
1. Purpose
The purpose of this section is to establish a uniform mechanism by which a landowner or developer may request the City recognize the landowner’s or developer’s vested rights to develop their land in accordance with a development approval or permit, or other affirmative government actions taken by the City.
2. Applicability
The procedures and standards in this section apply to the review of and decision on applications for a vested rights determination.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 79
-
Pro
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.5 Relief
3. Vested Rights Determination Procedure
This subsection identifies additions or modifications to the standard review procedures in Sec. 2.4, Standard Review Procedures, that apply to a vested rights determination. Figure 3 identifies key steps in the vested rights determination procedure. Figure 2.5.5.C.3: Vested Rights Determination cedure Determination of Completeness Staff Review and Action Sec. 2.4.12 (A) Pre-Application Community Meeting Optional Director makes determination Sec. 2.4.1 Sec. 2.4.2 Sec. 2.4.3 Sec. 2.4.4 Sec. 2.4.6 Sec. 2.5.6 Informational Meeting Optional Application Submission To Director Notification to Applicant of Decision Director notifies applicant Director prepares Technical Staff Report; City Attorney makes decision Appeal to City Council Optional
a.
Informational Meeting
Optional (See Sec. 2.4.1, Informational Meeting).
b.
Pre-Application Community Meeting
Not Applicable.
c.
Application Submission
Applicable (See 2.4.3, Application Submission), The application shall include
appropriate material to demonstrate vested rights in accordance with Sec.
2.5.5.C.4, Vested Rights Determination Standards. The application shall become
part of the record.
d.
Determination of Completeness
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.4, Determination of Completeness), except the Director
shall have ten days to determine whether the application is complete or
incomplete in consultation with the City Attorney.
e.
Application Amendment or Withdrawal
Applicable (See 2.4.3, Application Submission).
f.
Staff Review and Action
1. Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.6, Staff Review and Action), except the Director shall
prepare a staff report on the application, which shall include any information
Land Development Code Page 2 80 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.5 Relief
relevant to the vested rights determination. The City Attorney shall make a decision on the application following a hearing on the matter. The hearing shall be scheduled within 60 days of the date the application is determined complete. The applicant shall be provided written notice by certified mail at least 14 days before the hearing. At the hearing, the applicant or applicant’s representative may present evidence in support of the application. The City Attorney may consider all relevant information prior to the decision on the application.
2. The City Attorney shall make a decision within 30 days of the hearing based on the review standards in Sec. 2.5.5.C.4, Vested Rights Determination Standards. The City Attorney’s decision shall be an approval or denial, include findings of fact and conclusions of law, and shall state specifically:
(a)
What development rights, if any, are vested;
(b)
What laws or regulations those rights are vested against; and
(c)
What limitations or requirements apply for the applicant to preserve those vested rights.
g. Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notice
Not Applicable.
h. Deferral of Public Hearing
Not Applicable.
i. Public Hearing Procedures
Not Applicable.
j. Advisory Body Review and Recommendation
Not Applicable.
k.
Decision-Making Body Review and Decision
l.
Appeal
1.
An applicant may appeal a decision by the City Attorney on a vested rights determination to the City Council. Such an appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk within ten days after the City Attorney's written decision is mailed to the applicant.
2.
Upon receipt of an appeal, the City Clerk shall schedule the matter for consideration by the City Council within 60 days after the date the appeal is filed. The applicant shall be notified of the date of the Council's hearing by certified mail at least ten days in advance of the hearing.
3.
The City Council shall conduct a public hearing on the appeal, and the applicant may present evidence in support of the application. Within ten working days after the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall make a decision to either affirm, reverse, or modify the City Attorney’s decision. The City Attorney’s decision shall be reversed or modified only if there is competent substantial evidence in the record that the decision failed to
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 81
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.5 Relief
comply with the relevant review standards in Sec. 2.5.5.C.4, Vested Rights
Determination Standards.
4. An appeal of the City Council decision on a vested rights determination shall be by petition for certiorari review to the Circuit Court based solely on the record of the hearing before the City Council. The applicant is responsible for providing a verbatim transcript of the record of that hearing. Such an appeal shall be filed within 30 days after the date the City Council issues its written decision on the application.
m. Post Decision-Making Actions
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.12, Post Decision-Making Actions, for notification of a decision to the applicant, and limits to subsequent applications).
4. Vested Rights Determination Standards
An application for a vested rights determination shall be approved only if the applicant demonstrates by competent substantial evidence, one of the following:
a. Development of Regional Impact (DRI)
1. Valid and Unexpired Binding Letter of Vested Rights
The land is subject to a binding and unexpired binding letter of vested rights issued by the state land planning agency in accordance with Section 380.06, Fla Stat., stating that the land is presumed to be a Development of Regional Impact (DRI). The application for a vested rights determination based on a binding letter shall include the binding letter and a letter from the Department of Economic Development (DEO) verifying the authenticity of the binding letter and the related plan of development, all of which shall be made exhibits to the determination. Such determination shall recognize the vesting of the development as set forth in the binding letter, and such vesting shall continue until development approved in the binding letter is complete or until the expiration or invalidation of the binding letter, whichever occurs first.
2. Valid and Unexpired Development of Regional Impact (DRI)
Development which has been specifically approved in accordance with Chapter 380.06, Fla. Stat., and is subject to a DRI development order rendered prior to the governmental act (comprehensive plan or LDC adoption or amendment) that limits its rights to develop in accordance with the DRI development order. The DRI development order shall be made an exhibit to the vested rights determination, and the determination shall be subject to the terms of, and shall reference the limitations imposed by, the DRI development order.
b. Development Approved by Court Order
Development that is expressly approved in a court order. The court order shall be made an exhibit to the vested rights determination, and the determination shall be subject to the terms and conditions of the court order.
Land Development Code Page 2 82 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.5 Relief
c. Development Subject to Valid and Unexpired Building Permit, Final Plat for Subdivision, or Final Development Plan
Development subject to a valid and unexpired Building Permit, Final Plat, or Final Development Plan approved under the City’s LDC in effect at the time of approval. The approval shall be made an exhibit to the vested rights determination, and the determination shall be subject to the terms and conditions referenced in the approval. The determination shall expire upon expiration of the approval on which it was based.
d. Development Subject to Common Law Vested Rights
1. General Standards
(a)
There is a valid, unexpired act or omission of the City upon which the applicant relied; and
(b)
The applicant's reliance was reasonable and in good faith; and
(c)
The applicant, in reliance upon the valid, unexpired act, has made a substantial change in position and/or has incurred extensive obligations or expenses; and
(d)
It would be inequitable, unjust or fundamentally unfair to destroy the rights acquired by the applicant by means of the City's act or omissions.
2. Purchase of Property in Reliance on Existing Zoning is Sufficient
The purchase of property in reliance on then-existing zoning, without more, shall not vest the purchaser's right to develop in accordance with said zoning.
3. Not Considered Development Expenditures Without More
The following are not considered development expenditures or obligations in and of themselves, without more, unless the applicant was unable to obtain further approvals because of extraordinary delays beyond the applicant's control:
(a)
Expenditures for legal and other professional services that are not related to the design or construction of improvements;
(b)
Taxes paid; or
(c)
Expenditures for initial acquisition of the land.
e. Limitations on Vested Rights Determination
1.
Except as otherwise stated in the vested rights determination, upon the expiration of two years after the issuance of a vested rights determination, the determination shall expire and the issuance of development approvals or permits for the property subject to the vested rights determination shall be subject to the requirements of the comprehensive plan and this LDC.
2.
The applicant or the applicant’s successor may request an extension of the two-year period, which request must be filed not less than 90 days prior to the expiration of said time period. Such a request shall be scheduled for hearing by the City Council within 30 days after it is filed. The City Council
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 83
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.5 Relief
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
may grant extensions for such additional periods as it deems appropriate to avoid undue hardship to the applicant, provided the applicant pays all fees required by regulations in effect at that time.
All development subject to a vested rights determination shall be consistent with the terms of the development approval or permit upon which the determination was based. Any substantial deviation from a prior approval, except a deviation required by governmental action, shall cause the development involved to be subject to the comprehensive plan and this LDC. The City shall determine whether a proposed change is a substantial deviation, which is defined for purposes of this subsection as follows:
(a)
Any change to add a new land use or to change the vested mix of land uses that alters the basic character of the vested development; or
(b)
Any change in density or intensity of use that would increase the development's impacts on those public facilities subject to concurrency by more than five percent; or
(c)
Any change in access to the project that would increase the development's transportation impacts by more than five percent on any road subject to concurrency unless the access change would result in an overall improvement to the transportation network.
The holder of a determination may appeal a substantial deviation determination by the Director to the City Council, provided such appeal is filed within ten days after the date the written decision on the substantial deviation is mailed to the holder of the determination.
A change that is not a substantial deviation, as defined above, shall not divest vested rights.
A vested rights determination shall apply to the land and is therefore transferable from owner to owner of the land subject to the determination.
Development that is granted a vested rights determination shall be subject to the requirements of the comprehensive plan and this LDC except to the extent that the application of such requirements would result in the denial of:
(a)
The vested land uses;
(b)
The vested density or intensity of development;
(c)
The vested phasing of development; or
(d)
Other specifically vested development entitlements approved in the development order or orders on which the vested rights determination is based.
Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, a vested rights determination may be revoked by the City Council upon a showing by the City that a failure to revoke said determination would result in a peril to the health, safety or general welfare of the residents of the City unknown at the time of the approval of the determination.
Land Development Code Page 2 84 Apopka, FL
-
-
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.5 Relief
D. Appeals to City Council
1. Purpose
The purpose of this section is to establish a uniform mechanism for the appeal of certain decisions under this LDC to the City Council.
2. Types of Appeal
In accordance with Table 2.2.1: Summary table of Development Review Responsibilities, the following decisions may be appealed to the City Council in accordance with this section:
a. Special Exception Permit
A special exception permit (see Sec. 2.5.1.G, Special Exception Permit).
b. Minor Development Plan
A minor development plan (see Sec.2.5.2.A.4.a, Minor Development Plan
Procedure).
c. Zoning Variance
A zoning variance (see Sec. A, Zoning Variance).
d. Administrative Adjustment
An administrative adjustment (see Sec.2.5.5.B, Administrative Adjustment)
e. Interpretation
An interpretation of the Director (see Sec. 2.5.6, Interpretation).
3. Appeals Procedure
This subsection identifies additions or modifications to the standard review procedures in Sec. 2.4, Standard Review Procedures, that apply to an appeal to City Council. Figure 2.5.5.D.3 identifies key steps in the appeal procedure. Figure 2.5.5.D.3: Appeals Procedure Staff Review and Action Sec. 2.4.12 (A) Application Submission Appeal application to Director Scheduling of Public Hearing and Notice Decision Making Body Hearing, Review, and Decision City Council conducts a quasi judicial hearing, makes decision Sec. 2.4.3 Sec. 2.4.11 Sec. 2.4.6 Sec. 2.4.7 Notification to Applicant of Decision Director notifies applicant Director forwards appeal to City Council Director schedules hearings; Applicant provide notice Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 85
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.5 Relief
a. Informational Meeting
Optional (See Sec. 2.2.4.1, Informational Meeting).
b. Pre-Application Community Meeting
Not Applicable.
c. Application Submission
Applicable. (See Sec.2.4.3, Application Submission). An appeal application shall be submitted to the Director within 30 days after receipt of notice of the decision being appealed. The appeal application shall include: a statement of the decision to be reviewed, and the date of the decision; a statement of the interest of the person seeking review; and the specific error alleged as the grounds of the appeal.
d. Determination of Completeness
Not Applicable.
e. Application Amendment and Withdrawal
Not Applicable.
f. Staff Review and Action
Not Applicable. Instead, on accepting an appeal application, the Director shall transmit the application and all documents and other written materials relating to the appealed decision to the City Council. These materials, plus the comprehensive plan, other applicable City adopted plans, and this LDC, shall constitute the record of the appeal.
g. Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.7, Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification).
h. Deferral of Public Hearing
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.8, Deferral of Public Hearing).
i. Public Hearing Procedures
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.9, Public Hearing Procedures). The public hearing shall be on the record of the appeal, with presentations limited to arguments on the record of the appeal as it relates to the grounds for appeal specified in the appeal application.
j. Advisory Body Hearing and Recommendation
Not Applicable.
k. Decision-Making Body Review and Decision
1.
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.11 Decision-Making Body Hearing, Review, and Decision). The City Council shall consider the appeal at a quasi-judicial hearing and make a decision based on the review standards in Sec. 2.5.5.D.4, Appeal Review Standards.
2.
The City Council shall have the authority to:
Land Development Code Page 2 86 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.6 Interpretation
(a)
Request briefs to be filed on behalf of any party and prescribe filing and service requirements.
(b)
Hear argument on behalf of any party.
(c)
The City Council shall base its decision solely on the record of the appeal, as supplemented by arguments presented at the public hearing.
(d)
The final decision shall be one of the following:
i. Affirmation of the decision or interpretation being appealed (in whole or in part);
ii. Modification of the decision or interpretation being appealed (in whole or in part); or
iii. Reversal of the decision or interpretation being appealed (in whole or in part).
iv. Remand of the appeal back to the decision-making body appealed from, with direction for further action.
(e)
Members of City Council shall be governed by the conflict of interest requirements as established by the sunshine laws and the Florida Statutes.
(f)
No officer or employee of the City who has a financial or other private interest in a matter subject to an appeal shall participate in discussions with or give an official opinion to the Council on the proposal without first declaring for the record the nature and extent of the interest.
l. Post Decision-Making Action
Not Applicable.
4. Appeal Review Standards
The City Council may modify or reverse (in whole or in part) the decision or interpretation being appealed only if it finds there is competent substantial evidence in the record of the appeal that a clear and demonstrable error was made in the decision or interpretation.
5. Effect of Pending Appeal
A pending appeal stays all City actions in furtherance of the decision being appealed unless the Director certifies to the City Council that because of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or land. In that case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by an order issued by the City Council.
2.5.6. INTERPRETATION
A. Purpose
The purpose of this section is to provide a uniform mechanism for rendering formal written interpretations of the LDC.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 87
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.6 Interpretation
B. Applicability
The Director shall be responsible for making written interpretations under this section of all provisions of the LDC—including but not limited to: interpretations of the text of the LDC, interpretations of the zoning district boundaries, interpretations of compliance with a condition of approval, and interpretations of whether an unspecified use falls within a use classification, use category, or use type allowed in a zoning district. In making written interpretations, the Director may seek guidance from the City Attorney, and assistance from other City staff, as appropriate.
C. Interpretation Procedure
This subsection identifies additions or modifications to the standard review procedures in Sec. 2.4, Standard Review Procedures, that apply to interpretations. Figure 2.5.6.C identifies key steps in the interpretation procedure. Figure 2.5.6.C: Interpretation Procedure Determination of Completeness Staff Review and Action Sec. 2.4.12 (A) Informational Meeting Optional Director makes determination Sec. 2.4.1 Sec. 2.4.3 Sec. 2.4.4 Sec. 2.4.6 Sec. 2.5.6 Application Submission To Director Notification to Applicant of Decision Director notifies applicant Director renders formal written interpretation Appeal to City Council Optional
1. Informational Meeting
Optional (See Sec. 2.4.1, Informational Meeting).
2. Pre-Application Community Meeting
Not Applicable.
3. Application Submission
Applicable (See 2.4.3, Application Submission).
4. Determination of Completeness
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.4, Determination of Completeness).
5. Application Amendment or Withdrawal
Applicable (See Sec. 2.4.5, Application Amendment or Withdrawal).
Land Development Code Page 2 88 Apopka, FL
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.6 Interpretation
6. Staff Review and Action
Applicable (See Sec 2.4.6, Staff Review and Action). The Director reviews the request for interpretation, consults with the City Attorney and other city staff, as appropriate, and renders a formal written interpretation based on Sec. 2.5.7.F, Interpretation Decision Standards. The interpretation shall be in a form approved by the City Attorney and shall constitute the formal written interpretation. A written interpretation is binding on subsequent decisions by the Director or other City staff and officials in applying the same provision of the LDC or the Official Zoning District Map in the same circumstance(s), unless the interpretation is modified in accordance with this section, or the text of the LDC is amended.
7. Scheduling of Public Hearing and Public Notification
Not Applicable.
8. Public Hearing Procedures
Not Applicable.
9. Deferral of Public Hearing
Not Applicable.
10. Advisory Body Review and Recommendation
Not Applicable.
11. Decision-Making Body Review and Decision
Not Applicable.
12. Post Decision-Making Actions
Not Applicable. A party aggrieved by a decision of the Director on a written interpretation may appeal the Director’s decision to the City Council in accordance with Sec. 2.5.6, Appeal to City Council.
D. Tracking Interpretations
The Director shall maintain a copy of all written interpretations in one book, which shall be available in the office of the Director for public inspection, during normal business hours.
E. Amendment of Formal Written Interpretations
The Director may amend or repeal a formal written interpretation on the Director’s own initiative, or upon a request for interpretation submitted in accordance with this section, based upon new evidence or discovery of a mistake in the original interpretation, a change in State or federal law, an amendment to the LDC, or an amendment to the City Code of Ordinances that relates to the original formal written interpretation.
F. Interpretation Decision Standards
1. Text Provisions
Interpretation of a provision’s text, and its application shall be based on Sec. 10.1,
General Rules for Construction and Interpretation, Sec. 1.6, Relationship with Other
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 2 89
-
Article 2: Administration
Section 2.5 Application-Specific Review Procedures and Decision Standards
2.5.6 Interpretation
Laws, Covenants, or Other Private Agreements, and other considerations including, but not limited to, the following:
a.
The plain meaning of the provision’s wording, considering any terms specifically defined in Sec. 10.3, Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries, and Sec. 10.4, Definitions, and the common and accepted usage of terms; and
b.
The purpose of the provision, as indicated by:
1.
Any purpose statement in the section(s) where the text is located;
2.
The provision’s context and consistency with surrounding and related provisions;
3.
Any legislative history related to the provision’s adoption;
4.
The general purposes served by the LDC, as set forth in, Section 1.3, General Purpose and Intent; and
5.
The comprehensive plan.
2. Unspecified Uses
Interpretation of whether an unspecified use is similar to a use identified in Article 4: Use Regulations, Table 4.2.2.C, Principal Use Table, or is prohibited in a zoning district, shall be based on Sec. 10.3.2.A, Procedure for Interpreting Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries, and 10.3.2.B, Standards for Allowing Unlisted Principal Uses.
3. Zoning District Boundaries
Interpretation of zoning district boundaries shall be in accordance with Sec.10.3.2.D, Rules of Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries.
Land Development Code Page 2 90 Apopka, FL
Zoning Districts

Article 3
: Zoning Districts
..............................................................................
3-1
Section 3.1. General Provisions
.............................................................................................................
3-1
3.1.1.
Compliance With Zoning District Standards
.......................................................
3-1
3.1.2.
Establishment of Zoning Districts
.......................................................................
3-1
3.1.3.
Organization of Zoning Districts
.........................................................................
3-2
Section 3.2. Agricultural and Transitional Base Zoning Districts
...........................................................
3-5
3.2.1.
General Purposes of Agricultural and Transitional Base Zoning Districts
..........
3-5
3.2.2.
Established Agricultural and Transitional Base Zoning Districts
.........................
3-5
3.2.3.
AG: Agriculture District
.......................................................................................
3-6
3.2.4.
T: Transitional District
.........................................................................................
3-9
Section 3.3. Residential Base Zoning Districts
.....................................................................................
3-11
3.3.1.
General Purposes Of Residential Base Zoning Districts
....................................
3-11
3.3.2.
Established Residential Base Zoning Districts
...................................................
3-11
3.3.3.
RCE: Residential Country Estate District
...........................................................
3-12
3.3.4.
RSF-1A: Residential Single-Family Estate District
.............................................
3-14
3.3.5.
RSF-1B: Residential Single-Family District – Large Lot
......................................
3-16
3.3.6.
RTF: Residential Two-Family District
................................................................
3-18
3.3.7.
RMF: Residential Multi-Family District
.............................................................
3-20
3.3.8.
RMU: Residential Mixed-Use District
...............................................................
3-22
3.3.9.
MHP: Mobile Home Park District
......................................................................
3-24
Section 3.4. Commercial Base Zoning Districts
...................................................................................
3-27
3.4.1.
General Purposes of Commercial Zoning Districts
...........................................
3-27
3.4.2.
Established Commercial Base Zoning Districts
.................................................
3-27
3.4.3.
C-N: Neighborhood Commercial District
..........................................................
3-28
3.4.4.
C-C: Community Commercial District
...............................................................
3-30
3.4.5.
C-R: Regional Commercial District
....................................................................
3-32
3.4.6.
O: Office District
................................................................................................
3-34
3.4.7.
C-COR: Corridor Commercial District
................................................................
3-36
Section 3.5. Industrial Base Zoning Districts
.......................................................................................
3-38
3.5.1.
General Purposes of Industrial Districts
...........................................................
3-38
3.5.2.
Established Industrial Districts
..........................................................................
3-38
3.5.3.
I-L: Light Industrial District
................................................................................
3-40
3.5.4.
I-H: Heavy Industrial District
.............................................................................
3-42
Section 3.6. Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts
.............................................................................
3-45
3.6.1.
General Purpose Of Special Purpose Districts
..................................................
3-45
3.6.2.
Established Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts
...........................................
3-45
3.6.3.
MU-D: Mixed-Use Downtown District
..............................................................
3-46
3.6.4.
MU-ES: Mixed-Use East Shore District
.............................................................
3-50
3.6.5.
MU-ES-RTE: Mixed Use East Shore-Research/Technology/Education Subdistrict 3-52
3.6.6.
MU-ES-NM: Mixed Use East Shore-New Market Subdistrict
............................
3-56
3.6.7.
MU-ES-GT: Mixed-Use East Shore-Gateway Subdistrict
...................................
3-60
3.6.8.
MU-KPI: Kelly Park Interchange District Mixed-Use
.........................................
3-64
3.6.9.
INST: Institutional District
.................................................................................
3-66
3.6.10.
PR: Parks and Recreation District
.....................................................................
3-68
3.6.11.
AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District
................................................................
3-70
Section 3.7. Planned Development District
.........................................................................................
3-83
3.7.1.
Established Planned Development Zoning District
...........................................
3-83
3.7.2.
Planned Development District
..........................................................................
3-83
Section 3.8. Overlay Districts
..............................................................................................................
3-89
3.8.1.
General Purposes of Overlay Districts
..............................................................
3-89
3.8.2.
Established Overlay Zoning Districts
.................................................................
3-89
3.8.3.
Conflicting Standards
........................................................................................
3-89
3.8.4.
Classification of Overlay Districts
......................................................................
3-90
3.8.5.
NC-O: Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District
........................................
3-90
3.8.6.
H-O: Historic Overlay District
............................................................................
3-92
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.1 General Provisions
3.1.1 Compliance With Zoning District Standards
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
3.1.1. COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING DISTRICT STANDARDS
Land in the City shall not be developed except in accordance with the zoning district regulations of this article and all other regulations of this LDC.
3.1.2. ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
This LDC establishes the base, planned development, and overlay zoning districts identified in Table 3.1.2: Establishment of Zoning Districts. The boundaries of each of the zoning districts are identified on the Official Zoning District Map.
TABLE 3.1.2: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
Base Districts
Agricultural and Transitional Districts
AG: Agriculture
T: Transitional
Residential Districts
RCE: Residential Country Estate
RSF-1A: Residential Single-Family – Estate
RSF-1B: Residential Single-Family – Large Lot
RTF: Residential Two-Family
RMF: Residential Multi-Family
RMU: Residential Mixed-Use
MHP: Mobile Home Park
Commercial Districts
C-N: Neighborhood Commercial
C-C: Community Commercial
C-R: Regional Commercial
O: Office
C-COR: Corridor Commercial
Industrial Districts
I-L: Light Industrial
I-H: Heavy Industrial
Special Purpose Districts
MU-D: Downtown – Mixed-Use
MU-ES: Mixed-Use – East Shore
MU-KPI: Mixed-Use – Kelly Park Interchange
INST: Institutional
PR: Parks and Recreation
AIR: Airport
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 1
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.1 General Provisions
3.1.3 Organization of Zoning Districts
TA
BLE 3.1.2: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS Planned Development Districts
PD: Planned Development
Ov
erlay Districts
H-O: Historic Overlay
NC-O: Neighborhood Conservation Overlay
3.1.3. ORGANIZATION OF ZONING DISTRICTS
A. Base Zoning Districts
1.
Base zoning districts include Residential, Commercial, Industrial, and Special Purpose districts, as shown in Table 3.1.2: Establishment of Zoning Districts. Base districts are established initially by the City’s adoption of this LDC, and subsequently by a zoning map amendment (see Sec. 2.5.1.D., General Map Amendment, or Sec 2.5.1.E., Site-Specific Map Amendment).
2.
The general intent and standards of each base zoning district is set forth in Section 3.3, Residential Base Zoning Districts, through Section 3.6, Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts.
3.
For each base zoning district, the regulations set out the district’s purpose, the density and intensity and other dimensional standards applicable in the district, form standards (where relevant), and reference other LDC standards generally applicable to development in the district. Each base zoning district also includes photographs depicting a building form typical in the district and an illustration depicting how the district’s dimensional standards apply to lots and typical building forms. Graphics are included for illustrative purposes and show the application of the dimensional, density, and intensity standards to some of the uses allowed in the district. If there is a conflict between the illustrations and the text or tables, the text and tables control.
B. Planned Development Districts
1.
The general purpose of the planned development district is set forth in Section 3.7, Planned Development District , in addition to the standards applicable to the proposed planned development district.
2.
Planned development districts are adopted by the City Council as amendments to the Official Zoning District Map in accordance with Sec. 2.5.1.F, Planned Development, and Sec. 2.5.1.E, Site-Specific Zoning Map Amendment. The name and location of the specific PD District is shown on the Official Zoning District Map and recorded, as appropriate.
3.
Planned development districts are subject to an approved PD Plan and PD Agreement, which establishes a plan for development, and specific rules for individual PD Districts. As provided in Sec. 2.5.1.F, Planned Development, the PD Plan and PD Agreement is included with the adopting ordinance, and recorded, as appropriate.
C. Overlay Districts
1. Overlay zoning districts (see Table 3.1.2, Establishment of Zoning Districts) are established initially by the City’s adoption of this LDC, and subsequently by approval
Land Development Code Page 3 2 Apopka, FL
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.1 General Provisions
3.1.3 Organization of Zoning Districts
of a zoning map amendment (see Sec. 2.5.1.D, General Map Amendment, or Sec. 2.5.1.E, Site-Specific Map Amendment (Rezoning)).
2. Standards governing development in an overlay zoning district shall apply in addition to, or instead of, the standards governing development in the underlying base zoning district or PD District. If the regulations governing an overlay district expressly conflict with those governing an underlying base zoning district, the regulations governing the overlay district shall control. If land is classified into multiple overlay districts and the regulations governing one overlay district expressly conflict with those governing another overlay district, the more restrictive regulations control
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 3

-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.2 Agricultural and Transitional Base Zoning Districts
3.2.1 General Purposes of Agricultural and Transitional Base Zoning Districts
Section 3.2. AGRICULTURAL AND TRANSITIONAL BASE ZONING DISTRICTS
3.2.1. GENERAL PURPOSES OF AGRICULTURAL AND TRANSITIONAL BASE ZONING DISTRICTS
The purpose and intent of the Agricultural and Transitional base districts are to:
A. Provide appropriately located lands for agricultural and nursery production, agricultural support uses, low-density residential dwellings in a rural setting, and related uses; and
B. Accommodate lands that are annexed into the City without the concurrent adoption of another base zoning district.
3.2.2. ESTABLISHED AGRICULTURAL AND TRANSITIONAL BASE ZONING DISTRICTS
The agricultural and transitional base zoning districts established by this LDC are identified in Table 3.2.2: Established Agricultural and Transitional Base Zoning Districts.
TABLE3.2.2: ESTABLISHED AGRICULTURAL AND TRANSITIONAL BASE ZONING DISTRICTS
AG: Agriculture
T: Transitional
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 5
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.2 Agricultural and Transitional Base Zoning Districts
3.2.3 AG: Agriculture District
3.2.3. AG: AGRICULTURE DISTRICT Purpose A. The purpose of the AG: Agriculture District is to provide for lands that accommodate agricultural and nursery production, agricultural support uses, and low-density single-family detached dwellings in a rural setting. The district includes significant areas of open space, and a minimum lot area of two and one-half acres. District regulations discourage development that substantially interferes with agriculture production, nurseries, and the general rural character of the district. Use Standards B. Allowed uses and use-specific standards for principal, accessory, and temporary uses are established in Article 4: Use Regulations. Intensity and Dimensional Standards C.
Standard
Single-family[1]
All Other Uses
Lot Area, min. (sf.)
108,900
108,900
Living Area, min. (sf.)
2,000
Not applicable
1Lot Width, min. (ft.)
150(1)
None
2Front Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
45
100
3Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
35
100
4Corner Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
35
100
5Rear Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
50
100
Building Height, max. (ft.)
35
35
Density, max (dus/acre)
0.4
0.4
Notes: sf. = square feet; ft. = feet; ; min.= minimum; max.= maximum
[1] Lot area, minimum is applied for every dwelling unit.
[2] Lots located on cul-de-sacs and curves are allowed to reduce lot width by up to 40 percent of the minimum width at the property line, but are required to maintain a 150 feet width at the building line.
Land Development Code Page 3 6 Apopka, FL
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.2 Agricultural and Transitional Base Zoning Districts
3.2.3 AG: Agriculture District
D. Reference to Other Standards
Article 5: Development Standards Section 5.10 Signs
Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and
Section 5.1 Section 5.11 Green Building Standards
Loading Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards Section 5.12 Green Building Incentives
Section 5.3
Tree Protection Standards
Section 5.13
Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
Section 5.4
Open Space Set-Aside Standards
Section 5.14
Utilities
Section 5.5
Fences and Walls
Section 5.15
Guarantees and Sureties
Section 5.6
Exterior Lighting
Section 5.16
Miscellaneous Standards
Section 5.7
Development Design Guidelines
Article 6:
Environmental Standards
Section 5.8
Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
Article 7:
Concurrency Management System
Section 5.9
Agricultural Compatibility Standards
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 7

-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.2 Agricultural and Transitional Base Zoning Districts
3.2.4 T: Transitional District
3.2.4. T: TRANSITIONAL DISTRICT Purpose A. Use Standards B.
The purpose of the T: Transitional district is to provide a base zoning district to accommodate lands that are annexed into the City without the concurrent adoption of another base zoning district other than the T district. Lands in the T district are allowed to be developed at low densities, and are intended to be amended at the appropriate time to a different zoning district that is consistent with the Future Land Use Map (FLUM) and the goals, objectives, and policies of the comprehensive plan.
Allowed uses and use-specific standards for principal, accessory, and temporary uses are established in Article 4: Use Regulations.
C. Intensity and Dimensional Standards
Standard
All Uses
Lot Area, min. (sf.)
108,900
1Lot Width, min. (ft.)
150
2Front Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
50
3Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
50
4Corner Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
50
5Rear Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
50
Building Height, max. (ft.)
35
Density, max (dus/acre)
0.4
Notes: sf. = square feet; ft. = feet; min.= minimum; max.= maximum
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 9
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.2 Agricultural and Transitional Base Zoning Districts
3.2.4 T: Transitional District
D. Reference to Other Standards
Article 5: Development Standards Section 5.10 Signs
Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and
Section 5.1 Section 5.11 Green Building Standards
Loading Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards Section 5.12 Green Building Incentives
Section 5.3
Tree Protection Standards
Section 5.13
Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
Section 5.4
Open Space Set-Aside Standards
Section 5.14
Utilities
Section 5.5
Fences and Walls
Section 5.15
Guarantees and Sureties
Section 5.6
Exterior Lighting
Section 5.16
Miscellaneous Standards
Section 5.7
Development Design Guidelines
Article 6:
Environmental Standards
Section 5.8
Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
Article 7:
Concurrency Management System
Section 5.9
Agricultural Compatibility Standards
Land Development Code Page 3 10 Apopka, FL
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.3 Residential Base Zoning Districts
3.3.1 General Purposes Of Residential Base Zoning Districts
Section 3.3. RESIDENTIAL BASE ZONING DISTRICTS
3.3.1. GENERAL PURPOSES OF RESIDENTIAL BASE ZONING DISTRICTS
The purpose and intent of Residential base zoning districts are to:
A. Provide appropriately located lands for residential development that are consistent with the goals, policies, and objectives of the comprehensive plan, and other adopted City plans;
B. Support and preserve the development pattern and character of established neighborhoods;
C. Provide a range and diversity of housing choices, with varying densities, types, and designs, to meet the needs of the City’s citizens;
D. Provide for safe and efficient vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian access and circulation, and neighborhoods that promote multiple forms of mobility;
E. Protect residential neighborhoods from incompatible development;
F. Protect residential districts from flooding and other adverse environmental impacts;
G. Provide for the public services and facilities needed to serve residential development;
H. Maintain the City's neighborhoods as safe and convenient places to live;
I. Ensure compatible infill development; and
J. Promote green building practices in terms of energy efficiency and conservation, the use of alternative energy, greenhouse gas reduction, water supply and water quality protection, food security, materials recycling, and similar goals.
3.3.2. ESTABLISHED RESIDENTIAL BASE ZONING DISTRICTS
The residential base zoning districts established by this LDC are identified in Table 3.3.2: Established Residential Base Zoning Districts.
TABLE 3.3.2: ESTABLISHED RESIDENTIAL BASE ZONING DISTRICTS
RCE: Residential Country Estate
RSF-1A: Residential Single-Family – Estate
RSF-1B: Residential Single-Family – Large Lot
RTF: Residential Two-Family
RMF: Residential Multi-Family
RMU: Residential Mixed-Use
MHP: Mobile Home Park
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 11
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.3 Residential Base Zoning Districts
3.3.3 RCE: Residential Country Estate District
3.3.3. RCE: RESIDENTIAL COUNTRY ESTATE DISTRICT Purpose A. The purpose of the RCE: Residential Country Estate district is to provide lands to accommodate nurseries and other agricultural activities, as well as single-family detached residential dwellings at low densities in a more rural setting. The district includes significant areas of open space, and a minimum lot area of one acre per dwelling unit. District regulations discourage development that substantially interferes with nurseries and the general rural and open character of the district. Use Standards B. Allowed uses and use-specific standards for principal, accessory, and temporary uses are established in Article 4: Use Regulations. Intensity and Dimensional Standards C.
Standard
Single-family [one du]
All Other Uses
Lot Area, min. (ft.)
43,560
43,560
Living Area, min. (sf)
2,000
Not applicable
1Lot Width, min. (ft.)
130
130
2Front Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
35
35
3Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
15
15
4 Corner Side Yard/ Double Front Setback, min. (ft.)
35
35
5Rear Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
35
35
Building Height, max. (ft.)
35
35
Density, max (dus/acre)
1
Not applicable
Notes: sf. = square feet; ft. = feet; min.= minimum; max.= maximum; du=dwelling unit
Land Development Code Page 3 12 Apopka, FL
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.3 Residential Base Zoning Districts
3.3.3 RCE: Residential Country Estate District
D. Reference to Other Standards
Article 5: Development Standards Section 5.10 Signs
Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and
Section 5.1 Section 5.11 Green Building Standards
Loading Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards Section 5.12 Green Building Incentives
Section 5.3
Tree Protection Standards
Section 5.13
Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
Section 5.4
Open Space Set-Aside Standards
Section 5.14
Utilities
Section 5.5
Fences and Walls
Section 5.15
Guarantees and Sureties
Section 5.6
Exterior Lighting
Section 5.16
Miscellaneous Standards
Section 5.7
Development Design Guidelines
Article 6:
Environmental Standards
Section 5.8
Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
Article 7:
Concurrency Management System
Section 5.9
Agricultural Compatibility Standards
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 13
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.3 Residential Base Zoning Districts
3.3.4 RSF-1A: Residential Single-Family Estate District
3.3.4. RSF-1A: RESIDENTIAL SINGLE-FAMILY ESTATE DISTRICT Purpose A. Use Standards B.
The purpose of the RSF-1A: Residential Single-Family Estate district is to provide lands that accommodate primarily medium-density, single-family detached dwellings on lots with a minimum lot area of 12,500 square feet per dwelling unit. The district also accommodates parks and minor utility facilities. District regulations discourage development that substantially interferes with the quiet residential nature of the district.
Allowed uses and use-specific standards for principal, accessory, and temporary uses are established in Article 4: Use Regulations.
C. Intensity and Dimensional Standards
Standard
Single-family [one du]
All Other Uses
Lot Area, min. (sf.)
12,500
12,500
Living Area, min. (sf)
1,800
Not applicable
1Lot Width, min. (ft.)
95
95
2Front Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
25
25
3Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
10
10
4 Corner Side Yard/Double Front Setback, min. (ft.)
25
25
5Rear Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
25
25
Building Height, max. (ft.)
35
35
Density, max (dus/acre)
3 [1]
3 [1]
Notes: sf. = square feet; ft. = feet; min.= minimum; max.= maximum; du=dwelling unit
[1] Residential development north of Ponkan Road and west of Rock Springs Road (Park Avenue) shall be restricted to no more than two dwelling units an acre, unless otherwise authorized through the adopted Wekiva Parkway Interchange Plan.
Land Development Code Page 3 14 Apopka, FL
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.3 Residential Base Zoning Districts
3.3.4 RSF-1A: Residential Single-Family Estate District
D. Reference to Other Standards
Article 5: Development Standards Section 5.10 Signs
Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and
Section 5.1 Section 5.11 Green Building Standards
Loading Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards Section 5.12 Green Building Incentives
Section 5.3
Tree Protection Standards
Section 5.13
Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
Section 5.4
Open Space Set-Aside Standards
Section 5.14
Utilities
Section 5.5
Fences and Walls
Section 5.15
Guarantees and Sureties
Section 5.6
Exterior Lighting
Section 5.16
Miscellaneous Standards
Section 5.7
Development Design Guidelines
Article 6:
Environmental Standards
Section 5.8
Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
Article 7:
Concurrency Management System
Section 5.9
Agricultural Compatibility Standards
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 15
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.3 Residential Base Zoning Districts
3.3.5 RSF-1B: Residential Single-Family District – Large Lot
3.3.5. RSF-1B: RESIDENTIAL SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICT – LARGE LOT Purpose A. Use Standards B.
The purpose of the RSF-1B: Residential Single-Family-Large Lot district is to provide lands that accommodate primarily single-family detached dwellings on lots with a minimum area of 8,000 square feet per dwelling unit. The district also accommodates parks and minor utility facilities. District regulations discourage development that substantially interferes with the quiet residential nature of the district.
Allowed uses and use-specific standards for principal, accessory, and temporary uses are established in Article 4: Use Regulations.
C. Intensity and Dimensional Standards
Standard
Single-family [one du]
All Other Uses
Lot Area, min. (sf.)
8,000
8,000
Living Area, min. (sf.)
1,600
Not applicable
1Lot Width, min. (ft.)
75
75
2Front Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
25
25
3Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
10
10
4 Corner Side Yard / Double Front Setback, min. (ft.)
25
25
5Rear Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
25
25
Building Height, max. (ft.)
35
35
Density, max (dus/acre)
5 [1]
Not applicable
Notes: sf. = square feet; ft. = feet; min.= minimum; max.= maximum; du=dwelling unit
[1] Residential development north of Ponkan Road and west of Rock Springs Road (Park Avenue) shall be restricted to no more than 2 development units an acre, unless otherwise authorized through the adopted Wekiva Parkway Interchange Plan.
Land Development Code Page 3 16 Apopka, FL
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.3 Residential Base Zoning Districts
3.3.5 RSF-1B: Residential Single-Family District – Large Lot
D. Reference to Other Standards
Article 5: Development Standards Section 5.10 Signs
Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and
Section 5.1 Section 5.11 Green Building Standards
Loading Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards Section 5.12 Green Building Incentives
Section 5.3
Tree Protection Standards
Section 5.13
Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
Section 5.4
Open Space Set-Aside Standards
Section 5.14
Utilities
Section 5.5
Fences and Walls
Section 5.15
Guarantees and Sureties
Section 5.6
Exterior Lighting
Section 5.16
Miscellaneous Standards
Section 5.7
Development Design Guidelines
Article 6:
Environmental Standards
Section 5.8
Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
Article 7:
Concurrency Management System
Section 5.9
Agricultural Compatibility Standards
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 17
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.3 Residential Base Zoning Districts
3.3.6 RTF: Residential Two-Family District
3.3.6. RTF: RESIDENTIAL TWO-FAMILY DISTRICT Purpose A. Use Standards B.
The purpose of the RTF: Residential Two-Family district is to provide lands to accommodate primarily single-family detached dwellings and two-family attached dwellings. The district also accommodates parks, community gardens, and minor utility facilities. District regulations discourage development that substantially interferes with the residential nature of the district.
Allowed uses and use-specific standards for principal, accessory, and temporary uses are established in Article 4: Use Regulations.
C. Intensity and Dimensional Standards
Standard
Single-family [one du]
Two-Family [two du]
All Other Uses
Lot Area, min. (sf.)
7,500
15,000
7,500
Living Area, min. (sf per unit)
1,500
1,500
Not Applicable
1Lot Width, min. (ft.)
70
140
70
2Front Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
25
25
25
3Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
7.5 [1]
18 [1]
7.5 [1]
4 Corner Side Yard/ Double Front Setback, min. (ft.)
25
25
25
5Rear Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
25
25
25
Building Height, max. (ft.)
35
35
35
Density, max (dus/acre)
5 [2]
5 [2]
Not applicable
Notes: sf. = square feet; ft. = feet; min.= minimum; max.= maximum; du=dwelling unit
[1] Minimum of 15 feet between structures.
[2] Residential development north of Ponkan Road and west of Rock Springs Road (Park Avenue) will be restricted to no more than two dwelling units per acre, unless otherwise authorized through the adopted Wekiva Parkway Interchange Plan.
Land Development Code Page 3 18 Apopka, FL
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.3 Residential Base Zoning Districts
3.3.6 RTF: Residential Two-Family District
D. Reference to Other Standards
Article 5: Development Standards Section 5.10 Signs
Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and
Section 5.1 Section 5.11 Green Building Standards
Loading Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards Section 5.12 Green Building Incentives
Section 5.3
Tree Protection Standards
Section 5.13
Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
Section 5.4
Open Space Set-Aside Standards
Section 5.14
Utilities
Section 5.5
Fences and Walls
Section 5.15
Guarantees and Sureties
Section 5.6
Exterior Lighting
Section 5.16
Miscellaneous Standards
Section 5.7
Development Design Guidelines
Article 6:
Environmental Standards
Section 5.8
Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
Article 7:
Concurrency Management System
Section 5.9
Agricultural Compatibility Standards
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 19
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.3 Residential Base Zoning Districts
3.3.7 RMF: Residential Multi-Family District
3.3.7. RMF: RESIDENTIAL MULTI-FAMILY DISTRICT Purpose A. Use Standards B.
The purpose of the RMF: Residential Multi-Family district is to primarily accommodate small and medium scale multifamily development, that is oriented toward the street, and provides pedestrian entrances from the street. The district also accommodates detached single-family detached dwellings, two-family dwellings, townhomes, parks and recreation centers, and community gardens.
Allowed uses and use-specific standards for principal, accessory, and temporary uses are established in Article 4: Use Regulations.
C. Intensity and Dimensional Standards
Standard
Single-family [one du]
Two-Family & Townhome
Multi-Family
All Other Uses
Lot Area, min. (sf.)
7,500
15,000
43,560
7,500
Living Area, min. (sf per unit)
1,500
1,500
750 (1bd) 900 (2+bd)
Not applicable
1Lot Width, min. (ft.)
70
140
100
70
2Front Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
25
25
25
25
3Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
7.5 [1]
10[1]
15[1]
7.5
4 Corner Side Yard/ Double Front Setback, min. (ft.)
25
25
25
25
5Rear Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
25
25
25
25
Building Height, max. (ft.)
35
35
35
35
Density, max (dus/acre)
5 [2]
Two-Family:5 Townhome:10 [2]
10 [2]
Not applicable
Notes: sf. = square feet; ft. = feet; ; min.= minimum; max.= maximum; du= dwelling unit; bd=bedroom
[1] Minimum of 15’ between structures, only applies to exterior units.
[2] Residential development north of Ponkan Road and west of Rock Springs Road (Park Avenue) shall be restricted to no more than two dwelling units an acre, unless otherwise authorized through the adopted Wekiva Parkway Interchange Plan.
Land Development Code Page 3 20 Apopka, FL
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.3 Residential Base Zoning Districts
3.3.7 RMF: Residential Multi-Family District
D. Reference to Other Standards
Article 5: Development Standards Section 5.10 Signs
Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and
Section 5.1 Section 5.11 Green Building Standards
Loading Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards Section 5.12 Green Building Incentives
Section 5.3
Tree Protection Standards
Section 5.13
Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
Section 5.4
Open Space Set-Aside Standards
Section 5.14
Utilities
Section 5.5
Fences and Walls
Section 5.15
Guarantees and Sureties
Section 5.6
Exterior Lighting
Section 5.16
Miscellaneous Standards
Section 5.7
Development Design Guidelines
Article 6:
Environmental Standards
Section 5.8
Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
Article 7:
Concurrency Management System
Section 5.9
Agricultural Compatibility Standards
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 21
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.3 Residential Base Zoning Districts
3.3.8 RMU: Residential Mixed-Use District
3.3.8. RMU: RESIDENTIAL MIXED-USE DISTRICT Purpose A. The purpose of the RMU: Residential Mixed-Use district is to accommodate a variety of medium density residential development, as well as small and medium-scale retail, personal service, eating and drinking establishment, and mixed-use development that supports walkable urbanism. District development should be oriented to the street, be walkable and support multiple modes of mobility. The vertical mixing of residential and nonresidential uses within a single project, with residential development above the ground floor is strongly encouraged. The horizontal mixing of well-integrated stand-alone residential and nonresidential development is also encouraged. Use Standards B. Allowed uses and use-specific standards for principal, accessory, and temporary uses are established in Article 4: Use Regulations. Intensity and Dimensional Standards C.
Standard
Townhome
Multi-Family
Other Uses
Lot Area, min. (sf.)
8,000
8,000
5,000
Living Area, min. (sf per unit)
1,350
750 (1 bd) 900 (2+bd)
750
1Lot Width, min. (ft.)
50
100
100
2Front Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
15
15
15
3Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
7.5[1]
10[1]
10[1]
4 Corner Side Yard / Double Front Setback, min. (ft.)
7.5
20
10[1]
5Rear Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
20
25
25
Building Height, max. (ft.)
35
35
35
Density, max (dus/acre)
5 [2]
8 [2]
Not applicable
Notes: sf. = square feet; ft. = feet; min.= minimum; max.= maximum; bd=bedroom
[1] Only applies to the exterior units.
Land Development Code Page 3 22 Apopka, FL
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.3 Residential Base Zoning Districts
3.3.8 RMU: Residential Mixed-Use District
[2] Residential development north of Ponkan Road and west of Rock Springs Road (Park Avenue) will be restricted to no more than two dwelling units an acre, unless otherwise authorized through the adopted Wekiva Parkway Interchange Plan.
D. Reference to Other Standards
Article 5: Development Standards Section 5.10 Signs
Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and
Section 5.1 Section 5.11 Green Building Standards
Loading Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards Section 5.12 Green Building Incentives
Section 5.3
Tree Protection Standards
Section 5.13
Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
Section 5.4
Open Space Set-Aside Standards
Section 5.14
Utilities
Section 5.5
Fences and Walls
Section 5.15
Guarantees and Sureties
Section 5.6
Exterior Lighting
Section 5.16
Miscellaneous Standards
Section 5.7
Development Design Guidelines
Article 6:
Environmental Standards
Section 5.8
Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
Article 7:
Concurrency Management System
Section 5.9
Agricultural Compatibility Standards
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 23
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.3 Residential Base Zoning Districts
3.3.9 MHP: Mobile Home Park District
3.3.9. MHP: MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT Purpose A. The purpose of the MHP: Mobile Home Park District is to provide a zoning district for lands that existed on March 6, 2019 that accommodate mobile homes sites as part of an overall existing subdivision of mobile home parks. It is intended that the mobile home parks: include residences and related support services and recreational facilities and other amenities; respect the topographic and other environmental characteristics of the site on which they are located; and mitigate potential adverse impacts on surrounding development. It is also the intent of the City Council in adopting this district that no other lands be classified MHP: Mobile Home Park, after March 6, 2019. Use Standards B. Allowed uses and use-specific standards for principal, accessory, and temporary uses are established in Article 4: Use Regulations. Intensity and Dimensional Standards C.
Standard
All Uses
Lot Area, min. (sf.)
3,500 [1]
Lot Width, min. (ft.)
Not Applicable
Front Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
7.5
Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
15 [2]
Corner Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
[3]
Rear Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
7.5
Building Height, max. (ft.)
35
Min. living area (sf)
600
Notes: sf. = square feet; ft. = feet; min.= minimum; max.= maximum
[1] Each mobile home space shall contain a minimum of 4,000 square feet in area, excluding road right-of-way.
[2] Side yards shall be a minimum of 15 feet between structures.
[3] Corner or outside setbacks, including those for accessory structures shall be a minimum of 15 feet from the mobile home space boundary line.
[4] Residential development north of Ponkan Road and west of Rock Springs Road (Park Avenue) shall be restricted to no more than two dwelling units an acre, unless otherwise authorized through the adopted Wekiva Parkway Interchange Plan.
Land Development Code Page 3 24 Apopka, FL
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.3 Residential Base Zoning Districts
3.3.9 MHP: Mobile Home Park District
Other Standards D.
A mobile home park shall be a minimum of 10 acres in area. A minimum of ten mobile home spaces shall be completed for
Minimum Area
occupancy at initial opening for business.
Ownership A mobile home park shall be under single ownership. No lots or trailer spaces may be sold individually.
(A)
All streets and driveways shall be constructed using generally accepted engineering practices to allow proper drainage of the entire park, and safe and adequate access to each mobile home site.
(B)
All streets within the park shall have a minimum pavement width of 20 feet.
Streets (C) All mobile homes shall be setback a minimum of 20 feet from all streets or access points, as measured from the right-ofway edge.
(D)
All streets shall be lit at night by electric lights providing a minimum illumination of two-tenths (0.2) foot-candles.
(E)
Parking is prohibited on any mobile home park access or circulation drive.
Spaces
Each mobile home within the park shall be located on a space that is:
(A)
A minimum of 3500 square feet in area.
(B)
Clearly defined by permanent markers that physically delineate its location within the park.
(C)
Designed so each mobile home will be adequately supported and anchored so as to comply with the state requirements for the anchoring of mobile homes.
Each mobile home shall be surrounded with a skirt or apron that is placed between the bottom of the unit and the ground.
Skirt
(The skirt or apron shall be adequately maintained by the owner of the mobile home.)
Setbacks All development in the mobile home park shall be setback a minimum of 35 feet from the perimeter of the park
(A)
Except for (B), (C), and (D) below, a six-foot-high brick, stone or decorative block wall adjacent to external roadways, shall be erected inside a minimum ten-foot landscaped bufferyard, with landscape materials placed adjacent to the right-ofway on the exterior of the buffer wall.
(B)
Mobile home parks adjacent to an AG: Agricultural or T:Transitional district, or agricultural uses, shall provide a minimum five-foot bufferyard and a six-foot-high brick, stone, or decorative block finished wall unless acceptable alternative buffering methods are submitted and approved by City council.
Buffers (C) Mobile home parks adjacent to a Residential district, or existing single-family residential neighborhoods, or a multi-family development, shall provide a minimum of ten feet abutting the property line with a landscape bufferyard and a six-foothigh brick, stone or decorative block finished wall. The developer may provide up to 50 percent of the buffer wall length in a six-foot wrought iron fence between solid columns, if the columns have a minimum of 32 feet off-set and have a stone, brick or decorative block finish. Where wrought iron is used, additional landscape materials and irrigation may be required to ensure adequate buffering occurs.
(D) A ten-foot landscaped bufferyard shall be required if a mobile home park is adjacent to another mobile home park.
Water Utilities The mobile home park shall be served by public water and wastewater systems.
Other Laws Development in the mobile home park shall be in compliance with all applicable state and federal laws and regulations.
Reference to Other Standards E.
Article 5: Development Standards Section 5.10 Signs
Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and
Section 5.1 Section 5.11 Green Building Standards
Loading Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards Section 5.12 Green Building Incentives
Section 5.3
Tree Protection Standards
Section 5.13
Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
Section 5.4
Open Space Set-Aside Standards
Section 5.14
Utilities
Section 5.5
Fences and Walls
Section 5.15
Guarantees and Sureties
Section 5.6
Exterior Lighting
Section 5.16
Miscellaneous Standards
Section 5.7
Development Design Guidelines
Article 6:
Environmental Standards
Section 5.8
Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
Article 7:
Concurrency Management System
Section 5.9
Agricultural Compatibility Standards
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 25

-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.4 Commercial Base Zoning Districts
3.4.1 General Purposes of Commercial Zoning Districts
Section 3.4. COMMERCIAL BASE ZONING DISTRICTS
3.4.1. GENERAL PURPOSES OF COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
The commercial base zoning districts are established for the general purpose of ensuring there are lands in the City that provide a wide range of retail, office, service, employment, and related development to meet the needs of the City’s residents, and more specifically to:
A. Strengthen the City’s economic base, and provide employment opportunities close to home for City residents;
B. Provide appropriately located lands for a full range of business and commercial uses needed by the City’s residents, businesses, and workers, consistent with the goals, objectives, and policies of the comprehensive plan and other adopted City plans;
C. Create suitable environments for various types of mixed-use development, where business, office, retail, and residential development is designed and integrated in compatible ways;
D. Encourage, support and ensure a high quality design in retail, office, service, employment, and related development in the City;
E. Accommodate new infill development and redevelopment that is consistent with the goals, objectives, and policies of the comprehensive plan and other adopted City plans, especially along certain of the City’s older commercial corridors,;
F. Ensure commercial development is located and designed to protect and preserve the character of single-family neighborhoods; and
G. Create suitable environments for various types of businesses, and protect them from the adverse effects of incompatible development.
3.4.2. ESTABLISHED COMMERCIAL BASE ZONING DISTRICTS
The commercial base zoning districts established by this LDC are identified in Table 3.4.2: Established Commercial Base Zoning Districts.
TABLE 3.4.2: ESTABLISHED COMMERCIAL BASE ZONING DISTRICTS
C-N: Neighborhood Commercial
C-C: Community Commercial
C-R: Regional Commercial
O: Office
C-COR: Corridor Commercial
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 27
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.4 Commercial Base Zoning Districts
3.4.3 C-N: Neighborhood Commercial District
3.4.3. C-N: NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT Purpose A. The purpose of the C-N: Neighborhood Commercial district is to provide lands that accommodate a range of small-scale, low-intensity, neighborhood-serving commercial development that provide goods and services to residents of a neighborhood. District regulations are intended to ensure uses, development intensities, and development form that is consistent with a pedestrian-friendly and neighborhood scale. Development allowed in the district includes limited retail sales and services, personal services, eating or drinking establishments, and related uses. Mixed use development is also allowed, with residential above the ground floor, at a scale and form that is consistent with district character. Use Standards B. Allowed uses and use-specific standards for principal, accessory, and temporary uses are established in Article 4: Use Regulations. Intensity and Dimensional Standards C.
Standard
All Uses
Lot Area, min. (sf.)
7,500
1Lot Width, min. (ft.)
75
2Front Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
10
3Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
10 [1]
4Corner Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
30
5Rear Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
10/30 [1]
Building Height, max. (ft.)
35
Building Floorplate, max. (sf.)
4,000
Density, max (dus/acre)
Not applicable [3]
Intensity, max (FAR)
0.25[2][4]
Notes: sf. = square feet; ft. = feet; min.= minimum; max.= maximum
[1] Thirty (30) feet when adjacent to a residential use or a Residential district.
[2] Residential development north of Ponkan Road and west of Rock Springs Road (Park Avenue) shall be restricted to no more than 2 dwelling units an acre, unless otherwise authorized through the adopted Wekiva Parkway Interchange Plan.
[3] Residential development shall only be located above the ground floor.
[4]Floorplate of individual building shall not exceed 4,000 sf
Land Development Code Page 3 28 Apopka, FL
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.4 Commercial Base Zoning Districts
3.4.3 C-N: Neighborhood Commercial District
D. Reference to Other Standards
Article 5: Development Standards Section 5.10 Signs
Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and
Section 5.1 Section 5.11 Green Building Standards
Loading Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards Section 5.12 Green Building Incentives
Section 5.3
Tree Protection Standards
Section 5.13
Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
Section 5.4
Open Space Set-Aside Standards
Section 5.14
Utilities
Section 5.5
Fences and Walls
Section 5.15
Guarantees and Sureties
Section 5.6
Exterior Lighting
Section 5.16
Miscellaneous Standards
Section 5.7
Development Design Guidelines
Article 6:
Environmental Standards
Section 5.8
Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
Article 7:
Concurrency Management System
Section 5.9
Agricultural Compatibility Standards
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 29
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.4 Commercial Base Zoning Districts
3.4.4 C-C: Community Commercial District
3.4.4. C-C: COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT Purpose A. The purpose of the C-C: Community Commercial district is to provide lands that accommodate community-serving commercial, office, mixed use, and limited residential development (above commercial and office uses) , at medium intensities and densities. Allowed uses include retail sales, personal services, eating and drinking establishments, offices, recreation/entertainment uses, vehicle sales and services, mixed use, live/work, and multi-family dwellings above ground-level commercial and office uses. Use Standards B. Allowed uses and use-specific standards for principal, accessory, and temporary uses are established in Article 4: Use Regulations. Intensity and Dimensional Standards C.
Standard
All Uses
Lot Area, min. (sf.)
10,000
1Lot Width, min. (ft.)
100
2Front Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
10
3Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
10
4Corner Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
15
5Rear Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
10/30 [2]
Building Height, max. (ft.)
35
Density, max (dus/acre)
6 [3][4]
Floor Area Ratio (FAR), max.
0.25
Notes: sf. = square feet; ft. = feet; min.= minimum; max.= maximum
[1] Only applies to the exterior units.
[2] Thirty (30) feet when adjacent to a residential use or a Residential district.
[3] Residential development north of Ponkan Road and west of Rock Springs Road (Park Avenue) shall be restricted to no more than 2 dwelling units an acre, unless otherwise authorized through the adopted Wekiva Parkway Interchange Plan.
[4] Residential development shall only be located above the ground floor.
Land Development Code Page 3 30 Apopka, FL
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.4 Commercial Base Zoning Districts
3.4.4 C-C: Community Commercial District
D. Reference to Other Standards
Article 5: Development Standards Section 5.10 Signs
Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and
Section 5.1 Section 5.11 Green Building Standards
Loading Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards Section 5.12 Green Building Incentives
Section 5.3
Tree Protection Standards
Section 5.13
Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
Section 5.4
Open Space Set-Aside Standards
Section 5.14
Utilities
Section 5.5
Fences and Walls
Section 5.15
Guarantees and Sureties
Section 5.6
Exterior Lighting
Section 5.16
Miscellaneous Standards
Section 5.7
Development Design Guidelines
Article 6:
Environmental Standards
Section 5.8
Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
Article 7:
Concurrency Management System
Section 5.9
Agricultural Compatibility Standards
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 31
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.4 Commercial Base Zoning Districts
3.4.5 C-R: Regional Commercial District
3.4.5. C-R: REGIONAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT Purpose A. The purpose of the C-R: Regional Commercial district is to provide lands that accommodate region-serving commercial development, with some residential and mixed use development. The district is characterized by large-scale commercial, office, and other nonresidential development serving a 25-mile radius, along with mixed-use and moderate density residential development. Allowed uses include retail sales and services, personal services, offices, eating and drinking establishments, visitor accommodation, recreation/entertainment, vehicle sales and services, live/work, moderate density stand-alone townhome and multi-family development, and mixed-use development. Use Standards B. Allowed uses and use-specific standards for principal, accessory, and temporary uses are established in Article 4: Use Regulations. Intensity and Dimensional Standards C.
Standard
Multifamily
All Other Uses [4]
Lot Area, min. (sf.)
8,000
15,000
1Lot Width, min. (ft.)
100
150
2Front Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
15
15
3Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
10
10
4Corner Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
15[1]
15
5Rear Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
25
10/30[2]
Building Height, max. (ft.)
35
35
Density, max (dus/acre)
8 [3][4][5]
Not Applicable
Floor Area Ratio (FAR), max.
Not Applicable
0.25[4][5]
Notes: sf. = square feet; ft. = feet; min.= minimum; max.= maximum
[1] Only applies to the exterior units.
[2] Thirty (30) feet when adjacent to a residential use or a Residential district.
[3] Residential development north of Ponkan Road and west of Rock Springs Road (Park Avenue) shall be restricted to no more than 2 dwelling units an acre, unless otherwise authorized through the adopted Wekiva Parkway Interchange Plan.
[4] Horizontal mixed-use development shall comply with the standards form “All Other Uses.”
[5] Horizontal mixed-use development may achieve both the maximum density for “Multifamily” and the maximum FAR for “All Other Uses.”
Land Development Code Page 3 32 Apopka, FL
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.4 Commercial Base Zoning Districts
3.4.5 C-R: Regional Commercial District
D. Reference to Other Standards
Article 5: Development Standards Section 5.10 Signs
Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and
Section 5.1 Section 5.11 Green Building Standards
Loading Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards Section 5.12 Green Building Incentives
Section 5.3
Tree Protection Standards
Section 5.13
Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
Section 5.4
Open Space Set-Aside Standards
Section 5.14
Utilities
Section 5.5
Fences and Walls
Section 5.15
Guarantees and Sureties
Section 5.6
Exterior Lighting
Section 5.16
Miscellaneous Standards
Section 5.7
Development Design Guidelines
Article 6:
Environmental Standards
Section 5.8
Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
Article 7:
Concurrency Management System
Section 5.9
Agricultural Compatibility Standards
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 33
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.4 Commercial Base Zoning Districts
3.4.6 O: Office District
3.4.6. O: OFFICE DISTRICT Purpose A. The purpose of the O: Office district is to provide lands that accommodate a broad range of office, limited commercial development, and small-scale residential development, typically in locations where visibility and good access are important. Development is encouraged to be configured with multiple uses, shared parking, and coordinated signage and landscaping. Allowed uses include medical and dental offices, professional offices, and other general offices, eating and drinking establishments, live-work units, small-scale townhome development, and mixed-use development. Use Standards B. Allowed uses and use-specific standards for principal, accessory, and temporary uses are established in Article 4: Use Regulations. Intensity and Dimensional Standards C.
Standard
Town home and Multi-Family
All Other Uses [4]
Lot Area, min. (sf.)
15,000
10,000
1Lot Width, min. (ft.)
140
85
2Front Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
25
25
3Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
10[1]
10
4Corner Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
20
25
5Rear Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
25
10/25 [2]
Building Height, max. (ft.)
35
35
Density, max (dus/acre)
5 [3]
Not applicable
Floor Area Ratio (FAR), max.
Not Applicable
0.30
Notes: sf. = square feet; ft. = feet; min.= minimum; max.= maximum
[1] Only applies to the exterior units.
[2] Twenty-five feet when adjacent to a residential use or a Residential district.
[3] Residential development north of Ponkan Road and west of Rock Springs Road (Park Avenue) shall be restricted to no more than 2 dwelling units an acre, unless otherwise authorized through the adopted Wekiva Parkway Interchange Plan.
[4] Horizontal mixed use development shall comply with the standards for “All Other Uses.” Maximum density/intensity for residential and nonresidential horizontal mixed use development shall not exceed the maximum FAR for “All Other Uses.”
Land Development Code Page 3 34 Apopka, FL
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.4 Commercial Base Zoning Districts
3.4.6 O: Office District
D. Reference to Other Standards
Article 5: Development Standards Section 5.10 Signs
Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and
Section 5.1 Section 5.11 Green Building Standards
Loading Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards Section 5.12 Green Building Incentives
Section 5.3
Tree Protection Standards
Section 5.13
Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
Section 5.4
Open Space Set-Aside Standards
Section 5.14
Utilities
Section 5.5
Fences and Walls
Section 5.15
Guarantees and Sureties
Section 5.6
Exterior Lighting
Section 5.16
Miscellaneous Standards
Section 5.7
Development Design Guidelines
Article 6:
Environmental Standards
Section 5.8
Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
Article 7:
Concurrency Management System
Section 5.9
Agricultural Compatibility Standards
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 35
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.4 Commercial Base Zoning Districts
3.4.7 C-COR: Corridor Commercial District
3.4.7. C-COR: CORRIDOR COMMERCIAL DISTRICT Purpose A. Use Standards B.
The purpose of the C-COR: Corridor Commercial district is to provide lands that accommodate a moderate range of primarily commercial uses along commercial corridors, in ways that support infill and redevelopment. Allowed uses include, retail sales, personal services, office, eating and drinking, visitor accommodation, recreation/entertainment, and vehicle sales and services uses, moderate density townhome and multi-family dwellings, and mixed-use development.
Allowed uses and use-specific standards for principal, accessory, and temporary uses are established in Article 4: Use Regulations.
C. Intensity and Dimensional Standards
Standard
Town home and Multi-Family
All Other Uses [4]
Lot Area, min. (sf.)
8,000
10,000
1Lot Width, min. (ft.)
50
50
2Front Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
15
10
3Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
7.5[1]
10
4Corner Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
7.5
15
5Rear Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
20
10/30 [2]
Building Height, max. (ft.)
35
35
Density, max (dus/acre)
5 [3][4][5]
Not applicable
Floor Area Ratio (FAR), max.
Not Applicable
0.25[4][5]
Notes: sf. = square feet; ft. = feet; min.= minimum; max.= maximum
[1] Only applies to the exterior units.
[2] Twenty-five (25) feet when adjacent to a residential use or a Residential district.
[3] Residential development north of Ponkan Road and west of Rock Springs Road (Park Avenue) shall be restricted to no more than 2 dwelling units an acre, unless otherwise authorized through the adopted Wekiva Parkway Interchange Plan.
[4] Horizontal mixed-use development shall comply with the standards in “All Other Uses.”
[5] Horizontal mixed-use development may achieve both the maximum density for “Townhome and Multifamily” and the maximum FAR for “All Other Uses.”
Land Development Code Page 3 36 Apopka, FL
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.4 Commercial Base Zoning Districts
3.4.7 C-COR: Corridor Commercial District
D. Reference to Other Standards
Article 5: Development Standards Section 5.10 Signs
Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and
Section 5.1 Section 5.11 Green Building Standards
Loading Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards Section 5.12 Green Building Incentives
Section 5.3
Tree Protection Standards
Section 5.13
Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
Section 5.4
Open Space Set-Aside Standards
Section 5.14
Utilities
Section 5.5
Fences and Walls
Section 5.15
Guarantees and Sureties
Section 5.6
Exterior Lighting
Section 5.16
Miscellaneous Standards
Section 5.7
Development Design Guidelines
Article 6:
Environmental Standards
Section 5.8
Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
Article 7:
Concurrency Management System
Section 5.9
Agricultural Compatibility Standards
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 37
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.5 Industrial Base Zoning Districts
3.5.1 General Purposes of Industrial Districts
Section 3.5. INDUSTRIAL BASE ZONING DISTRICTS
3.5.1. GENERAL PURPOSES OF INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
The purpose of the Industrial base zoning districts is to:
A. Provide appropriately located lands for the full range of industrial uses needed by the City’s businesses and residents, consistent with the goals, objectives, and policies of the comprehensive plan and other adopted City plans;
B. Strengthen the City’s economic base, and provide employment opportunities;
C. Create suitable environments for various types of light industrial and industrial development, and protect them from the adverse effects of incompatible development;
D. Ensure industrial development is located and designed to protect and preserve the character of existing single-family districts and neighborhoods;
E. Improve the design quality of industrial areas; and
F. Provide a place to locate uses that are generally incompatible with other uses in other zoning districts.
3.5.2. ESTABLISHED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
The Industrial districts established by this LDC are identified in Table 3.5.2: Established Industrial Districts.
TABLE 3.5.2, ESTABLISHED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
I-L:
Light Industrial
I-H:
Heavy Industrial
Land Development Code Page 3 38 Apopka, FL

-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.5 Industrial Base Zoning Districts
3.5.3 I-L: Light Industrial District
3.5.3. I-L: LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT Purpose A. Use Standards B.
The purpose of the LI: Light Industrial district is to provide lands that accommodate light industrial and support development. Allowed uses include wholesaling, distribution, storage, processing, research and development, and light manufacturing. The district also accommodates support uses such as office and limited commercial uses that primarily serve the principal light industrial uses.
Allowed uses and use-specific standards for principal, accessory, and temporary uses are established in Article 4: Use Regulations.
C. Intensity and Dimensional Standards
Standard
All Uses
Lot Area, min. (sf.)
12,000
1Lot Width, min. (ft.)
100
2Front Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
10
3Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
10
4Corner Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
15
5Rear Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
10/30 [1]
Building Height, max. (ft.)
35
Floor Area Ratio (FAR), max.
0.40
Notes: sf. = square feet; ft. = feet; min.= minimum; max.= maximum
[1] Thirty (30) feet when adjacent to a residential use or a Residential district.
Land Development Code Page 3 40 Apopka, FL
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.5 Industrial Base Zoning Districts
3.5.3 I-L: Light Industrial District
D. Reference to Other Standards
Article 5: Development Standards Section 5.10 Signs
Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and
Section 5.1 Section 5.11 Green Building Standards
Loading Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards Section 5.12 Green Building Incentives
Section 5.3
Tree Protection Standards
Section 5.13
Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
Section 5.4
Open Space Set-Aside Standards
Section 5.14
Utilities
Section 5.5
Fences and Walls
Section 5.15
Guarantees and Sureties
Section 5.6
Exterior Lighting
Section 5.16
Miscellaneous Standards
Section 5.7
Development Design Guidelines
Article 6:
Environmental Standards
Section 5.8
Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
Article 7:
Concurrency Management System
Section 5.9
Agricultural Compatibility Standards
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 41
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.5 Industrial Base Zoning Districts
3.5.4 I-H: Heavy Industrial District
3.5.4. I-H: HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT Purpose A. The purpose of the I-H: Heavy Industrial district is to provide lands that accommodate heavy industrial development that generally requires large sites, as well as industrial uses that are important to the City’s economic growth but may impact adjacent lands. The uses generally involve greater potential for adverse off-site impacts on the environment and surrounding development (e.g. from dust, fumes, smoke, odor, noise, or vibration, or due to extensive movement of vehicles, materials, and goods). Allowed uses include heavy manufacturing, warehouse distribution, wholesale sales, major utility facilities, and research laboratories. District development is intended to include buffers and the use of mitigation techniques to ensure heavy industrial development mitigates potential impacts to surrounding residential development. Use Standards B. Allowed uses and use-specific standards for principal, accessory, and temporary uses are established in Article 4: Use Regulations. Intensity and Dimensional Standards C.
Standard
All Uses
Lot Area, min. (sf.)
25,000
1Lot Width, min. (ft.)
150
2Front Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
25
3Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
10
4Corner Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
25
5Rear Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
10/100 [1]
Building Height, max. (ft.)
35
Floor Area Ratio (FAR), max.
0.60
Notes: sf. = square feet; ft. = feet; min.= minimum; max.= maximum
[1] One hundred (100) feet when adjacent to a residential use or a Residential district.
Land Development Code Page 3 42 Apopka, FL
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.5 Industrial Base Zoning Districts
3.5.4 I-H: Heavy Industrial District
D. Reference to Other Standards
Article 5: Development Standards Section 5.10 Signs
Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and
Section 5.1 Section 5.11 Green Building Standards
Loading Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards Section 5.12 Green Building Incentives
Section 5.3
Tree Protection Standards
Section 5.13
Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
Section 5.4
Open Space Set-Aside Standards
Section 5.14
Utilities
Section 5.5
Fences and Walls
Section 5.15
Guarantees and Sureties
Section 5.6
Exterior Lighting
Section 5.16
Miscellaneous Standards
Section 5.7
Development Design Guidelines
Article 6:
Environmental Standards
Section 5.8
Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
Article 7:
Concurrency Management System
Section 5.9
Agricultural Compatibility Standards
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 43

-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.6 Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts
3.6.1 General Purpose Of Special Purpose Districts
Section 3.6. SPECIAL PURPOSE BASE ZONING DISTRICTS
3.6.1. GENERAL PURPOSE OF SPECIAL PURPOSE DISTRICTS
The purpose and intent of Special Purpose base zoning districts are to:
A. Accommodate development patterns in specific places in the City that provide lands that accommodate higher density/intensity, walkable development, that supports multiple forms of mobility, and mixed-use development that does not easily fit within the other base zoning district; or
B. Accommodate the development, maintenance, and expansion of special land uses, such as airports or park and recreation facilities.
3.6.2. ESTABLISHED SPECIAL PURPOSE BASE ZONING DISTRICTS
Special Purpose base zoning districts established by this LDC are identified in Table 3.6.2: Established Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts.
TABLE 3.6.2: ESTABLISHED SPECIAL PURPOSE BASE ZONING DISTRICTS
MU-D: Downtown Mixed-Use
MU-ES: East Shore Mixed-Use
MU-KPI: Kelly Park Interchange Mixed-Use
INST: Institutional
PR: Parks and Recreation
AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 45
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.6 Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts
3.6.3 MU-D: Mixed-Use Downtown District
3.6.3. MU-D: MIXED-USE DOWNTOWN DISTRICT Purpose A. The purpose of the MU-D: Downtown – Mixed Use district is to provide lands that accommodate downtown Apopka as a center of commerce, government, and culture. Principal types of development include higher intensity government, commercial, and employment uses, as well and higher density residential development, and mixed-uses, all in a form that is attractive, pedestrian-friendly, and supports multiples modes of mobility. Allowed uses include offices, retail services, personal services, recreation/entertainment, communication, education, health care, visitor accommodation, eating and drinking establishments, multi-family and townhome dwellings, and mixed-use. (See Appendix F: Downtown Overlays) Use Standards B. Allowed uses and use-specific standards for principal, accessory, and temporary uses are established in Article 4: Use Regulations. Intensity and Dimensional Standards C.
Standard
Residential
All Other Uses
Lot Area, min. (sf.)
5,000
Not Applicable
1Lot Width, min. (ft.)
50
Not Applicable
2Build-to-Line, min. / max.(ft.)
20 / 25 [1] [2]
0 [3]
3Building width at build-to-line, min. (% of lot width)
60 [2] [4]
60
4Front Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
Not Applicable
Not Applicable
5Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
5
Not Applicable
6Corner Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
Not Applicable
Not Applicable
7Rear Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
20
Not Applicable
8Building Height, max. (ft.)
75
Not Applicable
Density, max (dus/acre)
[5]
Not Applicable
Floor Area Ratio (FAR), max.
Not Applicable
2.0 [6]
Land Development Code Page 3 46 Apopka, FL
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.6 Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts
3.6.3 MU-D: Mixed-Use Downtown District
Notes: sf. = square feet; ft. = feet; min. = minimum; max. = maximum
[1] The area between the minimum and maximum build-to-lines that extends the width of the lot constitutes the build-to-zone.
[2] Where existing buildings along street frontage are all located behind the build-to-line, the buildings may not be extended to the rear or side unless they are first extended frontwards to comply with the maximum build-to-line standard, and the minimum building width at the buildto-line standard.
[3] Setbacks up to 30 feet from the build-to-line are allowed for civic space or outdoor dining, as long as they demarcate the build-to-line by some additional feature..
[4] The build-to-line width remaining where there are no buildings may be occupied by outdoor gathering spaces, outdoor dining areas, walkways, landscaped areas, stormwater management facilities that use low impact development techniques,
[5] Applicable to a residential development, and the residential component of a mixed-use development.
[6] Applicable to a nonresidential development and the nonresidential component of a mixed-use development.
Other Standards D.
Use Mixing Connectivity Pedestrian Circulation
The vertical mixing of residential uses with nonresidential uses within a single project or building, with residential development on upper floors is strongly encouraged. The vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian circulation systems of development shall be designed to allow vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian cross-access between the site and adjacent parcels of land. The Director may waive or modify the above requirement on determining that such cross-access is impractical due to site constraints, or is inappropriate due to traffic safety issues, or undesirable due to the proposed development’s incompatibility with existing development on the adjacent parcel. Easements allowing vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian cross-access between adjoining parcels of land, along with agreements defining maintenance responsibilities of the property owners, shall be recorded in the appropriate land records. Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of the street, with a planting strip at least three feet wide between the sidewalk and the street. Sidewalks shall be at least eight feet wide along street frontages (to accommodate street furniture, outdoor dining, or other pedestrian amenities) Sidewalks along pedestrian street frontages shall maintain a pedestrian “clear zone” that is unobstructed by any permanent or nonpermanent object for a minimum width of four feet.
Where a sidewalk or other walkway crosses a street, driveway, drive aisle, or parking lot, the crossing shall be clearly marked with a change in paving material, color, or height, or decorative bollards. Buildings shall face the street, and be located such that the facades occupy a minimum percentage of the build-to zone along the street frontage in accordance with Sec.3.6.3.C, Intensity and Dimensional Standards.
Building Form Building Entrances
Buildings shall also be configured in relation to the site and other buildings so that building walls frame and enclose at least two of the following: a) The corners of street intersections or entry points into the development; b) A street or pedestrian and/or vehicle access corridor within the development site; c) Public spaces or other site amenities; d) A plaza, square, outdoor dining area, or other outdoor gathering place for pedestrians. Where the facade of a principal building abuts or faces a street, at least one operable pedestrian entrance providing both ingress and egress shall be provided. If the facade includes multiple tenant spaces, at least one such entrance shall be provided for each street-level tenant space. These required pedestrian entrances shall open directly to the street sidewalk without requiring pedestrians to pass through a garage, parking lot, or other non-pedestrian area located between the entrance and the street.
Transparency
All primary pedestrian entrances into principal buildings shall be clearly defined and emphasized using changes in the wall plane or facade material, pilasters, awnings, canopies, porches, or other architectural elements Where the facade of a building abuts or faces a street or an adjoining public gathering space, a minimum of 25 percent the street–level facade area shall be comprised of transparent window or door openings to allow views of interior spaces and merchandise so as to enhance safety and create a more inviting environment for pedestrians.
Window and door openings counting toward meeting this transparency requirement shall consist of glass that is relatively clear and nonreflective, with a minimum visible light transmittance of 0.65 and maximum visible light reflectance of 0.2. Along any street, all proposed new or additional surface vehicle parking shall be located to the rear or side of the development’s principal building(s) or in a parking structure.
Parking
Surface parking lots with more than 100 parking spaces shall be organized into smaller modules that contain 50 or fewer spaces each and are visually separated by buildings or landscaped areas.
All vehicle parking lots and structures containing more than 50 parking spaces shall provide clearly identified pedestrian routes between parking areas and a primary pedestrian entrance(s) to the building(s) served by the parking area.
Bicycle Parking
New development shall provide at least one bicycle rack, locker, or other bicycle parking facility designed to accommodate
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 47
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.6 Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts
3.6.3 MU-D: Mixed-Use Downtown District
parking spaces for at least four bicycles, plus additional or larger facilities designed to accommodate parking spaces for at least two additional bicycles for each 40 vehicle parking spaces over 80 parking spaces. Required bicycle parking facilities shall be located within 50 feet of the primary pedestrian entrance(s) to the development’s principal building(s).
Where the street-level facade of a parking structure abuts or faces a pedestrian street frontage, the facade shall be articulated Parking through use of at least three of the following features: (1) windows or window-shaped openings; (2) masonry columns; (3) Structure decorative wall insets or projections; (4) awnings; (5) changes in color or texture of exterior materials; (6) integrated vegetation
(hanging or along trellises); or (7) other similar features approved by the Director.
E. Reference to Other Standards
Article 5: Development Standards Section 5.10 Signs
Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and
Section 5.1 Section 5.11 Green Building Standards
Loading Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards Section 5.12 Green Building Incentives
Section 5.3
Tree Protection Standards
Section 5.13
Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
Section 5.4
Open Space Set-Aside Standards
Section 5.14
Utilities
Section 5.5
Fences and Walls
Section 5.15
Guarantees and Sureties
Section 5.6
Exterior Lighting
Section 5.16
Miscellaneous Standards
Section 5.7
Development Design Guidelines
Article 6:
Environmental Standards
Section 5.8
Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
Article 7:
Concurrency Management System
Section 5.9
Agricultural Compatibility Standards
Land Development Code Page 3 48 Apopka, FL

-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.6 Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts
3.6.4 MU-ES: Mixed-Use East Shore District
3.6.4. MU-ES: MIXED-USE EAST SHORE DISTRICT Purpose A. Use Standards B. Research/Technology/Education New Market Gateway
The purpose of the MU-ES: Mixed-Use East Shore District is to provide lands that support the Ocoee Apopka Road Small Area Plan as a mixed-use, pedestrian-friendly showcase corridor that encourages mixed-use development at higher densities and intensities. The districts may also be applied outside of the area covered by the small area plan. Three sub districts are located within the MU-ES district: The MU-ES-RTE: The Mixed-Use East Shore-Research/Technology/Education subdistrict, provides for a higher intensity mix of light industrial, office, and employment uses. The MU-ES-NM: The Mixed-Use East Shore-New Market subdistrict supports the creation of a village center that supports a mix of retail, office and residential uses with a strong pedestrian form. The MU-ES-GT: The Mixed-Use East Shore-Gateway subdistrict, provides lands that connect to the New Market subdistrict that support a larger block structure, and permit a range of uses including multifamily, retail, light industrial, gas stations and large-scale retail development when outparcels frame the street.
Allowed uses and use-specific standards for principal, accessory, and temporary uses are established in Article 4: Use Regulations.
Land Development Code Page 3 50 Apopka, FL

-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.6 Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts
3.6.5 MU-ES-RTE: Mixed Use East Shore-Research/Technology/Education Subdistrict
3.6.5. MU-ES-RTE: MIXED USE EAST SHORE-RESEARCH/TECHNOLOGY/EDUCATION SUBDISTRICT Purpose A. Use Standards B.
The purpose of the MU-ES-RTE: Mixed-Use East Shore-Research/Technology/Education subdistrict is to provide lands for a higher intensity mix of light industrial, office, educational, research and development, and employment uses, that are pedestrian-friendly, well connected, and support multiple modes of mobility. Multifamily and townhomes are also allowed in the subdistrict, and mixed-use development is encouraged. The subdistrict’s primary focus is to provide opportunities and support research and development opportunities and a range of educational facilities. Street and block layout has a larger footprint to support these range of uses in instances where they prefer a campus-like setting.
Allowed uses and use-specific standards for principal, accessory, and temporary uses are established in Article 4: Use Regulations.
C. Intensity and Dimensional Standards, MU-ES-RTE (Research/Technology/Education)
Standard
Townhome
Multi-Family
All Other Uses
Lot Area, min. (sf.)
8,000
8,000
6,000
Living Area, min. (sf per unit)
1,000
750
Not applicable
1Lot Width, min. (ft.)
50
100
50
2Front Yard Setback, min. and max. (ft.)
15 min.
15 min./ 80 max.[1]
15 min./80 max.[1]
3Building width in build-to-zone, min (% of lot width)
50
50[2][3]
50[2][3]
4Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
7.5[4]
10[4]
10
5Corner Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
7.5
20
20
6Rear Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
20
25
25
7Building Height, max. (ft.)
35
35
50 [5]
8Density, max (dus/acre)
10 [6]
15 [6][7]
Not applicable
FAR, min. and max.
Not applicable
Not applicable
0.25 min./1.0 max.[8]
Land Development Code Page 3 52 Apopka, FL
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.6 Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts
3.6.5 MU-ES-RTE: Mixed Use East Shore-Research/Technology/Education Subdistrict
Notes: sf. = square feet; ft. = feet; min.= minimum; max.= maximum
[1] The area between the minimum and maximum build-to-lines that extends the width of the lot constitutes the building-to zone
[2] Where existing buildings along street frontage are all located behind the build-to-zone, the buildings may not be extended to the rear or side unless they are first extended frontwards to comply with the maximum build-to-line standards, and the minimum building width in the buildto-zone standard.
[3] The remaining build-to-zone width may be occupied by outdoor gathering spaces, outdoor dining areas, walkways, landscaped areas, stormwater management facilities that use low impact development techniques.
[4] Minimum of 15 ft. between structures, only applies to exterior units.
[5] Additional height, up to seven stories may be approved as a special exception permit in accordance with Sec. 2.5.1.G, Special Exception Permit.
[6] Residential development north of Ponkan Road and west of Rock Springs Road (Park Avenue) will be restricted to no more than 2 DUs per acre, unless otherwise authorized through the adopted Wekiva Parkway Interchange Plan.
[7] Applicable to a residential development, and the residential component of a mixed-use development.
[
8] Applicable to a nonresidential development, and the nonresidential component of a mixed
-
u
se development.
Other Standards, MU-ES-RTE (Research/Technology/Education) D.
For sites over 40 acres that are adjacent to arterial or collector roads, nonresidential uses shall be at least 60 percent and no more than 90 percent of the site. Compliance with this requirement shall occur within seven years of the date of approval of the development. Compliance shall be measured based on the floor area of the use, as a percentage of the overall constructed floor area of the development.
Use Mixing An applicant may request an increase or decrease in the percentage by the City Council. Justifications by the applicant shall
depend on surrounding land use, existing development patterns, or other land use factors including (but not limited to)
utilities, roads, development intensity or environmental factors.
Block Standards Connectivity Pedestrian Circulation
The maximum block perimeter shall not exceed 2,600 feet. The vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian circulation systems of development shall be designed to allow vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian cross-access between the site and adjacent parcels of land. The Director may waive or modify the above requirement on determining that such cross-access is impractical due to site constraints, or is inappropriate due to traffic safety issues, or undesirable due to the proposed development’s incompatibility with existing development on the adjacent parcel. Easements allowing vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian cross-access between adjoining parcels of land, along with agreements defining maintenance responsibilities of the property owners, shall be recorded in the appropriate land records. Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of the street, with a planting strip (Street trees at 1 per 40 feet on center (on average), ground cover and/or grates are located in this planting area) of 11 feet wide on avenue streets and six feet wide on local streets between the sidewalk and the street. Sidewalks shall be at least eight feet wide along avenue street frontages (to accommodate street furniture, outdoor dining, or other pedestrian amenities) and six feet wide along local streets. Sidewalks along pedestrian street frontages shall maintain a pedestrian “clear zone” that is unobstructed by any permanent or nonpermanent object for a minimum width of four feet. Where a sidewalk or other walkway crosses a street, driveway, drive aisle, or parking lot, the crossing shall be clearly marked with a change in paving material, color, or height, or decorative bollards.
Transparency Roof Design Parking
Where the facade of a building abuts, or faces a street or an adjoining public gathering space, a minimum of 25 percent of the street–level facade area shall be comprised of transparent window or door openings to allow views of interior spaces and merchandise so as to enhance safety and create a more inviting environment for pedestrians. Window and door openings counting toward meeting this transparency requirement shall consist of glass that is relatively clear and nonreflective, with a minimum visible light transmittance of 0.65 and maximum visible light reflectance of 0.2. Variation in a flat roof design more than ninety (90) feet in length shall include a change in parapet height or pitched roof height at least every ninety (90) feet. Along any street, all proposed new or additional surface vehicle parking shall be located predominately to the rear or side of the development’s principal building(s) or in a parking structure. No more than two bays of parking may be located in the front of the building. Surface parking lots with more than 100 parking spaces shall be organized into smaller modules that contain 50 or fewer spaces each and are visually separated by buildings or landscaped areas. All vehicle parking lots and structures containing more than 50 parking spaces shall provide clearly identified pedestrian routes between parking areas and a primary pedestrian entrance(s) to the building(s) served by the parking area.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 53
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.6 Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts
3.6.5 MU-ES-RTE: Mixed Use East Shore-Research/Technology/Education Subdistrict
Where the street-level facade of a parking structure abuts or faces a pedestrian street frontage, the facade shall be articulated through use of at least three of the following features: (1) windows or window-shaped openings; (2) masonry Parking Structure columns; (3) decorative wall insets or projections; (4) awnings; (5) changes in color or texture of exterior materials; (6) integrated vegetation (hanging or along trellises); or (7) other similar features.
New development shall provide at least one bicycle rack, locker, or other bicycle parking facility designed to accommodate parking spaces for at least four bicycles, plus additional or larger facilities designed to accommodate parking spaces for at Bicycle Parking least two additional bicycles for each 40 vehicle parking spaces over 80 parking spaces. Required bicycle parking facilities shall be located within 50 feet of the primary pedestrian entrance(s) to the development’s principal building(s).
Sec. 5.9, Neighborhood Compatibility Standards, shall only apply to proposed nonresidential and multifamily development abutting a residential zoning district, and only along shared property lines. No buffers shall be required Development between any other uses, unless specifically required as part of the approval of a special exception permit. (See Sec.
Compatibility 2.5.1.G, Special Exception Permit.)
Each development shall provide outdoor gathering spaces such as courtyards, plazas, pocket parks, where appropriate Open Space for the area being served. At a minimum, provide pedestrian amenities such as plazas, seating areas or gathering spaces between buildings that are visible and accessible.
E. Reference to Other Standards
Article 5: Development Standards Section 5.10 Signs
Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and
Section 5.1 Section 5.11 Green Building Standards
Loading Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards Section 5.12 Green Building Incentives
Section 5.3
Tree Protection Standards
Section 5.13
Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
Section 5.4
Open Space Set-Aside Standards
Section 5.14
Utilities
Section 5.5
Fences and Walls
Section 5.15
Guarantees and Sureties
Section 5.6
Exterior Lighting
Section 5.16
Miscellaneous Standards
Section 5.7
Development Design Guidelines
Article 6:
Environmental Standards
Section 5.8
Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
Article 7:
Concurrency Management System
Section 5.9
Agricultural Compatibility Standards
Land Development Code Page 3 54 Apopka, FL

-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.6 Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts
3.6.6 MU-ES-NM: Mixed Use East Shore-New Market Subdistrict
3.6.6. MU-ES-NM: MIXED USE EAST SHORE-NEW MARKET SUBDISTRICT Purpose A. Use Standards B.
The purpose of the MU-ES-NM: Mixed-Use East Shore-New Market subdistrict is to provide lands that support a walkable, high intensity/density village center, that is well connected and supports multiple modes of mobility. A mix of retail, office and residential uses is allowed. The subdistrict encourages the development of ground floor retail and restaurants, with residential on the upper floors. The subdistrict allows for a wide range of uses including retail, office, multifamily, townhome, two-family, and light industrial (high tech) uses. Form and scale focuses predominately on the pedestrian.
Allowed uses and use-specific standards for principal, accessory, and temporary uses are established in Article 4: Use Regulations.
C. Intensity and Dimensional Standards, MU-ES-NM (New Market)
Standard
Single-family [one du]
Two-Family & Townhome
Multi-Family
All Other Uses
Lot Area, min. (sf.)
5,000
7,000
8,000
5,000
Living Area, min. (sf per unit)
1,200
1,000
750
Not applicable
1Lot Width, min. (ft.)
40 [1]
50
75
50
2Front Yard Setback, min. and max. (ft.)
15 min.
15 min./30 max. [2]
10 min./30 max. [2]
10 min./30 max. [2]
3Building width in build-to-zone, min (% of lot width)
80
80[3]
80[3]
80[3]
4Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
4 min; 10 total
7.5[4]
15[4]
5
5Corner Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
15
7.5
Not applicable
Not applicable
6Rear Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
20
20
15
5
7Building Height, max. (ft.)
35
45
50
50 [5]
8Density, max. (dus/acre)
8 [6]
12 [6][7]
15 [6][7]
Not applicable
FAR, min. and max.
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
0.25 min./1.0 max.[8]
Notes: sf. = square feet; ft. = feet; ; min.= minimum; max.= maximum; du=dwelling unit
[1] A minimum of two-thirds of the lots for single-family detached dwellings with a width of 50 feet or less shall gain vehicle access by a rear alley.
[2] The area between the minimum and maximum build-to-lines that extends the width of the lot constitutes the build-to-zone.
[3] The remaining build-to-zone width may be occupied by outdoor gathering spaces, outdoor dining areas, walkways, landscaped areas,
stormwater management facilities that use low impact development techniques. [4]. Minimum of 15’ between structures, only applies to exterior units.
[5] Additional height, up to seven stories may be approved as a special exception permit in accordance with Sec. 2.5.1.G, Special Exception Permit.
Land Development Code Page 3 56 Apopka, FL
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.6 Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts
3.6.6 MU-ES-NM: Mixed Use East Shore-New Market Subdistrict
[6] Residential development north of Ponkan Road and west of Rock Springs Road (Park Avenue) will be restricted to no more than 2 DUs per acre, unless otherwise authorized through the adopted Wekiva Parkway Interchange Plan.
[7] Applicable to a residential development, and the residential component of a mixed-use development.
[8] Applicable to a nonresidential development, and the nonresidential component of a mixed-use development. Other Standards, MU-ES-NM (New Market) D.
For sites over 25 acres that are adjacent to arterial or collector roads, nonresidential uses shall be at least 50 percent and no
more than 80 percent of the site. Compliance with this requirement shall occur within seven years of the date of approval of the
development. Compliance shall be measured based on the floor area of the use, as a percentage of the overall constructed floor
Use Mixing
area of the development.
An applicant may request an increase or decrease in the percentage by the City Council. Justifications by the applicant shall
depend on surrounding land use, existing development patterns, or other land use factors including (but not limited to)
utilities, roads, development intensity or environmental factors.
Block Standards
The maximum block perimeter shall not exceed 1,600 ft.
The vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian circulation systems of development shall be designed to allow vehicular, bicycle, and
pedestrian cross-access between the site and adjacent parcels of land. The Director may waive or modify the above
requirement on determining that such cross-access is impractical due to site constraints, or is inappropriate due to traffic
Connectivity
safety issues, or undesirable due to the proposed development’s incompatibility with existing development on the adjacent parcel.
Easements allowing vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian cross-access between adjoining parcels of land, along with agreements
defining maintenance responsibilities of the property owners, shall be recorded in the appropriate land records.
Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of the street, with a planting strip (Street trees at one per 40 feet on center (on
average), ground cover and/or grates are located in this planting area) of ten feet wide on local streets and 13 feet wide on
principal streets between the sidewalk and the street. Sidewalks shall be at least nine feet wide along local street frontages (to
Pedestrian Circulation
accommodate street furniture, outdoor dining, or other pedestrian amenities) and ten feet wide along principal streets. Sidewalks along pedestrian street frontages shall maintain a pedestrian “clear zone” that is unobstructed by any permanent or nonpermanent object for a minimum width of six feet.
Where a sidewalk or other walkway crosses a street, driveway, drive aisle, or parking lot, the crossing shall be clearly marked
with a change in paving material, color, or height, or decorative bollards.
Façades shall not exceed 20 horizontal feet and ten vertical feet without including at least one of the following
Building
elements:(canopies, recesses, arcades, raised parapets, roof forms, adjacent display windows) to establish clearly defined, highly
Facades
visible, primary building entrances. Building facades along public streets shall maintain a pedestrian scale and integrate the public
and private spaces using architectural elements.
Building Massing and Façade Articulation
Building facades shall not exceed sixty (60) feet along a street frontage without providing a substantial volume break such as a volume recess, a tower or bay, or an architecturally prominent public entrance The recesses and projections shall have a minimum depth of three (3) feet.
Roof Design
When a flat roof is proposed, parapet walls with three-dimensional cornice treatments shall conceal the roof. The cornice
shall include a perpendicular projection of a minimum of eight (8) inches from the parapet facade plane.
All primary pedestrian entrances into principal buildings shall be clearly defined and emphasized using changes in the wall
plane or facade material, pilasters, awnings, canopies, porches, or other architectural elements. Where the facade of a
Building
principal building abuts or faces a street, at least one operable pedestrian entrance providing both ingress and egress shall be
Entrances
provided. If the facade includes multiple tenant spaces, at least one such entrance shall be provided for each street-level
tenant space. These required pedestrian entrances shall open directly to the street sidewalk without requiring pedestrians to
pass through a garage, parking lot, or other non-pedestrian area located between the entrance and the street
Where the facade of a building abuts or faces a street or an adjoining public gathering space, a minimum of 65 percent the
street–level facade area along local streets and a minimum of 50 percent along all other streets shall be comprised of
transparent window or door openings to allow views of interior spaces and merchandise so as to enhance safety and create a
Transparency
more inviting environment for pedestrians.
Window and door openings counting toward meeting this transparency requirement shall consist of glass that is relatively clear
and nonreflective, with a minimum visible light transmittance of 0.65 and maximum visible light reflectance of 0.2.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 57
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.6 Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts
3.6.6 MU-ES-NM: Mixed Use East Shore-New Market Subdistrict
Parking Along any street, all proposed new or additional surface vehicle parking shall be located to the rear of the development’s principal building(s) or in a parking structure.
Surface parking lots with more than 100 parking spaces shall be organized into smaller modules that contain 50 or fewer spaces each and are visually separated by buildings or landscaped areas.
All vehicle parking lots and structures containing more than 50 parking spaces shall provide clearly identified pedestrian routes between parking areas and a primary pedestrian entrance(s) to the building(s) served by the parking area.
New development shall provide at least one bicycle rack, locker, or other bicycle parking facility designed to accommodate parking spaces for at least four bicycles, plus additional or larger facilities designed to accommodate parking spaces for at least Bicycle Parking two additional bicycles for each 40 vehicle parking spaces over 80 parking spaces. Required bicycle parking facilities shall be located within 50 feet of the primary pedestrian entrance(s) to the development’s principal building(s).
Where the street-level facade of a parking structure abuts or faces a pedestrian street frontage, the facade shall be articulated Parking through use of at least three of the following features: (1) windows or window-shaped openings; (2) masonry columns; (3) Structure decorative wall insets or projections; (4) awnings; (5) changes in color or texture of exterior materials; (6) integrated vegetation
(hanging or along trellises); or (7) other similar features approved by the Director.
Sec. 5.9, Neighborhood Compatibility Standards shall only apply to proposed nonresidential and multifamily development
Development abutting a residential zoning district, and only along shared property lines. No buffers shall be required between any other uses,
Compatibility unless specifically required as part of the approval of a special exception permit. (See Sec 2.5.1.G, Special Exception Permit.)
Each development shall provide outdoor gathering spaces such as courtyards, plazas, pocket parks, where appropriate for the
Open Space area being served. At a minimum, provide pedestrian amenities such as plazas, seating areas or gathering spaces between
buildings that are visible and accessible. Land Development Code Page 3 58 Apopka, FL
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.6 Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts
3.6.6 MU-ES-NM: Mixed Use East Shore-New Market Subdistrict
Reference to Other Standards E.
Article 5: Development Standards Section 5.10 Signs
Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and
Section 5.1 Section 5.11 Green Building Standards
Loading Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards Section 5.12 Green Building Incentives
Section 5.3
Tree Protection Standards
Section 5.13
Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
Section 5.4
Open Space Set-Aside Standards
Section 5.14
Utilities
Section 5.5
Fences and Walls
Section 5.15
Guarantees and Sureties
Section 5.6
Exterior Lighting
Section 5.16
Miscellaneous Standards
Section 5.7
Development Design Guidelines
Article 6:
Environmental Standards
Section 5.8
Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
Article 7:
Concurrency Management System
Section 5.9
Agricultural Compatibility Standards
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 59
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.6 Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts
3.6.7 MU-ES-GT: Mixed-Use East Shore-Gateway Subdistrict
3.6.7. MU-ES-GT: MIXED-USE EAST SHORE-GATEWAY SUBDISTRICT Purpose A. Use Standards B.
The purpose of the MU-ES-GT: Mixed-Use East Shore-Gateway subdistrict, is to serve as a gateway to the MU-ES-NM subdistrict, with uses that are more suburban in character but are developed in a more walkable and pedestrian-friendly form. Subdistrict streets, while supporting a larger block structure than the other subdistricts, are well connected and support multiple modes of mobility. The subdistrict allows for a range of uses including multi-family, retail, light industrial, gas stations, and large scale retailers when outparcels frame the street.
Allowed uses and use-specific standards for principal, accessory, and temporary uses are established in Article 4: Use Regulations.
C. Intensity and Dimensional Standards, MU-ES-GT (Gateway)
Standard
Single-family [one du]
Two-Family & Townhome
Multi-Family
All Other Uses
Lot Area, min. (sf.)
7,500
8,000
8,000
7,500
Living Area, min. (sf per unit)
1,350
1,000
750
Not Applicable
1Lot Width, min. (ft.)
70
50
100
75
2Front Yard Setback, min. and max.(ft.)
25 min.
15 min.
15 min./ 80 max.[1]
15 min./ 80 max.[1]
3Building width in build-to-zone, min (% of lot width)
60
60
60[2]
60[2]
4Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
7.5 [3]
7.5[3]
10[3]
10 [3]
5Corner Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
20
7.5
20
20
6Rear Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
25
20
25
10
7Building Height, max. (ft.)
35
35
45
45
8Density, max (dus/acre)
5 [4]
10[4]
15[4][5]
Not applicable
FAR, min. and max.
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
0.25 min./1.0 max.[6]
Notes: sf. = square feet; ft. = feet; ; min.= minimum; max.= maximum; du= dwelling unit
[1] The area between the minimum and maximum build-to-lines that extends the width of the lot constitutes the build-to-zone.
[2] The remaining build-to-zone width may be occupied by outdoor gathering spaces, outdoor dining areas, walkways, landscaped areas, stormwater management facilities that use low impact development techniques.
[3] Minimum of 15 ft. between structures, only applies to exterior units
[4] Residential development north of Ponkan Road and west of Rock Springs Road (Park Avenue) will be restricted to no more than 2 DUs per
Land Development Code Page 3 60 Apopka, FL
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.6 Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts
3.6.7 MU-ES-GT: Mixed-Use East Shore-Gateway Subdistrict
acre, unless otherwise authorized through the adopted Wekiva Parkway Interchange Plan.
[5] Applicable to a residential development, and the residential component of a mixed-use development.
[
6] Applicable to a nonresidential development, and the nonreside
n
tial component of a mixed
-
u
se development.
Other Standards, MU-ES-GT (Gateway) D.
For sites over 25 acres that are adjacent to arterial or collector roads, nonresidential uses shall be at least 20 percent and no more than 50 percent of the site. Compliance with this requirement shall occur within seven years of the date of approval of the development. Compliance shall be measured based on the floor area of the use, as a percentage of the overall constructed floor area of the development.
Use Mixing An applicant may request an increase or decrease in the percentage by the City Council. Justifications by the applicant shall
depend on surrounding land use, existing development patterns, or other land use factors including (but not limited to)
utilities, roads, development intensity or environmental factors.
Block Standards The maximum block perimeter shall not exceed 2,000 ft.
The vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian circulation systems of development shall be designed to allow vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian cross-access between the site and adjacent parcels of land. The Director may waive or modify the requirement on determining that such cross-access is impractical due to site constraints, or is inappropriate due to traffic safety issues, or Connectivity undesirable due to the proposed development’s incompatibility with existing development on the adjacent parcel. Easements allowing vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian cross-access between adjoining parcels of land, along with agreements defining maintenance responsibilities of the property owners, shall be recorded in the appropriate land records.
Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of the street, with a planting strip (Street trees at 1 per 40 feet on center (on average), ground cover and/or grates are located in this planting area) of 11 feet wide on avenue streets and six feet wide on local streets between the sidewalk and the street. Sidewalks shall be at least eight feet wide along avenue street frontages (to accommodate street furniture, outdoor dining, or other pedestrian amenities) and six feet wide along local streets. Sidewalks Pedestrian along pedestrian street frontages shall maintain a pedestrian “clear zone” that is unobstructed by any permanent or Circulation nonpermanent object for a minimum width of four feet.
Where a sidewalk or other walkway crosses a street, driveway, drive aisle, or parking lot, the crossing shall be clearly marked with a change in paving material, color, or height, or decorative bollards.
Façades shall not exceed 20 horizontal feet and ten vertical feet without including at least one of the following Building elements:(canopies, recesses, arcades, raised parapets, roof forms, adjacent display windows) to establish clearly defined, highly Facades visible, primary building entrances. Building facades along public streets shall maintain a pedestrian scale and integrate the public
and private spaces using architectural elements.
Building Massing Therefore, building facades shall not exceed 60 feet along a street frontage without providing a substantial volume break such as and Façade a volume recess, a tower or bay, or an architecturally prominent public entrance The recesses and projections shall have a Articulation minimum depth of three feet.
Flat Roof Design When a flat roof is proposed, parapet walls with three-dimensional cornice treatments shall conceal the roof. The cornice shall include a perpendicular projection of a minimum of eight (8) inches from the parapet facade plane.
Locate and configure outparcels and their buildings to define street edges, development entry points, and gathering spaces. The
Building
outparcels shall meet the build-to-line setbacks. Additional buildings may be on the same parcel and are permitted to be setback
Orientation
further from the road, if outparcels are framing the street and meet the building width minimum percentage requirement.
All primary pedestrian entrances into principal buildings shall be clearly defined and emphasized using changes in the wall
plane or facade material, pilasters, awnings, canopies, porches, or other architectural elements. Where the facade of a Building principal building abuts or faces a street, at least one operable pedestrian entrance providing both ingress and egress shall be Entrances provided. If the facade includes multiple tenant spaces, at least one such entrance shall be provided for each street-level
tenant space. These required pedestrian entrances shall open directly to the street sidewalk without requiring pedestrians to pass through a garage, parking lot, or other non-pedestrian area located between the entrance and the street.
Where the facade of a building abuts or faces a street or an adjoining public gathering space, a minimum of 25 percent the street–level facade area shall be comprised of transparent window or door openings to allow views of interior spaces and merchandise so as to enhance safety and create a more inviting environment for pedestrians.
Transparency Window and door openings counting toward meeting this transparency requirement shall consist of glass that is relatively clear and nonreflective, with a minimum visible light transmittance of 0.65 and maximum visible light reflectance of 0.2.
Along any street, all proposed new or additional surface vehicle parking shall be predominately located to the rear or side of the development’s principal building(s) or in a parking structure. No more than two bays of parking may be located in the front of the building.
Parking Surface parking lots with more than 100 parking spaces shall be organized into smaller modules that contain 50 or fewer spaces each and are visually separated by buildings or landscaped areas.
All vehicle parking lots and structures containing more than 50 parking spaces shall provide clearly identified pedestrian routes
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 61
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.6 Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts
3.6.7 MU-ES-GT: Mixed-Use East Shore-Gateway Subdistrict
between parking areas and a primary pedestrian entrance(s) to the building(s) served by the parking area.
New development shall provide at least one bicycle rack, locker, or other bicycle parking facility designed to accommodate parking spaces for at least four bicycles, plus additional or larger facilities designed to accommodate parking spaces for at least Bicycle Parking two additional bicycles for each 40 vehicle parking spaces over 80 parking spaces. Required bicycle parking facilities shall be located within 50 feet of the primary pedestrian entrance(s) to the development’s principal building(s).
Where the street-level facade of a parking structure abuts or faces a pedestrian street frontage, the facade shall be articulated Parking through use of at least three of the following features: (1) windows or window-shaped openings; (2) masonry columns; (3) Structure decorative wall insets or projections; (4) awnings; (5) changes in color or texture of exterior materials; (6) integrated
vegetation (hanging or along trellises); or (7) other similar features approved by the Director.
Sec. 5.9, Neighborhood Compatibility Standards, shall only apply to proposed nonresidential and multifamily development Development abutting a residential zoning district, and only along shared property lines. No buffers shall be required between any other uses, , Compatibility unless specifically required as part of the approval of a special exception permit. (See Sec. 2.5.1.G, Special Exception Permit.)
Each development shall provide outdoor gathering spaces such as courtyards, plazas, pocket parks, where appropriate for the Open Space area being served. At a minimum, provide pedestrian amenities such as plazas, seating areas or gathering spaces between buildings that are visible and accessible.
E. Reference to Other Standards
Article 5: Development Standards Section 5.10 Signs
Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and
Section 5.1 Section 5.11 Green Building Standards
Loading Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards Section 5.12 Green Building Incentives
Section 5.3
Tree Protection Standards
Section 5.13
Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
Section 5.4
Open Space Set-Aside Standards
Section 5.14
Utilities
Section 5.5
Fences and Walls
Section 5.15
Guarantees and Sureties
Section 5.6
Exterior Lighting
Section 5.16
Miscellaneous Standards
Section 5.7
Development Design Guidelines
Article 6:
Environmental Standards
Section 5.8
Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
Article 7:
Concurrency Management System
Section 5.9
Agricultural Compatibility Standards
Land Development Code Page 3 62 Apopka, FL

-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.6 Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts
3.6.8 MU-KPI: Kelly Park Interchange District Mixed-Use
3.6.8. MU-KPI: KELLY PARK INTERCHANGE DISTRICT MIXED-USE
The MU-KPI: Kelly Park Interchange District – Mixed Use is found in Appendix A, which is incorporated here by reference.
Land Development Code Page 3 64 Apopka, FL

-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.6 Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts
3.6.9 INST: Institutional District
3.6.9. INST: INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT Purpose A. The purpose of the INST: Institutional district is to provide lands that accommodate institutional uses typically developed on larger sites such as elementary, middle, and high schools, cultural facilities, government offices, post offices, and colleges. Development may include the grouping of multiple institutional buildings, and inter-related public, private, and nonprofit development. District standards are intended to protect surrounding residential uses from incompatible development. Use Standards B. Allowed uses and use-specific standards for principal, accessory, and temporary uses are established in Article 4: Use Regulations. Intensity and Dimensional Standards C.
Standard
All Uses
Lot Area, min. (sf.)
10,000
1Lot Width, min. (ft.)
85
2Front Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
25
3Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
10
4Corner Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
25
5Rear Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
10/25 [1]
6Building Height, max. (ft.)
35
7Density, max (dus/acre)
Not applicable
Floor Area Ratio (FAR), max.
0.30
Notes: sf. = square feet; ft. = feet; min.= minimum; max.= maximum
[1] Twenty-five (25) feet when adjacent to a residential use or a Residential district.
Land Development Code Page 3 66 Apopka, FL
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.6 Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts
3.6.9 INST: Institutional District
D. Reference to Other Standards
Article 5: Development Standards Section 5.10 Signs
Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and
Section 5.1 Section 5.11 Green Building Standards
Loading Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards Section 5.12 Green Building Incentives
Section 5.3
Tree Protection Standards
Section 5.13
Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
Section 5.4
Open Space Set-Aside Standards
Section 5.14
Utilities
Section 5.5
Fences and Walls
Section 5.15
Guarantees and Sureties
Section 5.6
Exterior Lighting
Section 5.16
Miscellaneous Standards
Section 5.7
Development Design Guidelines
Article 6:
Environmental Standards
Section 5.8
Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
Article 7:
Concurrency Management System
Section 5.9
Agricultural Compatibility Standards
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 67
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.6 Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts
3.6.10 PR: Parks and Recreation District
3.6.10. PR: PARKS AND RECREATION DISTRICT Purpose A. The purpose of the PR: Parks and Recreation district is to provide lands to accommodate the preservation and protection of publicly owned active park and recreation lands, passive open space lands, and publicly owned lands that preserve significant natural features and environmentally sensitive areas. District standards limit development in these areas in order to preserve the City’s natural, scenic, and recreational assets, ensure their proper functioning, and promote visitor enjoyment. Use Standards B. Allowed uses and use-specific standards for principal, accessory, and temporary uses are established in Article 4: Use Regulations. Intensity and Dimensional Standards C.
Standard
All Uses
Lot Area, min. (sf.)
No Applicable
1Lot Width, min. (ft.)
Not Applicable
2Front Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
25
3Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
25
4Corner Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
25
5Rear Yard Setback, min. (ft.)
25
6Building Height, max. (ft.)
35
7Density, max (dus/acre)
Not Applicable
Floor Area Ratio (FAR), max.
Not Applicable
Notes: sf. = square feet; ft. = feet, min. = minimum, max. = maximum
Land Development Code Page 3 68 Apopka, FL
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.6 Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts
3.6.10 PR: Parks and Recreation District
D. Reference to Other Standards
Article 5: Development Standards Section 5.10 Signs
Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and
Section 5.1 Section 5.11 Green Building Standards
Loading Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards Section 5.12 Green Building Incentives
Section 5.3
Tree Protection Standards
Section 5.13
Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
Section 5.4
Open Space Set-Aside Standards
Section 5.14
Utilities
Section 5.5
Fences and Walls
Section 5.15
Guarantees and Sureties
Section 5.6
Exterior Lighting
Section 5.16
Miscellaneous Standards
Section 5.7
Development Design Guidelines
Article 6:
Environmental Standards
Section 5.8
Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
Article 7:
Concurrency Management System
Section 5.9
Agricultural Compatibility Standards
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 69
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.6 Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts
3.6.11 AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District
3.6.11. AIR: ORLANDO APOPKA AIRPORT DISTRICT
A. Purpose
1. It is hereby declared:
a.
That the creation or establishment of an airport hazard and the incompatible use of land in airport vicinities are public nuisances and injure the community served by the airport in question.
b.
That it is therefore necessary in the interest of the public health, public safety, and general welfare that the creation or establishment of airport hazards and incompatible land uses be prevented; and
c.
That this should be accomplished, to the extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police power, without compensation.
2.
It is further declared that the limitation of land uses incompatible with normal airport operations, the prevention of the creation or establishment of airport hazards, and the elimination, removal, alteration, mitigation, or marking and lighting of existing airport hazards are public purposes for which the City of Apopka may raise and expend public funds and acquire land or property interests therein, or air rights thereover.
3.
Reasonableness. All airport zoning regulations adopted under the Orlando Apopka Zoning District Regulations or future ordinances shall be reasonable and may not impose any requirement or restriction which is not reasonably necessary to effectuate the purposes of the Orlando Apopka Zoning District Regulations. In determining reasonable regulations, the City of Apopka shall consider, among other things, the character of the flying operations expected to be conducted at the airport, the nature of the terrain within the airport hazard area and runway protection zones, the character of the neighborhood, the uses to which the property to be zoned is put and adaptable, and the impact of any new use, activity, or construction on the airport’s operating capability and capacity.
4.
In the event that the City of Apopka has adopted, or hereafter adopts, a comprehensive plan or policy regulating, among other things, the height of buildings, structures, and natural objects, and uses of property, any airport zoning regulations applicable to the same area or portion thereof may be incorporated in and made a part of such comprehensive plan or policy, and be administered and enforced in connection therewith.
B. Use Standards
Allowed uses and use-specific standards for principal, accessory, and temporary uses are established in Article 4: Use Regulations.
Land Development Code Page 3 70 Apopka, FL
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.6 Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts
3.6.11 AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District
Other Standards C.
1. Community Development Director and Airport Manager
a.
The Community Development Director or designee in coordination with the Airport Manager shall administer all airport-zoning regulations adopted under the Orlando Apopka Zoning District Regulations.
b.
The Community Development Director or designee and the City of Apopka Code Enforcement shall enforce all airport-zoning regulations adopted under this section.
c.
The duties of the Community Development Director or designee pursuant to this Orlando Apopka Zoning District Regulations shall include:
1.
Deciding all permits under Sec. 333.07(1), Fla. Stat,
2.
Deciding all matters under Sec. 333.07(3),Fla. Stat., as they pertain to the Airport,
3.
And all other matters under this section applying to the Community Development Director or designee.
d.
The Community Development Director or designee shall not have or exercise any of the powers herein delegated to the City of Apopka Planning Commission to hear and decide appeals.
2. Land Use Compatibility
a. Plans Adopted by Reference
For the purpose of ensuring land use, zoning and development compatibility within and near the boundaries of the airport, a master plan for the Orlando Apopka Airport, as amended, and all building, zoning, development and land use plans, codes and regulations, including the City of Apopka Code of Ordinances and City of Apopka Comprehensive Plan, and Florida Building Code as amended, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference and shall govern all development, construction, permitting, variance and actions not specifically delineated herein.
b. Review Considerations
Airport land use compatibility regulations shall be reviewed with consideration for the following:
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 71
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.6 Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts
3.6.11 AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District
1. Whether sanitary landfills are located within the following areas:
(a)
Within 10,000 feet from the nearest point of any runway used or planned to be used by turbojet or turboprop aircraft. (Refer to Maps.)
(b)
Within 5,000 feet from the nearest point of any runway used only by piston-type aircraft. (Refer to Maps.)
(c)
Civil airport imaginary surfaces defined in Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations (14 CFR) part 77.25. A case-by-case review of such landfills shall be performed.
c. Landfills and birds
Where any landfill is located and constructed that attracts or sustains hazardous bird movements from feeding, water, or roosting areas into, or across, the runways or approach and departure patterns of aircraft. The landfill operator must incorporate bird management techniques or other practices to minimize bird hazards to airborne aircraft.
d. Noise Studies, Complete
Where the City of Apopka has conducted a noise study in accordance with the provisions of 14 CFR part 150, neither residential construction nor any educational facility as defined in the Orlando Apopka Zoning District Regulations with the exception of aviation school facilities, shall be permitted within the area contiguous to the airport defined by an outer noise contour that is considered incompatible with that type of construction by 14 CFR, part 150, or an equivalent noise level as established by other types of noise studies.
e. Noise Studies, Incomplete
Where the City of Apopka has not conducted a noise study, neither residential construction nor any educational facility as defined in this Code, with the exception of aviation school facilities, shall be permitted within an area contiguous to the airport measuring one half the length of the longest runway on either side of and at the end of each runway centerline.
f. Incompatible Uses
New incompatible uses, activities, or construction within runway clear zones, within runway clear zones (See Appendix E.) including uses activities, or construction in runway clear zones which are incompatible with normal airport operations or endanger public health, safety, and welfare by resulting in congregations of people, emissions of light or smoke, or attraction of birds shall be restricted.
g. Educational Facilities
1.
The construction of an educational facility of a public or private school at either end of a runway, within an area which extends 5 miles in a direct line along the centerline of the runway, and which has a width measuring one-half the length of the runway is prohibited.
2.
This subsection may not be construed to require the removal, alteration, sound conditioning, or other change, or to interfere with the continued use
Land Development Code Page 3 72 Apopka, FL
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.6 Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts
3.6.11 AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District
or adjacent expansion of any educational facility or site in existence on July 1,
1993
h. Exceptions
Exceptions approving construction of an educational facility within the delineated area shall only be granted when the City of Apopka makes specific findings detailing how the public policy reasons for allowing the construction outweigh health and safety concerns prohibiting such a location.
i. FDOT Compliance
The City of Apopka shall provide a copy of all airport protection zoning regulations and airport land use compatibility zoning regulations, and any related amendments, to FDOT’s aviation office within 30 days after adoption.
j. More Restrictive
This section does not prohibit the City of Apopka, from establishing airport zoning regulations more restrictive than prescribed in Ch. 333, Fla. Stat., in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public in the air and on the ground.
k. Permitted Uses
Site improvements may be required if determined by the Community Development Department and subject to requirements and standards by FDOT and FAA
1.
Aircraft operation, including heliports.
2.
Flight instruction and aviation school facility.
3.
Aircraft rental.
4.
Aircraft charter and taxi service.
5.
Aircraft engine and accessory maintenance.
6.
Aeronautical radio and instrument operations.
7.
Hangar rental service.
8.
Aviation service, light repair and restoration.
9.
Aircraft tire sales and repair.
10.
Aircraft sales and brokerage.
11.
Aviation-related administrative offices.
12.
Other uses which are similar and compatible to the uses permitted herein which adhere to the intent of the district and which are not prohibited as specified in this code. Use determination shall be based upon the Community Development Director’s determination.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 73
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.6 Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts
3.6.11 AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District
l. Prohibited Uses
1.
Any residential use.
2.
Automobile or vehicle service and repair.
3.
Schools, Places of Worship and any other institutional uses not related to airport or aviation-related business.
4.
Commercial and office uses not considered an aviation-related business.
5.
Outside storage of parts, materials, equipment, automobiles, trailers, boats, etc.
6.
Telecommunications towers not associated with airport use or navigation.
7.
All other uses which do not meet the stated purpose of this district and prohibited by Ch. 333, Fla Stat..
3. Permitting Requirements
a. Permit Required
A permit shall be obtained before any new structure or use may be constructed or established and before any existing use or structure may be substantially changed or substantially altered or repaired; such permit shall be obtained from the City of Apopka Community Development Department, Building Division in coordination with the Airport Manager and in conjunction with FAA requirements and procedures.
1. The FAA Notice Criteria Tool and Obstruction Evaluation/Airport Analysis tools are hereby adopted, as amended from time to time, by reference at the following website:
https://oeaaa.faa.gov/oeaaa/external/gisTools/gisAction.jsp?action=showNo NoticeRequiredToolForm
(a)
If the Notice Criteria Tool indicates that the proposed construction or alteration does not exceed Notice criteria standards (Part 77, subpart B), it is not required to file a Notice with the FAA (FAA form 7460-1) and the Notice Criteria Tool response should be submitted to the IDA board which will determine whether an airport zoning permit may be required due to other airport zoning issues such as land use; or
(b)
If the Notice Criteria Tool response indicates that the proposed construction or alteration does exceed Notice criteria standards (Part 77, subpart B) and/or that the FAA requests the filing of a notice, the applicant shall prepare and submit the Notice (FAA form 7460-1) manually or by utilizing the electronic submittal process at the FAA website: (https://www.faa.gov/documentLibrary/media/Form/FAA_Form_74601_AJV-1-050117.pdf). The Notice form must be submitted at least 45 days before the start date of the proposed construction or alteration or the date an application for a construction permit is filed, whichever is earliest. (14 C.F.R. s. 77.7)
Land Development Code Page 3 74 Apopka, FL
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.6 Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts
3.6.11 AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District
b. FDOT Compliance
Proposals for the construction or alteration of an obstruction must obtain a permit from Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT), subject to subsections (c), (d), and (e). However, permits from FDOT will be required only within an airport hazard area where federal obstruction standards are exceeded and if the proposed construction or alteration is within a 10-nautical-mile??the????
radius??of??
airport reference point, located at the approximate geometric center of all usable runways of a public-use??ormilitary??
airport??airport.????
c. Permit Exceptions
A permit is not required for existing structures that received construction permits from the Federal Communications Commission for structure exceeding federal obstruction standards before May 20, 1975; a permit is not required for any necessary replacement or repairs to such existing structures if the height and location are unchanged.
d. Marking and Lighting
In issuing a permit under this section, the City of Apopka shall require the owner of the obstruction to install, operate, and maintain thereon, at his or her own expense, marking and lighting in conformance with the specific standards established by the Federal Aviation Administration.
e. Permit Processing
Upon receipt of a complete permit application, the City of Apopka shall provide a copy of the application to FDOT’s aviation office by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by a delivery service that provides a receipt evidencing delivery. To evaluate technical consistency with this subsection, FDOT shall have a 15-day????review period following receipt of the application, which must run concurrently with the City of Apopka permitting process. Cranes, construction equipment, and other temporary structures in use or in place for a period not to exceed 18 consecutive months are exempt from FDOT’s review, unless such review is requested by FDOT.
f. FDOT Review
FDOT shall issue or deny a permit for the construction or alteration of an obstruction. The department shall review permit applications in conformity with Sec. 120.60, Fla. Stat. In determining whether to issue or deny a permit, the department shall consider:
1.
The safety of persons on the ground and in the air.
2.
The safe and efficient use of navigable airspace.
3.
The nature of the terrain and height of existing structures.
4.
The effect of the construction or alteration of an obstruction on the state licensing standards for a public-use??airportcontained??in??Florida??Statutes????Chapter 330 and rules adopted thereunder.
5.
The character of existing and planned flight operations and developments at public-use??airports.????
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 75
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.6 Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts
3.6.11 AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District
6.
Federal airways, visual flight rules, flyways and corridors, and instrument approaches as designated by the Federal Aviation Administration.
7.
The effect of the construction or alteration of an obstruction on the minimum descent altitude or the decision height at the affected airport.
8.
The cumulative effects on navigable airspace of all existing obstructions and all known proposed obstructions in the area.
g. Permit Approval
Except as provided herein, applications for permits shall be granted, provided the matter applied for meets the provisions of the City of Apopka Airport Zoning, the Ch. 333, Fla. Stat., Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations (14 CFR) and the all other regulations adopted and in force hereunder.
4. Signage
a.
Freestanding sign shall be a monument type sign and shall comply with standards set forth in Sec. 5.10, Signs.
b.
One wall sign is permitted for each hangar.
1. Wall sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet in copy area.
5. Nonconforming Uses or Structures
a. Continuance
The regulations promulgated herein shall not be construed to require removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any obstruction not conforming to the regulation when adopted or amended, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use, except as provided in Sec. 333.07(1) and (3), Fla. Stat..
b. Applications
Applications proposing to construct, alter, or allow an airport obstruction in an airport hazard area in violation of the airport protection zoning regulations adopted under this chapter must apply for a permit. A permit may not be issued if it would allow the establishment or creation of an airport hazard or if it would permit a nonconforming obstruction to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was when the applicable airport protection zoning regulation was adopted which allowed the establishment or creation of the obstruction, or than it is when the application for a permit is made.
c. Abandonment
If the Community Development Department determines that a nonconforming obstruction has been abandoned or is more than 80 percent torn down, destroyed, deteriorated, or decayed, a permit may not be granted if it would allow the obstruction to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the airport protection zoning regulations. Whether or not an application is made for a permit under this subsection, the owner of the nonconforming obstruction may be required, at his or her own expense, to lower, remove, reconstruct, alter, or equip such obstruction as may be necessary to conform to
Land Development Code Page 3 76 Apopka, FL
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.6 Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts
3.6.11 AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District
the current airport protection zoning regulations. If the owner of the nonconforming obstruction neglects or refuses to comply with such requirement for 10 days after notice, the administrative agency may report the violation to the political subdivision involved, which subdivision, through its appropriate agency, may proceed to have the obstruction so lowered, removed, reconstructed, altered, or equipped and assess the cost and expense thereof upon the owner of the obstruction or the land whereon it is or was located.
d. Compliance
If the owner of the nonconforming structure or tree shall neglect or refuse to comply with such order for 10 days after notice thereof, the Airport Manager may report the violation to the City of Apopka, which through its appropriate agency, may proceed to have the object so lowered, removed, reconstructed, or equipped, and assess the cost and expense thereof upon the object or the land whereon it is or was located, and, unless such an assessment is paid within 90 days from the service of notice thereof on the owner or the owner’s agent, of such object or land, the sum shall be a lien on said land, and shall bear interest thereafter at the rate of 6 percent per annum until paid, and shall be collected in the same manner as taxes on real property are collected by the City of Apopka, or, at the option of the City of Apopka, said lien may be enforced in the manner provided for enforcement of liens by Ch. 85, Fla. Stat., as amended.
e. Hazards
If a nonconforming obstruction is determined to be an airport hazard and the owner will not remove, lower, or otherwise eliminate it or the approach protection necessary cannot, because of constitutional limitations, be provided by airport regulations under this entire section; or it appears advisable that the necessary approach protection be provided by acquisition of property rights rather than by airport zoning regulations, the City of Apopka may acquire, by purchase, grant, or condemnation in the manner provided by Ch. 73, Fla. Stat., as amended; such property, air right, navigation easement, or other estate, portion or interest in the property or nonconforming structure or use or such interest in the air above such property, tree, structure, or use, in question, as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this section, and in so doing, if by condemnation, to have the right to take immediate possession of the property, interest in property, air right, or other right sought to be condemned, at the time, and in the manner and form, and as authorized by Ch. 74, Fla. Stat., as amended. In the case of the purchase of any property or any easement or estate or interest therein or the acquisition of the same by the power of eminent domain the City of Apopka making such purchase or exercising such power shall in addition to the damages for the taking, injury or destruction of property also pay the cost of the removal and relocation of any structure or any public utility which is required to be moved to a new location.
6. Public Notice
Airport zoning regulations may not be adopted, amended, or repealed except by action of the City of Apopka City Council, after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 77
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.6 Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts
3.6.11 AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District
the hearing shall be published at least once a week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Apopka or subdivisions where the airport zoning regulations are to be adopted, amended, or repealed.
7. Airport Zoning Commission
a. Planning Commission Authority
The City of Apopka shall utilize the Apopka Planning Commission to act as the airport zoning commission for all matters pertaining to land use activities, modifications and appeals, in the same manner and authority as other property subject to the Planning Commission decisions as described in the City of Apopka Code of Ordinances as amended. In all airport issues, regulations or other matters heard by the Planning Commission in its authority to act as the airport zoning commission, the Commission shall have and exercise the following powers:
1.
To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Community Development Director or designee in the enforcement of the airport zoning regulations.
2.
To hear and decide any special exceptions to the terms of the airport zoning regulations upon which the Planning Commission may be required to pass under such regulations.
3.
The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Planning Commission shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Community Development Director or designee, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under the airport zoning regulations, or to effect any variation in such regulations.
4.
The Planning Commission shall utilize rules in accordance with the provisions of the ordinance or resolution by which it was created. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chair and at such other times as the Commission may determine. The chair, or in the chair’s absence the acting chair, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses, and all meetings shall be public. The Planning Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. The Planning Commission shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Planning and Zoning Division and shall be a public record.
8. Appeals
a. Who May Make Appeal
Any person aggrieved, or taxpayer affected, by any decision of the Community Development Director or designee made in its administration of airport zoning regulations adopted based on Ch. 333, Fla. Stat.; which is of the opinion that a decision of the Community Development Director or designee is an improper application of airport zoning regulations may appeal to the Planning Commission
Land Development Code Page 3 78 Apopka, FL
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.6 Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts
3.6.11 AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District
authorized to hear and decide appeals from the decisions of the Community Development Director or designee.
b. Notice of Appeal
All appeals taken under this section must be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the Planning Commission, by filing with the Community Development Department from which appeal is taken and with the Planning Commission, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Community Development Department shall forthwith transmit to the Planning Commission all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken, or properly certified copies thereof in lieu of originals.
c. Stay of Proceedings
An appeal shall follow all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Community Development Department or designee from which the appeal is taken certifies to the Planning Commission, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts stated a stay of proceedings would, in its opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such cases, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by an order of the Planning Commission on notice to the Community Development Department on due cause shown.
d. Notice and Time of Hearings
The Planning Commission shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of appeals, give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney.
e. Authority of Commission to Rule
The Planning Commission may, in conformity with the provisions of this entire section, reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or modify, the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the Community Development Department from which the appeal is taken.
9. Judicial Review
a. Time Limitation
Any person aggrieved, or taxpayer affected, by any decision of the Community Development Department, or the Planning Commission, may apply for judicial relief to the circuit court in the judicial circuit where the Planning Commission is located within 30 days after rendition of the decision by the Planning Commission. Review shall be by petition for writ of certiorari, which shall be governed by the Florida Rules of Appellate Procedure.
b. Effect of Application
In any case in which airport zoning regulations adopted under this section, are held by a court to interfere with the use and enjoyment of a particular structure
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 79
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.6 Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts
3.6.11 AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District
or parcel of land to such an extent, or to be so onerous in their application to such a structure or parcel of land, as to constitute a taking or deprivation of that property in violation of the State Constitution or the Constitution of the United States, such holding shall not affect the application of such regulations to other structures and parcels of land, or such regulations as are not involved in the particular decision.
c. Exhaustion of Remedies
No appeal shall be or is permitted under this section, to any courts, as herein provided, save and except an appeal from a decision of the Planning Commission, the appeal herein provided being from such final decision of the Planning Commission only, the appellant being hereby required to exhaust his or her remedies hereunder of application for permits, exceptions and variances, and appeal to the Planning Commission, and gaining a determination by the Commission, before being permitted to appeal to the court hereunder.
10. Enforcement and Remedies
a. Non-compliance
Non-compliance with the terms codified herein may result in action including but not limited to revocation of the City of Apopka Permit and/or Business Tax Receipt (BTR), fines for code violations, and referral to the City of Apopka Code Enforcement Magistrate for adjudication.
b. Violations
Each violation of Ch. 333, Fla. Stat or of any airport zoning regulations, orders, or rulings adopted or made pursuant to Ch. 333, Fla. Stat. shall constitute a misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable as provided Sec. 775.082 or Sec. 775.083, Fla. Stat., and each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
c. Court Relief
In addition, the City of Apopka or may institute in any court of competent jurisdiction an action to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate any violation of the Orlando Apopka Airport Zoning District Regulations or of airport zoning regulations or of any order or ruling made in connection with their administration or enforcement, and the court shall adjudge to the plaintiff such relief, by way of injunction, which may be mandatory, or otherwise, as may be proper under all the facts and circumstances of the case in order to fully effectuate the purposes of this entire section and of the regulations adopted and orders and rulings made pursuant thereto.
d. FDOT Authority
FDOT may institute a civil action for injunctive relief in the appropriate circuit court to prevent violation of any provision of Ch. 333, Fla. Stat.
e. Penalties
Each violation of this article or of any regulation, order or ruling promulgated under this article shall be punishable by a fine of not more than 500 dollars or
Land Development Code Page 3 80 Apopka, FL
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.6 Special Purpose Base Zoning Districts
3.6.11 AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District
imprisonment for not more than six months, or both such fine and imprisonment, and each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
D. Reference to Other Standards
Article 5: Development Standards Section 5.10 Signs
Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and
Section 5.1 Section 5.11 Green Building Standards
Loading Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards Section 5.12 Green Building Incentives
Section 5.3
Tree Protection Standards
Section 5.13
Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
Section 5.4
Open Space Set-Aside Standards
Section 5.14
Utilities
Section 5.5
Fences and Walls
Section 5.15
Guarantees and Sureties
Section 5.6
Exterior Lighting
Section 5.16
Miscellaneous Standards
Section 5.7
Development Design Guidelines
Article 6:
Environmental Standards
Section 5.8
Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
Article 7:
Concurrency Management System
Section 5.9
Agricultural Compatibility Standards
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 81

-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.7 Planned Development District
3.7.1 Established Planned Development Zoning District
Section 3.7. PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
3.7.1. ESTABLISHED PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONING DISTRICT
The Planned Development zoning district established by this LDC is identified in Table 3.7.1: Established Planned Development Zoning District. TABLE 3.7.1: ESTABLISHED PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONING DISTRICT PD: Planned Development
3.7.2. PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
A. Purpose
The purpose of the Planned Development – (PD) zoning district is to encourage innovative, integrated, and efficient land planning and physical design concepts. The planned development district is intended to achieve a high quality of development, environmental sensitivity, energy efficiency, and adequate public facilities and services, and other goals and objectives by:
(1)
Reducing the inflexibility of zoning district standards that sometimes results from strict application of the base district, and development and form standards;
(2)
Allowing greater flexibility in selecting: the form and design of development, the ways by which pedestrians and traffic circulate, how the development is located and designed to respect the natural features of the land and protect the environment, the location and integration of open space and civic space into the development, and design amenities;
(3)
Encouraging a greater mix of land uses within the same development;
(4)
Allowing more efficient use of land, with smaller networks of streets and utilities;
(5)
Providing pedestrian connections within the site and to the public right-of way; and
(6)
Promoting development forms and patterns that respect the character of established surrounding neighborhoods and other types of land uses.
B. Use Standards
Allowed uses and use-specific standards for principal, accessory, and temporary uses are established in Article 4: Use Regulations. The specific uses that may be developed in the district shall be identified in the PD Plan
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 83
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.7 Planned Development District
3.7.2 Planned Development District Intensity and Dimensional Standards C. Standard Requirement Lot Area, min. (sf.) To be determined in PD Plan. 1Lot Width, min. (ft.) 2Front Yard Setback, min. (ft.) 3Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.) 4Corner Side Yard Setback, min. (ft.) 5Rear Yard Setback, min. (ft.) 6Building Height, max. (ft.) 7Density, max (dus/acre) 8Floor Area Ratio (FAR), max.
Notes: sf. = square feet; ft. = feet; min.= minimum; max.= maximum
D. Classification of Planned Development Zoning District
Land shall be classified into a PD zoning district only in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in Sec. 2.5.1.F, Planned Development, and this section.
E. PD District Development Standards
1. Development Standards in PD District
a. Development in a PD district shall comply with the standards in Article 5: Development Standards, Article 6: Environment Standards, and Article 7: Concurrency, unless they are modified as allowed by Table 3.7.2.E.1: PD District Development Standards Subject to Modification.
TABLE 3.7.2.E.1: PD DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS SUBJECT TO MODIFICATION
STANDARD
MEANS TO MODIFY
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
PD Plan
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards
PD Plan
Section 5.3 Tree Protection Standards
PD Plan
Section 5.4 Open Space Set-Aside Standards
No modification
Section 5.5 Fences and Walls
No modification
Section 5.6 Exterior Lighting
PD Plan
Section 5.7 Development Design Guidelines
PD Plan
Section 5.8 Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
PD Plan
Section 5.9 Agricultural Compatibility Standards
No modification. Applies to edge of PD district
Section 5.10 Signs
No modification. Applies to edge of PD district
Section 5.11 Green Building Standards
PD Plan
Section 5.12 Green Building Incentives
No modification
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
No modification
Section 5.14 Utilities
PD Plan
Section 5.15 Guarantees and Sureties
No modification
Land Development Code Page 3 84 Apopka, FL
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.7 Planned Development District
3.7.2 Planned Development District
TA
BLE 3.7.2.E.1: PD DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS SUBJECT TO MODIFICATION
Section 5.16
Miscellaneous Standards
PD Plan
Article 6:
Environmental Standards
No modification
Article 7:
Concurrency Management System
No modification
b. Modifications to development standards, as allowed Table 3.7.2.E.1: PD District Development Standards Subject to Modification, shall be:
1.
Consistent with the purposes of the PD district; and
2.
Documented in the PD Plan and PD Agreement, with a clear basis for why the change is needed, how it supports the purposes of the district, and how it supports high-quality development.
F. Planned Development Zoning District Standards
The application for the PD zoning district classification, shall include a PD Plan and PD Agreement, and comply with the following standards.
1. PD Plan
The PD Plan shall:
a.
Establish a statement of planning and development goals for the PD district that is in accordance with the comprehensive plan and other adopted City plans, as applicable, as well as the purposes of the individual PD district;
b.
Identify the specific principal, accessory, and temporary uses permitted in the PD district. They shall be consistent with the Principal Use Table (see Article 4: Use Regulations), and the purposes of the PD district. Uses shall also be subject to applicable use-specific standards identified in the PD Plan, and any additional limitations or requirements applicable to the individual PD district;
c.
Establish the general location of each development area in the PD district, its acreage, types and mix of land uses (if applicable), number of residential units (by use type), nonresidential floor area (by use type), residential density, and nonresidential intensity;
d.
Establish the density, intensity, and dimensional standards that apply in the individual PD district. The density, intensity, and dimensional standards shall be consistent with the requirements of the individual PD district, and its purposes;
e.
No more than 75 percent of the residential lots in a development or phase shall be 50 feet in width or less. The remaining lots shall be a minimum of 65 feet in width. Any increase or decrease in lot width or percentage may be accepted, denied or accepted with conditions of the plan by the City Council. Justifications by the applicant may depend on surrounding land use, existing development patterns or other land use factors including (but not limited to) utilities, roads, development intensity or environmental factors.
f.
Where relevant, establish the standards and requirements that ensure development on the perimeter of the PD district is designed and located to be compatible with the character of adjacent existing or approved development. Determination of compatible character shall be based on densities/intensities, lot
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 85
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.7 Planned Development District
3.7.2 Planned Development District
size and dimensions, building height, building mass and scale, form and design features, hours of operation, exterior lighting, and siting of service areas;
g.
Establish the general location, amount, and type (whether designated for active or passive recreation) of open space, consistent with the purposes of the individual PD district;
h.
Identify the location of environmentally sensitive lands, resource lands, wildlife habitat, and waterway corridors, and indicate how protection of these lands will be assured consistent with the purposes of the individual PD district and the requirements of this LDC;
i.
Identify the on-site pedestrian and bicycle circulation systems, and how they will connect to off-site pedestrian and bicycle systems in ways that are consistent with the purposes of the individual PD district, and the requirements of this LDC;
j.
Identify the general design and layout of the on-site transportation circulation system, including the general location of all public streets, existing or projected transit corridors, and how they interface with the pedestrian circulation system (pedestrian and bicycle pathways, and trails), and connect to existing and planned City and regional systems in a manner consistent with the purposes of the individual PD district, and the requirements of this LDC;
k.
Identify the general location of on-site potable water and wastewater facilities, and how they will connect to existing and planned City and regional systems in a manner consistent with the purposes of the individual PD district, and the requirements of this LDC;
l.
Identify the general location of on-site storm drainage facilities, and how they will connect to existing and planned City systems, in a manner consistent with the purposes of the individual PD district, and the requirements of this LDC;
m.
Identify the general location and layout of all other on-site and off-site public facilities serving the development, and how they are consistent with the purposes of the individual PD district. The other on-site and off-site public facilities considered shall include—but not limited to—parks, schools, and facilities for fire protection, police protection, emergency management, stormwater management, and solid waste management;
n.
Establish provisions addressing how transportation, potable water, wastewater, stormwater management, and other public facilities will be provided to accommodate the proposed development; and
o.
Establish the development standards that will be applied to development. The development standards shall be consistent with the requirements of the individual PD district and its purposes, and the requirements of this LDC, as appropriate. At a minimum, the development standards shall address:
1.
Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards;
2.
Landscaping and Buffer Standards
3.
Tree Protection Standards;
Land Development Code Page 3 86 Apopka, FL
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.7 Planned Development District
3.7.2 Planned Development District
4.
Open Space Set-Aside Standards;
5.
Fences and Walls;
6.
Exterior Lighting;
7.
Development Design Guidelines;
8.
Neighborhood Compatibility Standards, if applicable;
9.
Agricultural Compatibility Standards, if applicable;
10.
Signs;
11.
Green Building Standards;
12.
Green Building Incentives, if applicable;
13.
Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways;
14.
Utilities;
15.
Guarantees and Sureties; and
16.
Miscellaneous Standards
2. PD Agreement
a. A PD Agreement is also a required component for the establishment of a PD district. A PD Agreement shall include, but not be limited to:
1.
Conditions related to approval of the application for the individual PD district classification;
2.
Conditions related to the approval of the PD Plan, including any conditions related to the form and design of development shown in the PD Plan;
3.
Provisions addressing how public facilities (pedestrian and bicycle, other transportation, potable water, wastewater, stormwater management, and other public facilities) will be provided to accommodate the proposed development. This shall include but not be limited to:
(a)
Recognition that the applicant/landowner will be responsible to design and construct or install required and proposed on-site public facilities in compliance with applicable City, State, and federal regulations; and
(b)
The responsibility of the applicant/landowner to dedicate to the public the rights-of-way and easements necessary for the construction or installation of required and proposed on-site public facilities in compliance with applicable City, State, and federal regulations.
4.
Provisions related to environmental protection and monitoring (e.g., restoration of mitigation measures, annual inspection reports);
5.
Identification of community benefits and amenities that will be provided to compensate for the added development flexibility afforded by the individual PD zoning district; and
6.
Any other provisions the City Council determines are relevant and necessary to the development of the PD district.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 87
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.7 Planned Development District
3.7.2 Planned Development District
b. All conditions shall be related in both type and amount to the anticipated impacts of the proposed development on the public and surrounding lands.
3. Development Phasing Plan
If development in a PD district is proposed to be phased, the PD Plan shall include a development phasing plan that identifies the general sequence or phases in which the planned development is proposed to be developed, including how residential and nonresidential development will be timed, how infrastructure (public and private), open space, and other amenities will be provided and timed, how development will be coordinated with the City’s capital improvements program, and how environmentally sensitive lands will be protected and monitored.
4. Conversion Schedule
The PD Plan may include a conversion schedule that identifies the extent to which one type of use may be converted to another type of use.
5. Compensating Community Benefits
Compensating community benefits shall also be identified in the PD Plan and Agreement. These benefits shall be in addition to what is otherwise required to meet the minimum standards of this LDC and other City, County, State, and federal regulations. They may include, but are not limited to:
a. Improved Design
The use of architectural design that exceeds any minimum standards established in this LDC or any other City regulation, or the use of site design incorporating principles of walkable urbanism and traditional neighborhood development, compatible with the comprehensive plan and other adopted City plans.
b. Green Building
The use of environmental, energy efficiency, or resiliency principles in community, site, and building design, beyond the minimum standards or established in Sec. 5.12, Green Building Standards.
c. Natural Preservation
The preservation of environmentally sensitive lands, natural features, or trees, on the site, that exceed the requirements of this LDC.
d. Dedication of Land or Facilities or In-Lieu Fee Contribution
1. Parks, Recreation, and Open Space
The dedication of land, construction of facilities, or contribution of an in-lieu fee for public parks, trails and trail linkages, greenways, waterfront access, recreation facilities, or open space called for in the comprehensive plan or other adopted City plans, beyond the requirements of Sec. 5.5, Open Space Set-Aside Standards.
Land Development Code Page 3 88 Apopka, FL
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.8 Overlay Districts
3.8.1 General Purposes of Overlay Districts
2. Stormwater Management Facilities
The dedication of land, construction of facilities, or contribution of an in-lieu fee for stormwater management facilities that exceed the requirements of the LDC or the City Code of Ordinances..
3. Transportation Facilities
The dedication of land, construction of facilities, or contribution of an in-lieu fee for off-site transportation facilities that exceed the requirements of Sec. Section 5.13, Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways.
4. Community Facilities
The dedication of land or construction of facilities for community facilities
(e.g. cultural arts center, public plaza, and public art) called for in the comprehensive plan or other adopted City plans.
e. Rehabilitation of Historic Structures
The protection and/or rehabilitation of a historic structure or site identified on the National Register of Historic Places or the local register of historic places.
f. Workforce Housing
The construction of workforce dwelling units, and/or contribution of funds for such construction, that is consistent with the comprehensive plan or other adopted City plans.
g. Other
Any other community benefit that would provide benefits to the development site and the citizens of the City, generally.
Section 3.8. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
3.8.1. GENERAL PURPOSES OF OVERLAY DISTRICTS
The purpose and intent of Overlay zoning districts are to provide supplemental standards with respect to special areas, land uses, or environmental features, that supersede the standards of the underlying base zoning district.
3.8.2. ESTABLISHED OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS
Overlay zoning districts established by this LDC are identified in Table 3.8.2: Established Overlay Zoning Districts.
TABLE 3.8.2: ESTABLISHED OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS
NC-O: Neighborhood Conservation Overlay (NEW)
H-O: Historic Overlay
3.8.3. CONFLICTING STANDARDS
If there is a conflict between any base zoning district and overlay district regulations, the overlay district regulations shall control, unless expressly stated to the contrary.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 89
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.8 Overlay Districts
3.8.4 Classification of Overlay Districts
3.8.4. CLASSIFICATION OF OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Land shall be classified or reclassified into an overlay zoning district only in accordance with the procedures and standards in either Sec. 2.5.1.D, General Map Amendment, or Sec. 2.5.1.E., Site-Specific Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning).
3.8.5. NC-O: NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION OVERLAY DISTRICT
A. Purpose
The purpose of the Neighborhood Conservation Overlay (NCO) district is to protect and preserve unique development features and community character in Apopka’s neighborhoods. The district is intended to promote development that is compatible with existing neighborhood character, with specific development standards tailored to individual neighborhoods based on unique architectural, natural, cultural, and historic attributes.
B. Applicability
1. General Applicability
The standards and requirements in this section apply to individually-designated NCO districts, in addition to base zoning district requirements. Individual NCO districts may also contain additional, neighborhood-specific standards and requirements.
2. Specific Areas of Applicability
Specific NCO districts will be listed below as they are established by the City Council.
3. District Boundaries
Individual NCO districts shall be placed on the Official Zoning District Map.
C. Procedure and Standards For Designation
1. Individual NCO districts shall be established as an Official Zoning District Map amendment in accordance with Sec. 2.5.1.E., Site-Specific Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning). In addition to zoning map amendment procedures and review standards, areas shall meet the following standards, in order to be eligible for a NCO district designation.
a.
A neighborhood plan is approved for the area, specifying the development context in the district.
b.
At least 65 percent of the land area within the proposed NCO district, not including street and other rights-of-way, is developed.
c.
Development patterns in the proposed NCO district demonstrate an on-going effort to maintain or rehabilitate the character and physical features of existing buildings.
d.
There is existing or potential pressure for new development or redevelopment and new infill development within the district.
e.
Development standards proposed for the individual NCO district will encourage the retention of the general character and appearance of existing development.
Land Development Code Page 3 90 Apopka, FL
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.8 Overlay Districts
3.8.5 NC-O: Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District
f. One or more of the following attributes creates a distinctive, cohesive, and identifiable character for the proposed NCO district:
1.
Scale, size, type of construction, or distinctive building materials;
2.
Lot layouts, setbacks, street layouts, alleys or sidewalks;
3.
Special natural or streetscape characteristics, such as rivers, lakes, wetland areas, parks, gardens, or street landscaping;
4.
Land use patterns, including mixed or unique uses or activities; or
5.
Proximity to historic districts or sites.
D. Modifications of Otherwise Applicable Development Regulations
Individual NCO districts shall identify specific standards for new construction and substantial improvements to existing structures.
1. Standards for individual NCO districts may include, but are not be limited to:
a.
Lot size;
b.
Location of proposed buildings or additions;
c.
Setbacks or required yards;
d.
Building height;
e.
Building size (for principal and accessory structures);
f.
Building orientation;
g.
Exterior building materials and colors;
h.
Building roof line and pitch;
i.
Building foundation treatment;
j.
Garage location;
k.
Porch treatment;
l.
Landscaping and screening;
m.
Impervious surface coverage;
n.
Paving requirements or limitations;
o.
Exterior lighting;
p.
Required features on a front facade;
q.
Neighborhood character and compatibility;
r.
Views to or from specific locations;
s.
Riparian areas, wetland areas, or drainage patterns; and
t.
Demolition of structures.
2. In addition, the City Council may also prohibit use types within an NCO district.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 91
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.8 Overlay Districts
3.8.6 H-O: Historic Overlay District
3.8.6. H-O: HISTORIC OVERLAY DISTRICT
A. Purpose
The purpose of the Historic Overlay (H-O) district is to:
1.
Protect and preserve areas of the City and individual sites having special historic or cultural significance;
2.
Ensure new development and redevelopment is consistent with the character of existing development in the H-O districts; and
3.
Prevent destruction of historic structures and encroachment by uses, structures, and site development features that are incompatible with the unique appearance and historic and cultural significance in the H-O districts.
B. Applicability
1. General Applicability
a. The standards and requirements in this section apply to individually listed historic places put on the local register and development within individually-designated H-O districts, in addition to base zoning district requirements.
2. Specific Applicability
a. The Individual historic places listed on the local historic register include:
3. District Boundaries
Individual H-O districts and historic places on the local historic register shall be placed on the Official Zoning Map.
C. Local Register of Historic Places
1. Establishment
A local register of historic places is hereby established as a means of identifying and classifying various sites, buildings, structures, objects, and districts as historic and/or architecturally significant. The local register will be maintained by the Director, and is available for public review in the office of the Director during normal business hours.
2. Initiation of Placement on the Local Register
A request for placement of sites, buildings, structures, objects or districts on the local register may be initiated by the City Council, the Historic Preservation Board, the owner of the site, building, structure, object, or area; or, in the case of a district, by the owner of a site, building, structure, object, or area within the proposed district.
3. Placement on the Local Register
The following procedure shall be followed for placement of sites, buildings, structures, objects, areas, and districts on the local register:
a.
A nomination form, available from the Director, shall be completed by the applicant and returned to the Director.
b.
Upon receipt of a completed nomination form, including necessary documentation, the Director shall place the nomination on the agenda of the
Land Development Code Page 3 92 Apopka, FL
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.8 Overlay Districts
3.8.6 H-O: Historic Overlay District
next regularly scheduled meeting of the historic preservation board. If the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board is too close at hand to allow for the required notice to be given, the nomination shall be placed on the agenda of the succeeding regularly scheduled meeting.
c.
Adequate notice of the historic preservation board's consideration of the nomination shall be provided to the public at large, and to the owner(s) of the nominated property(ies), at least 15 days in advance of the meeting at which the nomination will be considered by the board.
d.
The board shall, within 90 days from the date of the meeting at which the nomination is first on the board's agenda, review the nomination and write a recommendation thereon. The recommendation shall include specific findings and conclusions as to why the nomination does or does not meet the appropriate criteria for listing on the local register. The recommendation shall also include any owner's objection to the listing. If the nomination is of a district, the recommendation shall also clearly specify, through the use of maps, lists, or other means, those buildings, objects, or structures which are classified as contributing to the historical significance of the district. If the 90-day period runs and the board has not prepared and sent a recommendation, and the period has not been extended by mutual consent of the applicant and the board, the nomination may be submitted by the applicant directly to the Planning Commission.
e.
The nomination form and the board's recommendation shall be sent to the Planning Commission and proceed as a text or map amendment, as appropriate (See Secs. 2.5.1.C, Text Amendments, and 2.5.1.E, Site-Specific Map Amendment (Rezoning)).
4. Criteria for Listing on the Local Register:
a.
A site, building, or district must meet the following criteria before it may be listed on the local register:
1.
The site, building, or district possesses historic integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, distinguishable features, and association; and
2.
The site, building or district is associated with events that are significant to local, state, or national history; or the district site, building, structure, or object embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction, or represents the work of a master, or possesses high artistic values, or represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction.
b.
A site or building located in a local register of historic places district shall be designated as contributing to that district if it meets the following criteria:
1. The property is one which, by its location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling and association, adds to the district's sense of time and place and historical development.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 3 93
-
Article 3: Zoning Districts
Section 3.8 Overlay Districts
3.8.6 H-O: Historic Overlay District
2.
A property should not be considered contributing if the property's integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling and association has been so altered that the overall integrity of the property has been irretrievably lost.
3.
Structures that have been built within the past 50 years shall not be considered to contribute to the significance of a district, unless a strong justification concerning their historical or architectural merit is given or the historical attributes of the district are considered to be less than 50 years old.
5. Effect of Listing on Local Register
a.
The Director may issue an official certificate of historic significance to the owner of properties listed individually on the local register or judged as contributing to the character of a district listed on the local register. The Mayor is authorized to issue and place official signs denoting the geographic boundaries of each district listed on the local register.
b.
Structures and buildings listed individually on the local register or judged as contributing to the character of a district listed on the local register shall be deemed historic and entitled to modified enforcement of the Standard Building Code as provided by chapter 1, section 101.5, of the Standard Building Code Congress International, Inc.
c.
For individual structures or H-O districts listed on the Local Register, the DRC may create a reduction or exemption in parking requirements in Sec. 5.1., Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards, if such a reduction or exemption is necessary to allow a viable use of the historic structure, unless the reduction or exemption would create a severe parking shortage or traffic congestion.
Land Development Code Page 3 94 Apopka, FL
Use Regulations

Article 4
: Use Regulations
.............................................................................
4-1
Section 4.1. General Provisions
.............................................................................................................
4-1
Section 4.2. Principal Uses
....................................................................................................................
4-1
4.2.1.
General
................................................................................................................
4-1
4.2.2.
Principal Use Table
..............................................................................................
4-1
4.2.3.
Standards Specific to Principal Uses
.................................................................
4-15
Section 4.3. Accessory Uses and Structures
........................................................................................
4-36
4.3.1.
General
..............................................................................................................
4-36
4.3.2.
Accessory Uses and Structure Table
.................................................................
4-36
4.3.3.
General Standards for all Accessory Uses and Structures
................................
4-41
4.3.4.
Standards Specific to Accessory Uses and Structures
.....................................
4-41
Section 4.4. Temporary Uses and Structures
......................................................................................
4-52
4.4.1.
General
..............................................................................................................
4-52
4.4.2.
Temporary Uses and Structures Table
..............................................................
4-53
4.4.3.
General Standards for All Temporary Uses and Structures
..............................
4-57
4.4.4.
Standards Specific to Temporary Uses and Structures
.....................................
4-57

-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.1 General Provisions
4.2.1 General
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 4.2, Principal Uses, identifies land uses allowed as the principal uses in the various zoning districts and sets out the special standards that apply to a number of the allowable principal uses. Sec. 4.3 Accessory Uses and Structures, identifies land uses and structures commonly allowed as accessory to principal uses, sets out general standards applicable to all accessory uses and structures, and sets out special standards that apply to particular accessory uses and structures. Sec. 4.4, Temporary Uses and Structures, identifies land uses or structures allowed on a temporary basis, sets out general standards applicable to all temporary uses and structures, and sets out special standards that apply to particular temporary uses and structures.
Section 4.2. PRINCIPAL USES
4.2.1. GENERAL
A. Purpose
The purpose of this section is to authorize the establishment and continuation of land uses that are allowed as the primary use(s) of a parcel—i.e., principal uses. This section identifies the zoning districts in which such principal uses are allowed, identifies what type of permit or review is required to establish them, and sets out any special standards applicable to particular principal uses. This section is also intended to establish a hierarchy for organizing principal uses that reflects functional relationships among the various principal uses and that, in conjunction with Sec. 10.3.1, Principal Use Classification System, makes it easier to determine whether a particular proposed use is allowable as a principal use in a particular zoning district.
B. Organization and Applicability
Sec. 4.2.2, Principal Use Table, contains Table 4.2.2.C: Principal Use Table, that lists allowable principal uses and shows whether each use is permitted or prohibited within the various zoning districts, as well as the type of permit or approval by which the use may be allowed. Sec. 4.2.3, Standards Specific to Principal Uses, sets forth standards applicable to specific principal uses regardless of the zoning district in which they are allowed or the review procedure by which they are approved, unless expressly stated to the contrary. These standards may be modified by other applicable requirements in this LDC.
4.2.2. PRINCIPAL USE TABLE
A. Structure of the Principal Use Table
1. Organization and Classification of Principal Uses
Table 4.2.2.C: Principal Use Table, organizes allowable principal uses with the
following hierarchy of use classifications:
a. Use Classifications
Use classifications are very broad and general (e.g., Rural and Agricultural Uses, Residential Uses, Public, Civic, and Institutional Uses, Commercial Uses, and Industrial Uses).
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 4 1
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.2 Principal Uses
4.2.2 Principal Use Table
b. Use Categories
Use categories represent major subgroups of the use classifications that have common functional, product, or physical characteristics, such as the type and amount of activity, type of occupants or users/customers, or operational characteristics. For example, the Commercial Use Classification is divided into multiple use categories, including Eating or Drinking Establishments and Visitor Accommodation Uses.
c. Use Types
Use Types identify specific principal land uses whose characteristics are considered to fall within the various use categories. For example, bank or other financial institution and consumer goods establishment use types within the Retail Sales and Service Use Category. Each use type is defined in Sec. 10.3.1, Principal Use Classification System. Classifying principal uses in this manner provides a systematic basis for determining whether a particular land use not expressly listed should be considered a form or example of a listed principal use, and for addressing future additions to the Principal Use Tables.
2. Description of Use Classification System
See Sec. 10.3.1, Principal Use Classification System, for a description of the use classification system and Sec. 10.3.2, Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries, for the procedures for using the system to interpret unlisted uses.
3. Designation of Principal Uses in Table 4.2.2.C: Principal Use Table
Table 4.2.2.C: Principal Use Table, uses the following abbreviations to designate whether and how a principal use is allowed in a particular zoning district:
P A “P” under a base zoning district column indicates that the use is allowable as a principal use in the district, subject to any referenced use-specific standards and all other applicable regulations of this LDC.
S An “S” under a base zoning district column indicates that the use is allowable as a principal use in the district only on approval of a special exception in accordance with Sec. 2.5.1.G, Special Exception Permit, and subject to any referenced use-specific standards and all other applicable regulations of this LDC.
A An “A” under the planned development district indicates that the use may be allowed as a part of the PD Plan for a planned development in accordance with Sec. 2.5.1.F, Planned Development, and Sec. 3.7.2, Planned Development District, subject to any referenced use-specific standards and other applicable regulations of this LDC.
A blank cell under a base or the planned development district column indicates that the use is prohibited as a principal use or special exception in the zoning district.
Land Development Code Page 4 2 Apopka, FL
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.2 Principal Uses
4.2.2 Principal Use Table
4. Reference to Use-Specific Standards
A particular use category or use type allowable as a principal use in a zoning district may be subject to additional standards that are specific to the particular use. The applicability of such use-specific standards is noted in the last column of Table
4.2.2.C: Principal Use Table, (“Use-Specific Standards”) through a reference to standards in Sec. 4.2.3, Standards Specific to Principal Uses.
B. Multiple Principal Uses
A development may include a single principal use with one or more accessory uses that are customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use (e.g., home occupation as accessory to a dwelling, or administrative offices as accessory to a school, retail sales, or manufacturing use). A development may also include multiple principal uses, none of which is necessarily customarily incidental or subordinate to another principal use (e.g., a place of worship combined with a school, a gas station combined with a convenience store, restaurant, or automotive repair use, or a flex building housing retail, industrial service, and warehousing tenants). A development with multiple principal uses shall include only those principal uses designated in Table: 4.2.2.C: Principal Use Table as allowed in the applicable zoning district, and each principal use shall be subject to any use-specific standards applicable to the use.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 4 3

-
=
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.2 Principal Uses
4.2.2 Principal Use Table
C. Principal Use Table
TABLE 4.2.2.C: PRINCIPAL USE TABLE P= PERMITTED USE A= ALLOWED USE IN A PD DISTRICT IF APPROVED AS PART OF A PD PLAN S=ALLOWED WITH APPROVAL OF SPECIAL EXCEPTION BLANK CELL USE IS PROHIBITED
Principal Use Category
Principal Use Type
Agricultural & Transitional Districts
Residential Districts
Commercial Districts
IndustrialDistricts
Special Purpose
Districts
PlannedDevelopmentDistrict
Use-SpecificStandards
AG
T
RCE
RSF-1A
RSF-1B
RTF
RMF
RMU
MHP
C-N
C-C
O
C-COR
C-R
I-L
I-H
MU-D
MU-ES
INST
PR
AIR
PD
NM
GT
RTE
Rural and Agricultural
Agriculture / Forestry Uses
Agricultural production
P
P
Apiaries
P
P
P
S
P
P
4.2.3.B.1.a
Community Garden
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
4.2.3.B.1.b
Forestry
P
P
P
Greenhouse and nursery
P
P
P
Keeping horses or ponies
P
P
P
4.2.3.B.1.c
Other agricultural use
P
P
Agricultural/Forestry-Related Uses
Agriculture research facility
P
P
Agritourism (570, Fla. Stat.)
P
P
Equestrian center
P
A
4.2.3.B.1.d
Farm distribution hub
P
Farm supply sales and farm machinery/implement sales, rental, or repair
P
P
Farm winery
P
P
A
Riding stable
P
P
A
4.2.3.B.1.e
Rural corporate retreat
P
P
A
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 4 5
-
=
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.2 Principal Uses
4.2.2 Principal Use Table
TABLE 4.2.2.C: PRINCIPAL USE TABLE P= PERMITTED USE A= ALLOWED USE IN A PD DISTRICT IF APPROVED AS PART OF A PD PLAN S=ALLOWED WITH APPROVAL OF SPECIAL EXCEPTION BLANK CELL USE IS PROHIBITED
Principal Use Category
Principal Use Type
Agricultural & Transitional Districts
Residential Districts
Commercial Districts
IndustrialDistricts
Special Purpose
Districts
PlannedDevelopmentDistrict
Use-SpecificStandards
AG
T
RCE
RSF-1A
RSF-1B
RTF
RMF
RMU
MHP
C-N
C-C
O
C-COR
C-R
I-L
I-H
MU-D
MU-ES
INST
PR
AIR
PD
NM
GT
RTE
Open Space Uses
Arboretum or botanical garden
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Cemetery
P
P
S
P
S
A
4.2.3.B.2.a
Park
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Residential
Household Living Uses
Accessory Dwelling Unit
S
4.2.3.C.1.b
Dwelling, live-work
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
4.2.3.C.1.a 4.2.3.C.1.b
Dwelling, mobile home
P
4.2.3.C.1.a 4.2.3.C.1.d
Dwelling, multifamily
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
4.2.3.C.1.a
Dwelling, single-family detached
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
4.2.3.C.1.a 4.2.3.C.1.e
Dwelling, townhome
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
4.2.3.C.1.a
Dwelling, two-family (duplex)
P
P
P
P
P
A
4.2.3.C.1.a 4.2.3.C.1.e.2
Group Living Uses
Assisted living facility
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
P
P
S
A
4.2.3.C.2.a
Adult living facility, extended congregate care
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
A
4.2.3.C.2.a
Adult foster home
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
A
4.2.3.C.2.a 4.2.3.C.2.b
Boardinghouse or roominghouse
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
4.2.3.C.2.a
Child foster home
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
A
4.2.3.C.2.a
Continuing care retirement community
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
P
P
S
A
4.2.3.C.2.a 4.2.3.C.2.c
Land Development Code Page 4 6 Apopka, FL
-
=
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.2 Principal Uses
4.2.2 Principal Use Table
TABLE 4.2.2.C: PRINCIPAL USE TABLE P= PERMITTED USE A= ALLOWED USE IN A PD DISTRICT IF APPROVED AS PART OF A PD PLAN S=ALLOWED WITH APPROVAL OF SPECIAL EXCEPTION BLANK CELL USE IS PROHIBITED
Principal Use Category
Principal Use Type
Agricultural & Transitional Districts
Residential Districts
Commercial Districts
IndustrialDistricts
Special PurposeDistricts
PlannedDevelopmentDistrict
Use-SpecificStandards
AG
T
RCE
RSF-1A
RSF-1B
RTF
RMF
RMU
MHP
C-N
C-C
O
C-COR
C-R
I-L
I-H
MU-D
MU-ES
INST
PR
AIR
PD
NM
GT
RTE
Emergency shelter or home
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
A
4.2.3.C.2.a
Family day care home
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
A
4.2.3.C.2.a
Public, Civic, and Institutional
Communications Uses
Broadcasting studio
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Newspaper/periodical publishing establishment
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Wireless telecommunications tower
See Sec. 75-26 Approved Uses and Sec. 75-27 Special Exceptions, of the Code of Ordinances
4.2.3.D.1.a
Community Service Uses
Adult day care facility
S
S
S
S
S
P
P
S
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
4.2.3.D.2.a
Child care facility
S
S
S
S
S
P
P
S
S
S
S
S
P
P
P
P
A
4.2.3.D.2.b
Club or lodge
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Community center/facility
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Cultural facility
S
S
S
P
S
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Emergency services facility
S
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Philanthropic institution
S
S
S
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Post office
S
S
S
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Place of Worship
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
P
P
P
P
S
S
S
S
S
A
4.2.3.D.2.b.7
Educational Uses
Boarding school
P
P
P
A
College or university
S
P
P
S
S
P
P
P
A
School, elementary, middle, or high
S
S
S
S
S
S
P
S
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Vocational or trade school
S
S
P
P
P
P
P
S
S
P
P
P
A
Health Care Uses
Clinic
S
S
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Hospital
S
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
4.2.3.D.3.a
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 4 7
-
=
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.2 Principal Uses
4.2.2 Principal Use Table
TABLE 4.2.2.C: PRINCIPAL USE TABLE P= PERMITTED USE A= ALLOWED USE IN A PD DISTRICT IF APPROVED AS PART OF A PD PLAN S=ALLOWED WITH APPROVAL OF SPECIAL EXCEPTION BLANK CELL USE IS PROHIBITED
Principal Use Category
Principal Use Type
Agricultural & Transitional Districts
Residential Districts
Commercial Districts
IndustrialDistricts
Special PurposeDistricts
PlannedDevelopmentDistrict
Use-SpecificStandards
AG
T
RCE
RSF-1A
RSF-1B
RTF
RMF
RMU
MHP
C-N
C-C
O
C-COR
C-R
I-L
I-H
MU-D
MU-ES
INST
PR
AIR
PD
NM
GT
RTE
Medical or dental lab
S
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Medical marijuana dispensary
Nursing home facility
S
S
P
P
P
P
A
4.2.3.D.3.b
Transportation Uses
Airport
P
4.2.3.D.4.a
Heliport
S
P
A
4.2.3.D.4.b
Park and ride facility
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Parking facility (as a principal use)
P
P
P
P
P
S
S
S
P
P
P
A
4.2.3.D.4.c
Terminal
P
P
P
P
A
Utility Uses
Solar energy collection facility (large-scale)
P
P
P
A
Utility facility, major
P
P
S
P
S
P
P
P
S
S
A
4.2.3.D.5.a
Utility facility, minor
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Commercial
Adult Uses
Adult book store or video store
See Chapter 10, Article III, Division 4. Locational Requirements, of the Code of Ordinances
4.2.3.E.1
Adult entertainment
Animal Care Uses
Animal Shelter
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Kennel
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
4.2.3.E.2.a
Kennel, hobby
P
P
A
Pet beauty parlor
P
S
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Veterinary hospital or clinic
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
4.2.3.E.2.b
Business Support Service Uses
Business service center
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Conference or training center
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
4.2.3.E.3.a
Data processing facility
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Employment or travel agency
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Land Development Code Page 4 8 Apopka, FL
-
=
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.2 Principal Uses
4.2.2 Principal Use Table
TABLE 4.2.2.C: PRINCIPAL USE TABLE P= PERMITTED USE A= ALLOWED USE IN A PD DISTRICT IF APPROVED AS PART OF A PD PLAN S=ALLOWED WITH APPROVAL OF SPECIAL EXCEPTION BLANK CELL USE IS PROHIBITED
Principal Use Category
Principal Use Type
Agricultural & Transitional Districts
Residential Districts
Commercial Districts
IndustrialDistricts
Special PurposeDistricts
PlannedDevelopmentDistrict
Use-SpecificStandards
AG
T
RCE
RSF-1A
RSF-1B
RTF
RMF
RMU
MHP
C-N
C-C
O
C-COR
C-R
I-L
I-H
MU-D
MU-ES
INST
PR
AIR
PD
NM
GT
RTE
Telephone call center
P
P
A
Eating or Drinking Establishment Uses
Alcoholic beverage establishments
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
4.2.3.E.4.a 4.2.3.E.4.b
Brewpub or microbrewery
P
P
P
S
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
4.2.3.E.4.a 4.2.3.E.4.c
Restaurant
S
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
4.2.3.E.4.a
Restaurant, drive-in
P
P
P
S
P
P
A
4.2.3.E.4.a 4.2.3.E.4.d
Restaurant, fast food
P
P
P
P
P
A
4.2.3.E.4.a
Funeral and Mortuary Services Uses
Crematory
P
P
P
P
A
Funeral home or mortuary
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Office Uses
Contractor’s office
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
General business
P
S
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Office, professional
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Personal Service Uses
Art, music, dance, or martial arts studio/school
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Beauty salon or barber shop
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Confectionery store, ice cream, candy
P
P
P
S
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Dry cleaning or laundry dropoff/pick-up establishment
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Fortune telling establishment
P
P
P
P
A
Laundry, self-service
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Lawn care, pool, or pest control service
P
P
P
P
A
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 4 9
-
=
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.2 Principal Uses
4.2.2 Principal Use Table
TABLE 4.2.2.C: PRINCIPAL USE TABLE P= PERMITTED USE A= ALLOWED USE IN A PD DISTRICT IF APPROVED AS PART OF A PD PLAN S=ALLOWED WITH APPROVAL OF SPECIAL EXCEPTION BLANK CELL USE IS PROHIBITED
Principal Use Category
Principal Use Type
Agricultural & Transitional Districts
Residential Districts
Commercial Districts
IndustrialDistricts
Special PurposeDistricts
PlannedDevelopmentDistrict
Use-SpecificStandards
AG
T
RCE
RSF-1A
RSF-1B
RTF
RMF
RMU
MHP
C-N
C-C
O
C-COR
C-R
I-L
I-H
MU-D
MU-ES
INST
PR
AIR
PD
NM
GT
RTE
Massage establishment
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Nail care establishment
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Pawnshop
P
P
P
A
Personal or household goods repair establishment
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Tanning salon
P
P
P
S
P
P
P
A
Tattoo or body-piercing establishment
P
P
P
P
A
Taxidermy
P
P
P
A
Tobacco shop
P
P
P
S
P
P
S
P
P
P
A
Vape / Hookah Lounge
S
Recreation/ Entertainment Uses
Arena, stadium, or amphitheater
S
P
S
S
A
4.2.3.E.5.a
Cinema
P
S
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Country club
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Golf course
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Golf driving range
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Nightclub
P
S
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Performance arts theater
P
S
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Recreation facility, indoor
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Recreation facility, outdoor
P
S
P
S
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
4.2.3.E.5.b
Retail Sales and Service Uses
Alcoholic beverage establishments
See alcoholic beverage establishments under Eating or Drinking Establishment Uses
4.2.3.E.6.a
Bank or other financial institution
P
P
P
S
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
4.2.3.E.6.b
Check cashing business
P
P
P
P
P
P
0
Land Development Code Page 4 10 Apopka, FL
-
=
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.2 Principal Uses
4.2.2 Principal Use Table
TABLE 4.2.2.C: PRINCIPAL USE TABLE P= PERMITTED USE A= ALLOWED USE IN A PD DISTRICT IF APPROVED AS PART OF A PD PLAN S=ALLOWED WITH APPROVAL OF SPECIAL EXCEPTION BLANK CELL USE IS PROHIBITED
Principal Use Category
Principal Use Type
Agricultural & Transitional Districts
Residential Districts
Commercial Districts
IndustrialDistricts
Special PurposeDistricts
PlannedDevelopmentDistrict
Use-SpecificStandards
AG
T
RCE
RSF-1A
RSF-1B
RTF
RMF
RMU
MHP
C-N
C-C
O
C-COR
C-R
I-L
I-H
MU-D
MU-ES
INST
PR
AIR
PD
NM
GT
RTE
Consumer goods establishment
P
S
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Drug store or pharmacy
P
P
P
S
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Farmers’ market
P
P
S
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
4.2.3.E.6.d
Flea market
S
S
S
S
A
4.2.3.E.6.e
Grocery store and food market
P
P
P
P
P
S
P
P
P
A
Vehicle Sales and Service Uses.
Automobile service station
S
S
P
P
P
P
S
P
P
A
4.2.3.E.7.a
Commercial fuel depot
P
P
4.2.3.E.7.b
Commercial vehicle repair and maintenance
P
P
A
4.2.3.E.7.c
Commercial vehicle sales and rentals
P
P
A
Personal vehicle repair and maintenance
P
P
P
A
4.2.3.E.7.b.1
Personal vehicle sales and rentals
P
P
P
A
4.2.3.E.7.e
Taxi or limousine service facilities
P
P
P
P
A
Vehicle equipment and supplies sales and rentals
P
P
P
P
A
Vehicle paint finishing shop
P
P
Vehicle or trailer storage yard
S
P
Vehicle towing or wrecker service
S
P
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 4 11
-
=
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.2 Principal Uses
4.2.2 Principal Use Table
TABLE 4.2.2.C: PRINCIPAL USE TABLE P= PERMITTED USE A= ALLOWED USE IN A PD DISTRICT IF APPROVED AS PART OF A PD PLAN S=ALLOWED WITH APPROVAL OF SPECIAL EXCEPTION BLANK CELL USE IS PROHIBITED
Principal Use Category
Principal Use Type
Agricultural & Transitional Districts
Residential Districts
Commercial Districts
IndustrialDistricts
Special PurposeDistricts
PlannedDevelopmentDistrict
Use-SpecificStandards
AG
T
RCE
RSF-1A
RSF-1B
RTF
RMF
RMU
MHP
C-N
C-C
O
C-COR
C-R
I-L
I-H
MU-D
MU-ES
INST
PR
AIR
PD
NM
GT
RTE
Visitor Accommodation Uses
Bed & breakfast
S
S
S
S
S
P
P
P
A
Hotel or motel
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Water-related uses
Boat sales, rental, service, or repair
P
P
P
A
4.2.3.E.8.a
Boat storage yard
P
P
A
Marina
S
P
P
P
A
Waterfront fuel sales
S
P
P
A
Industrial
Extraction Uses
Surface mining
S
4.2.3.F.1 4.2.3.F.2.a
Industrial Service Uses
Building, heating/air conditioning, plumbing, or electrical contractor’s storage yard
P
P
4.2.3.F.1
Dry-cleaning, laundry, or carpet-cleaning plant
P
P
4.2.3.F.1 4.2.3.F.3.a
Educational, scientific, or industrial research and development
P
4.2.3.F.1
Fuel oil or bottled gas distribution
S
4.2.3.F.1
Fuel oil storage
P
4.2.3.F.1
General industrial services
P
P
4.2.3.F.1
Heavy equipment sales, rental, repair, servicing or storage
S
S
4.2.3.F.1
Land Development Code Page 4 12 Apopka, FL
-
=
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.2 Principal Uses
4.2.2 Principal Use Table
TABLE 4.2.2.C: PRINCIPAL USE TABLE P= PERMITTED USE A= ALLOWED USE IN A PD DISTRICT IF APPROVED AS PART OF A PD PLAN S=ALLOWED WITH APPROVAL OF SPECIAL EXCEPTION BLANK CELL USE IS PROHIBITED
Principal Use Category
Principal Use Type
Agricultural & Transitional Districts
Residential Districts
Commercial Districts
IndustrialDistricts
Special PurposeDistricts
PlannedDevelopmentDistrict
Use-SpecificStandards
AG
T
RCE
RSF-1A
RSF-1B
RTF
RMF
RMU
MHP
C-N
C-C
O
C-COR
C-R
I-L
I-H
MU-D
MU-ES
INST
PR
AIR
PD
NM
GT
RTE
Machine shop
P
P
4.2.3.F.1
Metal-working, welding, plumbing, or gas, steam, or water pipe fitting
P
P
4.2.3.F.1
Repair of scientific or professional instrument
P
P
P
P
P
4.2.3.F.1
Manufacturing and Production Uses
Asphalt plant
P
4.2.3.F.1
Bakery
P
P
P
P
P
4.2.3.F.1
Brewery or distillery
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
4.2.3.F.1
Concrete batching plant
P
4.2.3.F.1
Food processing or beverage bottling
S
P
A
4.2.3.F.1
Manufacturing, assembly, or fabrication, heavy
P
P
4.2.3.F.1
Manufacturing, assembly, or fabrication, light
P
P
4.2.3.F.1 4.2.3.F.4.a
Warehouse and Freight Movement Uses
Consolidated storage (self-service storage)
S
S
P
P
4.2.3.F.1 4.2.3.F.5.b
Moving and storage facility
P
P
4.2.3.F.1
Outdoor storage (as a principal use)
S
S
P
4.2.3.F.1 4.2.3.F.5.a
Warehouse, distribution
P
P
P
4.2.3.F.1
Warehouse, storage
P
P
P
4.2.3.F.1
Waste-Related Uses
Composting facility
P
P
A
4.2.3.F.1
Incinerator
P
4.2.3.F.1
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 4 13
-
=
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.2 Principal Uses
4.2.2 Principal Use Table
TABLE 4.2.2.C: PRINCIPAL USE TABLE P= PERMITTED USE A= ALLOWED USE IN A PD DISTRICT IF APPROVED AS PART OF A PD PLAN S=ALLOWED WITH APPROVAL OF SPECIAL EXCEPTION BLANK CELL USE IS PROHIBITED
Principal Use Category
Principal Use Type
Agricultural & Transitional Districts
Residential Districts
Commercial Districts
IndustrialDistricts
Special PurposeDistricts
PlannedDevelopmentDistrict
Use-SpecificStandards
AG
T
RCE
RSF-1A
RSF-1B
RTF
RMF
RMU
MHP
C-N
C-C
O
C-COR
C-R
I-L
I-H
MU-D
MU-ES
INST
PR
AIR
PD
NM
GT
RTE
Land clearing debris disposal facility
P
4.2.3.F.1
Recovered materials processing facility
P
4.2.3.F.1 4.2.3.F.6.b
Recycling drop-off center
S
P
P
A
4.2.3.F.1 4.2.3.F.6.a
Salvage/recycling facility
P
4.2.3.F.1
Solid waste transfer station
P
P
P
4.2.3.F.1 4.2.3.F.6.c
Wholesale Uses
Showroom, wholesale
P
P
P
P
4.2.3.F.1
Other wholesale use
P
P
4.2.3.F.1
Land Development Code Page 4 14 Apopka, FL
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.2 Principal Uses
4.2.3 Standards Specific to Principal Uses
4.2.3. STANDARDS SPECIFIC TO PRINCIPAL USES
A. General
B. Agricultural Uses
1. Agricultural/Forestry Uses
a. Apiaries
An apiary shall be located a minimum of 200 feet from any property line.
b.
Community Garden
1.
Accessory buildings shall be limited to sheds for the storage of tools, greenhouses, and seasonal farm stands. The combined area of all buildings and other structures shall not exceed 15 percent of the parcel area.
2.
Areas used for communal composting shall be limited to ten percent of the parcel area.
3.
Perimeter fences, including trellises, are allowed in community gardens, subject to the standards in Sec. 5.6, Fences and Walls.
4.
Before a community garden is issued a permit, the community garden shall have an established set of operating rules addressing the governance structure of the garden, hours of operation, assignment of garden plots, and maintenance and security requirements and responsibilities.
c.
Keeping horses or ponies
A structure for the keeping of horses or ponies including but not limited to a livestock barn stable, shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from any property line.
d. Equestrian center
An equestrian center shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from any property line.
e. Riding stable
A riding stable shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from any property line.
2. Open Space Uses
a. Cemetery
1.
A cemetery shall comply with all applicable state and federal regulations regarding the licensing and operation of cemeteries.
2.
A cemetery shall be located on a site with an area of at least one acre.
3.
A cemetery shall have direct vehicular access to and from an arterial or collector street. Any vehicular access to or from any local street, shall be located and designed to inhibit its regular use.
4.
A cemetery shall include adequate space for the parking and maneuvering of funeral processions.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 4 15
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.2 Principal Uses
4.2.3 Standards Specific to Principal Uses
5.
Buildings shall be set back at least 25 feet from property lines.
6.
If a cemetery is combined with a funeral home or mortuary, the combined uses shall comply with the standards (including districts where permitted) applicable to each component use.
C. Residential Uses
1. Household Living Uses
a. All household living uses
All residential developments shall include an entrance feature complementary to and in keeping with the character and scale of the proposed development. Entrance features shall be provided at both primary and secondary entrances and shall contain signage that complies with the standards of this LDC. The major component of the entrance features shall be supplemental landscaping materials with appropriate irrigation systems, but other treatments may also be utilized. Entrance features shall be reviewed and approved by the DRC and the City Council during review of the final development plan.
b. Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU)
1. Zoning District
A property owner may request approval to allow one accessory dwelling unit
in the MU-D Downtown district only.
2. Existing Development on Lot
A single-family dwelling shall exist on the lot or will be constructed in conjunction with the ADU. The ADU is treated as a second principal use on the lot.
3. Location
The ADU may be attached to or detached from the principal dwelling.
4. Size
The ADU shall have a maximum gross floor area of 500 square feet.
5. Owner Occupancy Required; Declaration of Restrictions
The property owner shall occupy either the principal structure or the ADU. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for construction of an ADU, an applicant shall record in the public records of Orange County a declaration of restrictions containing a reference to the legal description of the property and the deed under which the property was conveyed to the present owner stating that:
(a)
The ADU shall not be sold or conveyed separate from the principal residence;
(b)
The ADU is restricted to the approved size;
Land Development Code Page 4 16 Apopka, FL
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.2 Principal Uses
4.2.3 Standards Specific to Principal Uses
(c)
The use permit for the ADU shall be in effect only so long as either the principal residence or the ADU is occupied by the owner of record as their principal residence;
(d)
The declarations shall run with the land, shall be binding upon any successor in ownership of the property and that noncompliance shall be cause for code enforcement and/or revocation of the conditional use permit;
(e)
The deed restrictions shall only be removed with the express, written approval of the City, but shall lapse upon removal of the accessory unit; and
(f)
The ADU shall not be used for commercial purposes other than being leased for residential purposes.
6. Number per Lot or Parcel
Only one ADU shall be allowed for each lot or parcel.
7. Setbacks
The ADU shall meet the front, side and rear yard regulations for the zoning district in which it is located.
c.
Dwelling, live-work
1.
The residential portion of the building shall not occupy over 60 percent of the gross floor area.
2.
The nonresidential portion of the building shall comply with all applicable nonresidential building code requirements.
3.
Employees shall be limited to occupants of the residential portion of the building plus up to three persons not residing in the residential portion.
4.
Drive-through facilities are prohibited.
5.
Any nonresidential off-street parking shall be located as far as practicable from existing adjacent single-family detached dwellings.
d.
Dwelling, mobile home
1.
Mobile home dwellings shall be located on a permanent foundation and anchoring, consistent with the requirements of state law and the F.A.C.
2.
Mobile home dwellings must be permanently enclosed underfloor.
3.
All equipment related to the transportation of the mobile home dwelling shall be removed.
4.
Mobile home dwellings shall be at least 20 feet wide.
e.
Dwelling, single-family detached
1. Subdivisions with more than 20 single-family detached dwelling units shall include a neighborhood "pocket park" within the development. Pocket parks shall be provided at the rate of one park for every 100 units or less, and shall be sized as follows:
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 4 17
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.2 Principal Uses
4.2.3 Standards Specific to Principal Uses
2.
3.
4.
5.
(a)
20—25 units: the equivalent of one lot
(b)
26—50 units: the equivalent of 1.5 lots
(c)
51—75 units: the equivalent of two lots
(d)
76—100 units: the equivalent of 2.5 lots
(e)
Developments with more than 100 units shall provide the required number of parks, sized based on the increments listed above.
Each park shall provide both passive and active recreational opportunities. If a development is proposed to be phased, the required park shall be constructed in the phase in which the need is originally generated. Parks are to be constructed prior to 25 percent "build-out" of any subdivision or phase. If more than one park is required, the developer may request that the City Council consider the aggregation of all or a portion of the required parks into one or more larger parks.
Subdivisions with 75 or more single-family detached dwelling units shall provide a community outdoor swimming pool. Land for the pool and surrounding area may be counted toward compliance with the requirement of subsection d.1, above.
Subdivisions with 100 or more or more single-family detached dwelling units shall provide one of the following recreation amenities for every 25 dwelling units above 75:
(a)
Tennis court;
(b)
Other outdoor sports facility (racquetball, pickleball, basketball, shuffleboard, bocce, or similar facility), in multiples or combination at least equal to the size of a tennis court’
(c)
Playground or tot lot;
(d)
Outdoor fitness stations; or
(e)
Picnic or rest area with shaded shelter;
Subdivisions required to provide more than one facility shall provide a variety of the options above. Subdivisions with 150 or more single-family detached dwelling units may substitute a second pool for three required recreation amenities. Land used for this subsection may be counted toward compliance with the requirement of subsection d.1, above.
No more than 75 percent of the lots in a residential subdivision shall be 50 feet or less in width. The remaining lots shall be a minimum of 65 feet in width. Any increase or decrease in lot width or percentage may be accepted, denied or accepted with conditions of the plan by the City Council. Justifications by the applicant may depend on surrounding land use, existing development patterns or other land use factors including (but not limited to) utilities, roads, development intensity or environmental factors.
Single-family detached dwellings where 80 percent of the land is considered “golf course frontage” may propose to convert screen rooms that existed on
Land Development Code Page 4 18 Apopka, FL
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.2 Principal Uses
4.2.3 Standards Specific to Principal Uses
March 6, 2019 to glass “sun rooms” or “Florida Rooms” by requesting and receiving approval as a special exception permit in accordance with Sec. 2.5.1.G, Special Exception Permit and the following conditions. (For the purposes of this section “golf course frontage” shall mean that portion of the rear of the lot that abuts a golf course. "Golf course" shall include the tee-box, fairway, rough area, out of bounds area and putting green.)
(a)
Proposals for construction of other types of home additions into the established setbacks are considered inconsistent with the implied and explicit intent of this subsection.
(b)
In addition to public notification required by Sec. 2.5.1.G, Special Exception Permit, written notification shall be provided a minimum of 14 calendar days before the public hearing to surrounding property owners who may be impacted by a reduction in the rear yard requirement, including all properties which have visual access to the subject property's rear lot line (i.e., homes located on the opposite side of a golf course.)
(c)
The applicant shall notify and receive approval of the proposed changes from the entity managing the golf course and any homeowners association of which the home is a member.
(d)
The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of ten feet from the rear lot line or the internal boundary of any easement on the lot (whichever is greater).
(e)
The type of exterior material and architectural style (siding, colors, roofing material) of any addition shall be the same as that of the principal building.
(f)
The construction of any portion of any structure that extends into the reduced setback shall be undertaken in a manner which results in an exterior facade comprised of a minimum of 60 percent of transparent glass, exclusive of the roof.
(g)
The maximum height shall not exceed that of the principal building.
(h)
The proposed addition shall comply with all applicable building code requirements.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 4 19
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.2 Principal Uses
4.2.3 Standards Specific to Principal Uses
f. Dwelling, two-family (duplex)
1. Subdivisions with 20 two-family (duplex) dwelling units or more shall include a neighborhood "pocket park" within the development. Pocket parks shall be provided at the rate of one park for every 100 units or less and shall be sized as follows:
(a)
20—25 units: the equivalent of 0.5 lot
(b)
26—50 units: the equivalent of 0.75 lot
(c)
51—75 units: the equivalent of one lot
(d)
76—100 units: the equivalent of 1.25 lots
(e)
Developments with more than 100 units shall provide the required number of parks, sized based on the increments listed above.
2.
Each park shall provide both passive and active recreational opportunities. If a development is proposed to be phased, the required parks shall be constructed in the phases in which the need is originally generated. Parks are to be constructed prior to 25 percent "build-out" of any subdivision or phase. If more than one park is required, the developer may request that City Council consider the aggregation of all or a portion of the required parks into one or more larger parks.
3.
Subdivisions with 75 two-family (duplex) dwelling units shall provide a community outdoor swimming pool. Land for the pool and surrounding area may be counted toward the requirement of subsection e.(a) , above.
4.
Subdivisions with 100 or more two-family (duplex) dwelling units shall provide one of the following recreation amenities for every 25 dwelling units above 75:
(a)
Tennis court;
(b)
Other outdoor sports facility (racquetball, pickleball, basketball, shuffleboard, bocce, or similar), in multiples or combination at least equal to the size of a tennis court’
(c)
Playground or tot lot;
(d)
Outdoor fitness stations; or
(e)
Picnic or rest area with shaded shelter;
Subdivisions required to provide more than one facility shall provide a variety of the options above. Subdivisions with150 or more two-family (duplex) dwelling units may substitute a second pool for three required recreation amenities. Land used for this subsection may be counted toward compliance with the requirement of subsection e.(a) , above.
2. Group Living Uses
a. All Group Living Uses
Any group living use subject to approval of a special exception permit in accordance with Sec. 2.5.1.G, Special Exception Permit, shall comply with the
Land Development Code Page 4 20 Apopka, FL
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.2 Principal Uses
4.2.3 Standards Specific to Principal Uses
following standards, in addition to those required for approval of a special exception permit.
1. In general:
(a)
The facility shall conform to all applicable building and fire codes and ordinances whether federal, state, county or City.
(b)
The facility shall comply with all applicable laws of the Florida Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services.
(c)
The facility shall comply with to all applicable requirements of this LDC, the City Code of Ordinances, and all applicable City licensing requirements.
(d)
The facility shall comply with Ch.419, Fla. Stat., including notice requirements.
2.
The external appearance of all structures and the building site on which the facility is located shall be consistent with the general character of the district in which it is located. Exterior building materials, building bulk, landscaping, fences and walls, parking areas, and general design of the facility shall all be visually and functionally compatible with the surrounding uses.
3.
The facility shall not be occupied by any person who has been convicted of, entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to, or has been found guilty by reason of insanity of a forcible felony under Ch. 776, Fla. Stat., a felony of the second degree under Ch. 800, Fla. Stat., or any of the sex offenses set forth under Ch. 794, Fla. Stat.., regardless of whether an adjudication of guilt on imposition of sentence was suspended, deferred, or withheld.
4.
Signage shall comply with Sec. 5.11, Signs.
5.
Dining, living, and sleeping room areas shall conform to all applicable requirements established and determined by the Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services.
6.
Distance between locations shall conform with the following standards:
(a)
A facility in a Residential district shall be a minimum of 1,500 feet from any other such facility.
(b)
A facility in a Nonresidential district shall be a minimum of 1,500 feet from any other such facility adjacent to or located within a Residential district, and a minimum of 300 feet from a facility located in a Nonresidential district.
(c)
For the purposes of this requirement, distance measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest property line of the subject facility to the nearest property line of the other facility.
7.
Homes of six or fewer residents which otherwise meet the definition of a community residential home shall be allowed in a single-family or multifamily zone district and treated for development review purposes like a single family
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 4 21
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.2 Principal Uses
4.2.3 Standards Specific to Principal Uses
home, provided the home is not located within a radius of 1,000 feet of another existing community residential home with six or fewer residents, or is not located within a radius of 1,200 feet of another existing community residential home. Such homes with six or fewer residents are not required to comply with the notification provisions of Ch. 419, Fla. Stat. if, before licensure, the sponsoring agency provides the City with the most recently published data compiled from the licensing entities as defined in Ch. 419, Fla. Stat, that identifies all community residential homes within the City in order to show the proposed use complies with the distance requirements of this subsection and state law.
b. Adult foster home
Operation of an adult foster home shall comply with all relevant State and federal laws.
c. Continuing care retirement community
1.
Age restrictions on community residents shall comply with the federal Fair Housing Act.
2.
The number of nursing care beds shall not be more than 20 percent of the total number of permitted dwelling units.
3.
The community may include retail commercial uses as ancillary to the principal residential and healthcare uses.
4.
A minimum of 20 percent of the community’s land area shall be devoted to outdoor open space, indoor or outdoor recreation facilities, and indoor or outdoor social-oriented amenities, including community centers. Such areas shall be located so as to be safely and conveniently accessible to community residents.
5.
Each outdoor area intended for active recreation shall have a minimum area of 5,000 square feet and minimum dimension of 50 feet.
D. Public, Civic, and Institutional Uses
1. Communication Uses
a. Wireless telecommunications tower
Wireless telecommunications towers shall comply with Chapter 75, Article II, Telecommunications Towers, Communications Antennas and Associated Equipment, of the Code of Ordinances.
2. Community Service Uses
a. Adult day care
Operation of an adult day care shall comply with all relevant State and federal laws.
b. Child care facility
1. A child care facility shall have an outdoor play area that complies with the following standards:
Land Development Code Page 4 22 Apopka, FL
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.2 Principal Uses
4.2.3 Standards Specific to Principal Uses
(a)
The area shall include a minimum of 75 square feet per child.
(b)
The area shall include a fence that is at least three and one half feet in height that completely encloses the play area, that is designed so all persons entering the play area are within direct line of sight from the child care facility classroom areas
(c)
The area shall not locate play equipment within the required yard setback.
2. Parking areas and vehicular circulation patterns shall comply with the following standards:
(a)
Design shall enhance the safety of children as they arrive at and leave the facility.
(b)
A designated pickup and delivery area, providing at least one parking space for every 20 children shall be located adjacent to the childcare facility in such a way that children do not have to cross vehicular traffic to enter or exit the facility.
3.
No outdoor play activities shall be conducted after 8:00 p.m.
4.
If located on the site of a place of worship, the facility is allowed as an accessory use only if the use is compatible with adjacent land uses in terms of hours of operation, noise, lighting, parking, traffic impacts, and similar considerations.
5.
If located on the site of a Public, Civic, and Institutional or Commercial use, as an accessory use, it shall not exceed 20 percent of the floor area of the principal use.
6.
It shall comply with all applicable State and federal laws.
7.
If the child care facility is required to receive approval of a special exception permit in accordance with Sec. 2.5.1.G, Special Exception Permit, it shall comply with the following standards in addition to the requirements for approval of a special exception permit:
(a)
The facility shall comply with all applicable State and federal laws.
(b)
The facility shall be compatible with and similar in character and scale to surrounding land uses.
(c)
The maximum number of children to attend the facility shall be limited by applicable Florida Statutes and in Residential districts by the number of persons per household, as projected in the Apopka Comprehensive Plan and the maximum number of dwellings per acre permitted in the Future Land Use District in which the proposed site is located, whichever is lower
c. Place of Worship
1.
A place of worship shall have access onto an arterial or collector street.
2.
An accessory child care facility shall comply with the standards for a child care facility. (See Sec. 4.2.3.D.2.b, Child care facility).
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 4 23
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.2 Principal Uses
4.2.3 Standards Specific to Principal Uses
3.
A place of worship located in the Mixed Use-Downtown (MU-D) district shall have a building area of at least 5,000 sf.
4.
The City Council shall have the authority to grant modifications to any of the standards listed in this section in order to eliminate a substantial burden on religious exercise as guaranteed by the federal Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act of 2000 (RLUIPA), 42 U.S.C. Sec. 2000, as amended. In granting such a modification, the City Council may require conditions consistent with the federal act that will secure substantially the objectives of the modified standard and that will substantially mitigate any potential adverse impact on the environment or on adjacent properties.
3. Health Care Uses
a. Hospital
A hospital shall comply with the following standards:
1.
Be located on at least three acres of land.
2.
Have direct vehicular access onto an arterial street, or provide adequate ingress and egress to the site as determined by the DRC.
3.
Have a minimum street frontage of 200 feet.
4.
Design vehicular access, circulation systems, and exterior signage to provide safe and separate emergency vehicle access to the hospital, with minimal conflicts with other vehicular or pedestrian traffic in the area.
5.
Locate principal structures at least 100 feet from any property line.
b. Nursing home facility
A nursing home facility shall comply with the following standards:
1.
Have direct vehicular access to and from an arterial or collector street. Any vehicular access to or from any local street, shall be located and designed to inhibit its regular use.
2.
Include security provisions (e.g., fencing) that restricts patients from leaving the property without authorization.
3.
Comply with all applicable State laws regarding licensing and operation.
4. Transportation Uses
a. Airport
1.
The land area proposed for the airport shall be sufficient to meet Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) requirements for the class of facility proposed.
2.
There shall be no existing or proposed flight obstructions located outside the site that falls within the approach zone to any runway or landing area.
3.
Airport runways shall be located at least 200 feet from any property line of the site.
Land Development Code Page 4 24 Apopka, FL
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.2 Principal Uses
4.2.3 Standards Specific to Principal Uses
4. Where located within 500 feet of any existing residential development or Residential district, an adequate buffer is provided along any property line to ensure the airport does not adversely impact the residential uses.
b. Heliport
A heliport shall comply with the following standards:
1.
Provide adequate land area for take-off and landing to ensure public safety in accordance with FAA standards.
2.
Where located within 500 feet of an existing residential development or Residential district, provide an adequate buffer along the property line to ensure the heliport does not create adverse noise, site, and aesthetic impacts to the residential uses.
c. Parking facility (as a principle use)
1.
Parking of motor vehicles shall be the primary use of the facility. Except as otherwise expressly provided in this LDC, no other business shall be conducted in the parking facility—including, but not limited to, repair, servicing, washing, or display of vehicles, or storage of goods.
2.
A parking facility shall not be located contiguous to a single-family residential development or zoning district.
5. Utility Uses
a. Utility facility, major
A major utility facility shall be set back 100 feet from all property lines.
E. Commercial Uses
1. Adult Uses
Adult uses shall comply with Chapter 10, Article III, Adult Entertainment Code, of the Code of Ordinances.
2. Animal Care Uses
a.
Kennel
1.
Those parts of structures in which animals are boarded shall be fully enclosed and sufficiently insulated so no unreasonable noise or odor can be detected off the premises.
2.
All boarded animals shall be kept within a totally enclosed part of the structure between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
3.
Any open exercise runs or pens shall be at least 50 feet from any lot line, with a Type D perimeter buffer provided between the run or pen and the property line.
b.
Veterinary hospital or clinic
1. Veterinary hospitals or clinics shall maintain no kennels outside the principle building.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 4 25
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.2 Principal Uses
4.2.3 Standards Specific to Principal Uses
2.
The structure shall be insulated and soundproofed in order to minimize all loud noises that might disturb persons on adjacent development.
3.
Any open exercise runs or pens shall be at least 50 feet from any property line, with a Type D perimeter buffer provided between the run or pen and the property line.
3.
Business Support Service Uses
a. Conference or training center
1.
Dining and banquet facilities may be provided for employees, trainees, and conferees, provided the gross floor area devoted to such facilities does not exceed 30 percent of the total floor area of the principal building.
2.
On-site recreational facilities may be provided for use by employees, trainees, or conferees.
3.
No products shall be sold on-site except those that are clearly incidental and integral to training programs and seminars conducted in the center (e.g., food items, shirts, glasses and mugs, pens and pencils, and similar items bearing the logo of conference or seminar sponsors or participants).
4.
Eating or Drinking Establishment Uses
a. All eating or drinking establishments
1. An eating or drinking establishment having outdoor seating (including, but not limited to, seating for dining or listening to live or recorded acoustic or amplified entertainment outside of the building) shall comply with the following standards:
(a)
The outdoor seating area shall be located no closer than 100 feet from any single-family detached district or single-family detached development.
(b)
The outdoor seating area shall not obstruct the movement of pedestrians along sidewalks or through areas intended for public use.
(c)
The outdoor seating area shall be located in such a manner that a minimum width of four feet is maintained at all times as an unobstructed pedestrian path.
(d)
The outdoor seating area shall be restricted to the usable sidewalk area and adjacent outdoor seating area of the licensed establishment or within the usable sidewalk area of the building where the validly licensed restaurant is located.
(e)
All tables, chairs, umbrellas, heaters, signs or other personal or business property is not located within four feet of a pedestrian crosswalk or handicap corner curb cut.
(f)
The outdoor seating area does not obstruct vehicle passengers from exiting their cars with the placement of curbside tables.
Land Development Code Page 4 26 Apopka, FL
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.2 Principal Uses
4.2.3 Standards Specific to Principal Uses
(g)
All furniture is stored inside the establishment whenever the business is closed.
(h)
In addition:
i. The outdoor seating area shall keep the sidewalk and close proximity free of trash and debris.
ii. For the purpose of public safety, at any time after obtaining approval for an outdoor seating area, the permittee may be limited to use of non-breakable beverage containers if the Police Department receives complaints or there are observations that the City needs to needs to amend the approval to impose the non-breakable beverage provision.
iii. Operators of outdoor seating areas may be required to cease immediately at the sole discretion of the City.
iv.
A permit to operate an outdoor seating area is a license to temporarily use the City's sidewalks within the City's rights-of-way. It is not intended and shall not be constructed as an interest in the real property.
v.
Approval of an outdoor seating area shall be conditioned upon obtaining the necessary State alcoholic beverage license and meeting all State alcoholic beverage requirements. The approved plan by the State for the state alcoholic beverage license to allow service outside of the establishment must conform to the proposed development plan for the outdoor seating area and must be submitted with the application for a development plan for an outdoor seating area. All tables and chairs must not exceed the boundaries of the State alcoholic beverage plan and the outdoor seating area plan.
(i)
Outdoor seating areas shall comply with the following standards related to liability and indemnification:
i. Prior to the approval, the applicant shall furnish a signed statement indemnifying the City, its officers and employees for any damages to property or injury to persons which may be occasioned by any activity carried under the terms of the approval.
ii. A permittee shall pay, and by its acceptance of an approval specifically agrees to pay, any and all damages or penalties which the City may be legally required to pay as a result of the permittee's operation or maintenance of an outdoor seating area under this part, whether or not the acts or omissions complained of are authorized, allowed or prohibited by the City.
iii. A permittee shall also pay all expenses incurred by the City in defending itself with regard to any and all damages and penalties mentioned in subsection (i) above. These expenses shall include all
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 4 27
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.2 Principal Uses
4.2.3 Standards Specific to Principal Uses
out-of-pocket expenses, including a reasonable attorney's fee and the reasonable value of services rendered by any employee of the City.
iv.
The permittee shall maintain, throughout the term of the approval, liability insurance insuring the City and the permittee with regard to all damages mentioned in subsection (i) above caused by the permittee or its agents, in the minimum amounts of:
(1)
Workers' and unemployment compensation insurance as provided by the laws of Florida.
(2)
Two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000) for property damage, bodily injury, or death payable to any one person and $1,000,000.00 for property damage, bodily injury or death when totaled with all other claims or judgments arising out of the same incident or occurrence.
(3)
The insurance policies obtained by a permittee in compliance with this subsection shall be issued by a company or companies acceptable to the City and a current Certificate or Certificates of Insurance, along with written evidence of payment of all required premiums, shall be filed and maintained with the City during the term of the approval. The policies shall name the City as an additional insured and shall contain a provision that written notice of cancellation or reduction in coverage of the policy shall be delivered by registered mail to the City at least 30 days in advance of the effective date thereof.
(4)
An applicant for approval shall be required to submit evidence of liability insurance.
v.
Approval of an outdoor seating area is conditional at all times. Approval for an outdoor seating area may be revoked or suspended in accordance with Article 9: Enforcement.
b. Alcoholic beverage establishment
Alcoholic beverage establishments shall comply with Chapter 6, Alcoholic Beverages, of the Code of Ordinances.
c. Brewpub or microbrewery
1.
The minimum area of the eating, drinking, and entertainment area of the brewpub or microbrewery shall be no more than 50 percent of the total square footage for the establishment, or a minimum of 1,500 square feet, whichever is greater.
2.
The establishment shall have fenestration through vision glass, doors or active outdoor spaces along a minimum of 50 percent of the length of the building side that fronts the street, unless the building in which it is located is an adaptive re-use and the building makes compliance impracticable.
3.
Facilities for off-site distribution of manufactured beer are allowed only if conducted from the rear of the building, with adequate loading and access for the activity.
Land Development Code Page 4 28 Apopka, FL
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.2 Principal Uses
4.2.3 Standards Specific to Principal Uses
4.
Crushing and fermentation operations are managed such that by-products are contained and disposed of in a way that does not result in spill-over impacts on adjacent property, public spaces, or public rights-of-way.
5.
Outdoor storage is prohibited.
d. Restaurant, drive-in
To accommodate the drive-up or drive-through service the development shall comply with Sec, 4.3.4.B.6, Drive-through Facility.
5. Recreation / Entertainment Uses
a.
Arena, stadium, or amphitheater
1.
An arena, stadium, or amphitheater shall be located at least 500 feet from any Residential district or residential development, as measured from all property lines.
2.
An arena, stadium, or amphitheater shall have a minimum lot size of five acres.
3.
An arena, stadium, or amphitheater shall have at least 300 feet of frontage on an arterial street at the point of access.
4.
All points of vehicular access shall be from arterial streets, and located to minimize vehicular traffic to and through local streets in residential areas.
5.
Safety fences up to a height of eight feet shall be provided in accordance with Sec. 5.6, Fence and Wall Standards to any portions of the site directly adjacent to any Residential district or residential development.
b.
Recreation facility, outdoor
1. Swimming pool (outdoor) (as a principal use)
An outdoor swimming pool shall be enclosed by a fence at least six feet high,
or in accordance with State of Florida building standards.
6. Retail Sales and Service Uses
a. Alcoholic beverage establishment
See Sec. 4.2.3.E.4.b, Alcoholic beverage establishment.
b. Bank or other financial institution
Any drive through facilities shall comply with Sec, 4.3.4.B.6, Drive-through Facility.
c. Check cashing business
1.
Hours of operation shall be limited to between 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
2.
A schedule of fees/charges shall be posted where immediately visible to persons entering the business, and a copy of the fee schedule shall be made available to all persons entering the business.
3.
No other business shall share floor space with the check cashing business.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 4 29
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.2 Principal Uses
4.2.3 Standards Specific to Principal Uses
4.
Security lighting and cameras shall be provided on all open sides of the building to provide surveillance of the area within 100 feet of the building’s exterior.
5.
At least one security employee (with no other duties) shall be on the premises when the business is open.
d.
Farmers’ market
1.
Vehicular access to the subject property shall not be by means of streets internal to a development with single-family detached dwellings.
2.
Stalls, sales tables, and any other outdoor facilities related to the market shall be located at least 25 feet from any abutting street.
3.
Items for sale shall not be displayed or stored within customer pathways.
4.
Before issuance of a permit for the farmers’ market, it shall have an established set of operating rules addressing the governance structure of the market, hours of operation, and maintenance and security requirements and responsibilities.
e.
Flea market
1.
Hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 AM to 7:00 PM.
2.
Sanitary facilities shall be provided for both men and women.
3.
Provisions shall be made for garbage or trash removal for each day the flea market is open to the public.
4.
All rental spaces and buildings shall maintain a 50-foot setback from all residential development or land in a Residential district.
7. Vehicle Sales and Service Uses
a.
Automobile service station
1.
On a corner lot, a driveway shall begin at a point not less than 100 feet from the point of curvature (PC) of the curb return.
2.
Driveways shall be defined by curbing.
3.
Gasoline pumps and other service appliances shall be set back at least 25 feet from the street right-of-way.
4.
The storage or junking of wrecked motor vehicles (whether capable of movement or not) is prohibited.
5.
No storage or parking space shall be offered for rent.
6.
Canopies over gas pumps shall have a maximum clearance height of 15 feet above grade unless State or federal law requires higher clearance.
b.
Commercial fuel depot
1.
On a corner lot, a driveway shall begin at a point not less than 100 feet from the point of curvature (PC) of the curb return.
2.
Driveways shall be defined by curbing.
Land Development Code Page 4 30 Apopka, FL
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.2 Principal Uses
4.2.3 Standards Specific to Principal Uses
3.
Gasoline pumps and other service appliances shall be set back at least 25 feet from the street right-of-way.
4.
The storage or junking of wrecked motor vehicles (whether capable of movement or not) is prohibited.
5.
No storage or parking space shall be offered for rent.
6.
Canopies over gas pumps shall have a maximum clearance height of 15 feet above grade unless State or federal law requires higher clearance.
c.
Commercial vehicle repair and maintenance
1.
A commercial vehicle repair and maintenance establishment shall be located at least 200 feet from any residential development, Residential district, school, or child day care center.
2.
All sales and installation operations are encouraged to be conducted in a wholly enclosed building with no outdoor storage.
3.
Service activity on any commercial vehicle shall be completed within one month, and no vehicle may be stored on the property for longer than this period.
4.
The demolition or junking of commercial vehicles is prohibited. Commercial vehicles shall not be parked or stored as a source of parts or for the purpose of sale or lease/rent.
d.
Personal vehicle repair and maintenance
1.
A personal vehicle repair and maintenance establishment shall be located at least 150 feet from any residential development, Residential district, school, or child day care center.
2.
All sales and installation operations shall be conducted in a wholly enclosed building with no outdoor storage.
3.
Service activity on any motor vehicle shall be completed within a seven day period, and no vehicle may be stored on the property for longer than this period.
4.
The storage, demolition or junking of motor vehicles (whether capable of movement or not) is prohibited. Vehicles shall not be parked or stored as a source of parts or for the purpose of sale or lease/rent.
5.
Car wash and auto detailing uses shall be designed to ensure proper functioning of the site as related to vehicle stacking, circulation, and turning movements. If an automatic car wash is an accessory use to a gasoline sales use, it shall be governed by the use and dimensional standards applicable to the gasoline sales use.
e.
Personal vehicle sales and rental
1. The personal vehicle sales and rental establishment shall have no more than one vehicle display pad for every 100 feet of street frontage. A vehicle display
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 4 31
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.2 Principal Uses
4.2.3 Standards Specific to Principal Uses
pad shall not exceed 5000 square feet in area and may be elevated up to two feet above adjacent displays or ground level.
2.
No vehicles or other similar items shall be displayed on the top of a building.
3.
No materials for sale or rent other than vehicles shall be displayed between the principal structure and the adjoining street.
4.
The storage or junking of wrecked motor vehicles (whether capable of movement or not) is prohibited.
8. Water-Related Uses
a. Boat sales, service, rental, or repair
1.
Boats shall be not stored as a source of parts.
2.
Discarded parts resulting from any repair work shall be removed promptly from the premises.
3.
The use shall be designed so that service bays are not visible from an adjoining street.
4.
Repair of all boats and equipment shall occur within an enclosed building.
5.
Outdoor boat and equipment storage is allowed in an outdoor storage area.
6.
Boats that are repaired and awaiting removal shall be stored for no more than 30 consecutive days. A boat abandoned by its lawful owner before or during the repair process may remain on site after the 30 day period, provided the owner or operator of the establishment demonstrates steps have been taken to remove the boat from the premises using the appropriate legal means.
7.
If the boat repair and servicing use is combined with a boat or marine sales or rental use, docking facility, or marina, the combined use shall comply with the standards (including districts where permitted) applicable to each component.
F. Industrial Uses
1. All Industrial Uses
All industrial uses in the I-L: Light Industrial district shall be contained within an enclosed building, unless a special exception is approved for the use in accordance with Sec. 2.5.1.G, Special Exception Permit.
2. Extraction Uses
a. Surface mining
1.
The mining activity shall comply with and receive all applicable permits under State law, and comply with Chapter 16-39.008, FAC.
2.
Activities shall be confined to vacant properties of 100 acres or more, or total surrounding residential units equal 20 units or less when measured a quarter of a mile from the area to be mined.
Land Development Code Page 4 32 Apopka, FL
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.2 Principal Uses
4.2.3 Standards Specific to Principal Uses
3. Industrial Service Uses
a. Dry-cleaning, laundry, or carpet-cleaning plant
1.
The establishment shall be within an enclosed building
2.
The establishment shall use nonflammable liquids in the cleaning processes that emit no odor, fumes, or steam detectable to normal senses from off the premises.
4. Manufacturing and Production Uses
a. Manufacturing, assembly, or fabrication, light
Manufactured home and prefabricated building sales establishments shall comply with the following standards:
1.
Any lot engaged in the sale of manufactured homes or prefabricated buildings shall be at least one acre in area and maintain a minimum lot width of at least 125 feet.
2.
Model manufactured homes and prefabricated buildings shall be positioned in a uniform, organized fashion. Haphazard placement of buildings at varying angles shall be prohibited.
3.
No display areas shall be located within required setbacks or required landscaping buffers.
4.
Storage of materials related to the construction, transport, or installation of homes or prefabricated buildings shall only take place within areas enclosed by an opaque fence or wall with a minimum height of six feet.
5.
No signage, flags, or other attention-getting devices shall be mounted on a manufactured home or prefabricated building.
5. Warehouse and Freight Movement Uses
a.
Outdoor storage (as a principal use)
1.
Outdoor storage shall be screened from all public streets, residential development, and Residential districts by an opaque fence or wall with a minimum height of six feet, and a maximum height of ten feet.
2.
Stacked or stockpiled material located within 50 feet of a screening fence or wall shall not exceed the height of the screening fence or wall.
3.
Adjacent lots located within the I-H: Heavy Industrial district do not have to be screened.
4.
Outdoor storage areas shall be configured to allow vehicular circulation through and around the storage area.
5.
Any repair of equipment shall be conducted within an enclosed building.
6.
Customers and vehicles shall be allowed to circulate through the area(s) used for outdoor storage.
b.
Consolidated storage (self-service storage)
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 4 33
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.2 Principal Uses
4.2.3 Standards Specific to Principal Uses
Self-service storage facilities shall comply with the following standards:
1.
If separate buildings are constructed, there shall be a minimum separation of ten feet between buildings.
2.
The only commercial uses permitted on-site shall be the rental of storage bays and the pickup and deposit of goods or property in dead storage. Storage bays shall not be used to manufacture, fabricate, or process goods, to service or repair vehicles, small engines or electrical equipment, or conduct similar repair activities, to conduct garage sales or retail sales of any kind, or to conduct any other commercial or industrial activity on the site.
3.
Individual storage bays or private postal boxes within a self-service storage facility shall not be considered premises for the purpose of assigning a legal address.
4.
No more than one security or caretaker quarters may be developed on the site, and shall be integrated into the building’s design.
5.
Except as otherwise authorized in this subsection, all property stored on the site shall be enclosed entirely within enclosed buildings.
6.
Hours of public access to a self-storage establishment abutting a Residential district or existing residential development shall be restricted to the hours between 6:00 A.M. and 10:00 P.M.
7.
Where the establishment provides drive-up access to storage, the following standards shall be met:
(a)
Interior parking shall be provided in the form of aisleways adjacent to the storage bays. Aisleways shall be used both for circulation and temporary customer parking while using storage bays. The minimum width of aisleways shall be 21 feet if only one-way traffic is permitted, and 30 feet if two-way traffic is permitted.
(b)
The one-or two-way traffic flow patterns in aisleways shall be clearly marked. Marking shall consist, at a minimum, of standard directional signage and painted lane markings with arrows.
(c)
Appropriate access and circulation by vehicles and emergency equipment shall be ensured through the design of internal turning radii of aisleways.
(d)
All access ways shall be paved with asphalt, concrete, or comparable paving materials.
8.
Garage doors serving individual storage units shall be perpendicular to a public or private street so as to not be visible from adjacent streets.
9.
Windows may not exceed 20 percent of any street-facing façade and shall not be reflective.
10.
A maximum of two colors (excluding roof colors) shall be used on wall facades visible from off-site areas. Colors shall be neutral and shall not be used to call attention to the establishment.
Land Development Code Page 4 34 Apopka, FL
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.2 Principal Uses
4.2.3 Standards Specific to Principal Uses
11.
Perimeter or exterior walls visible from an arterial street or residential development shall not include metal as a primary material.
12.
Open storage of recreational vehicles, travel trailers, and dry storage of pleasure boats of the type customarily maintained by persons for their personal use shall be permitted within a self-service storage facility use, provided that the following standards are met:
(a)
Open storage shall occur only within a designated area, which shall be clearly delineated.
(b)
The size of the open storage area shall not exceed 25 percent of the buildable area of the site.
(c)
Outdoor storage areas shall be located to the rear of the principal structure.
(d)
Storage shall not occur within the areas set aside for minimum building setbacks.
(e)
No dry stacking of boats shall be permitted on-site.
6. Waste-Related Uses
a.
Recycling drop-off center
1.
The subject property shall front on and have direct vehicular access to an existing street with sufficient capacity to accommodate the type and amount of traffic expected to be generated by the recycling drop-off center.
2.
All operations shall be confined to the interior of a wholly enclosed building. There shall be no outdoor storage.
3.
The property shall be kept clean and free from debris.
b.
Materials recovery facility
1.
All separation and processing operations, including storage of solid waste, shall be confined to the interior of a wholly enclosed building.
2.
All necessary State permits shall be issued for the facility.
3.
Processing of solid waste must begin within 24 hours of it reaching the site.
4.
The Enforcement Officer shall be provided the right to inspect the facility at any time for compliance with the applicable regulations.
c.
Solid waste transfer station
1.
Hours of operation shall occur only between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
2.
Buildings associated with the solid waste transfer station shall be set back at least 500 feet from all property lines.
3.
Measures shall be taken to control any noxious and offensive odors.
4.
All activities pertinent to the transferring of solid waste shall be conducted in a wholly enclosed building that has an impervious surface for loading and
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 4 35
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.3 Accessory Uses and Structures
4.3.1 General
unloading solid waste and is capable of accommodating all types of solid waste hauling vehicles.
5. The solid waste transfer station shall not commence until the State has issued all applicable permits.
Section 4.3. ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
4.3.1. GENERAL
The purpose of this section is to authorize the establishment and continuation of land uses and structures that are incidental and customarily subordinate to principal uses— accessory uses and structures. This section also identifies the zoning districts in which such accessory uses and structures are allowed (Sec. 4.3.2, Accessory Uses and Structure Table), sets out general standards applicable to all accessory uses and structures (Sec. 4.3.3, General Standards for all Accessory Uses and Structures), and sets out any special standards applicable to particular accessory uses and structures (Sec. 4.3.4, Standards Specific to Accessory Uses and Structures). This section is intended to allow a broad range of accessory uses and structures, so long as they are located on the same lot as the principal use and comply with the standards set forth in this section to reduce potentially adverse impacts on surrounding lands.
4.3.2. ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURE TABLE
A. Structure of Accessory Use/Structure Table
1. Organization of Accessory Uses and Structures
Table 1.1.1.A: Accessory Use and Structures Table, in this subsection lists accessory uses and structures alphabetically.
2. Designation of Uses and Structures
The following abbreviations are used in the table to designate whether and how an accessory use or structure is allowed in a particular zoning district:
P A “P” under a base zoning district column indicates that the use or structure is allowable as an accessory use or structure in the zoning district, subject to Sec. 4.3.3, General Standards for all Accessory Uses and Structures, and any referenced use-specific standards in 4.3.4, Standards Specific to Accessory Uses and Structures, and all other applicable requirements of this LDC.
S An “A” under the planned development (PD) zoning district column indicates that the use or structure is allowable as an accessory use or structure in the zoning district, subject to Sec. 4.3.3, General Standards for all Accessory Uses and Structures, and any referenced use-specific standards in Sec. 4.3.4, Standards Specific to Accessory Uses and Structures, and all other applicable requirements of this LDC—unless the PD Plan or PD Agreement approved for the zoning district expressly identifies the accessory use or structure as prohibited.
Land Development Code Page 4 36 Apopka, FL
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.3 Accessory Uses and Structures
4.3.2 Accessory Uses and Structure Table
A blank cell under a zoning district column indicates that the use or structure is prohibited as an accessory use or structure in the zoning district.
3. Review for Compliance with this Section and Any use Specific Standards
A proposed accessory use shall be reviewed for compliance with this section when it is proposed and prior to its development, either as part of a development plan (see Sec. 2.5.2.A, Development Plan (Major and Minor), or a building permit (see Code of Ordinances Art.VI, Sec. 6.08.00).
4. Reference to Use-Specific Standards
A particular use or structure allowable as an accessory use or structure in a zoning district may be subject to additional standards that are specific to the particular accessory use or structure. The applicability of such use-specific standards is noted in the last column of Table 1.1.1.A: Accessory Use and Structures Table, through a reference to standards in Sec. 4.3.4, Standards Specific to Accessory Uses and Structures.
5. Unlisted Accessory Uses and Structures
The Director shall evaluate potential accessory uses or structures that are not identified in Table 1.1.1.A: Accessory Use and Structures Table, on a case-by-case basis, as an Interpretation (see Sec. 2.5.6, Interpretation). In making the interpretation, the Director shall consider the following:
a.
Accessory uses identified in Sec. 10.3.1, Principal Use Classification System.
b.
The definition of the accessory use (see Sec. Section 10.4, Definitions), and the general accessory use standards established in Sec. 4.3.3, General Standards for all Accessory Uses and Structures;
c.
The additional standards for specific accessory uses established in Sec. 4.3.4, Standards Specific to Accessory Uses and Structures;
d.
The purpose and intent of the zoning district in which the accessory use or structure is located (see Article 3: Zoning Districts);
e.
Any potential adverse impacts the accessory use or structure may have on other lands in the area, compared with other accessory uses permitted in the zoning district; and
f.
The compatibility of the accessory use or structure, including the structure in which it is housed, with other principal and accessory uses permitted in the zoning district.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 4 37

-
=
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.3 Accessory Uses and Structures
4.3.2 Accessory Uses and Structure Table
B. Accessory Use and Structures Table
TABLE 4.3.2.B: ACCESSORY USE AND STRUCTURES TABLE P= PERMITTED ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE A= ALLOWED ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE IN A PD DISTRICT IF APPROVED AS PART OF A PD PLAN BLANK CELL ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE IS PROHIBITED
Accessory Uses and Structures
Agricultural & Transitional Districts
Residential Districts
Commercial Districts
IndustrialDistricts
Special Purpose Districts
PlannedDevelopmentDistrict
Use-SpecificStandards
AG
T
RCE
RSF-1A
RSF-1B
RTF
RMF
RMU
MHP
C-N
C-C
O
C-COR
C-R
I-L
I-H
MU-D
MU-ES
INST
PR
AIR
PD
NM
GT
RTE
Amateur ham radio antenna
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
4.3.4.B.1
Antenna
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Automated teller machine (ATM)
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
4.3.4.B.2
Automatic car wash
P
P
P
A
Bed and breakfast (as accessory to a single-family detached dwelling)
4.3.4.B.3
Beekeeping
P
P
A
Boathouse
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Bike parking rack
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Clubhouse (as accessory to a residential development, golf, or tennis facility)
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Bike share station
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Community garden
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Community recreation facility (as accessory to a residential development)
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
4.3.4.B.4
Composting, small-scale
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Donation Bin
S
4.3.4.B.5
Drive-through facility
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
4.3.4.B.6
Electric vehicle (EV) level 1 or 2 charging station
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
4.3.4.B.7
Electric vehicle (EV) level 3 charging station
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
4.3.4.B.7
Farmers’ market
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Garage or carport
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Greenhouse
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 4 39
-
=
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.3 Accessory Uses and Structures
4.3.2 Accessory Uses and Structure Table
TABLE 4.3.2.B: ACCESSORY USE AND STRUCTURES TABLE P= PERMITTED ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE A= ALLOWED ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE IN A PD DISTRICT IF APPROVED AS PART OF A PD PLAN BLANK CELL ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE IS PROHIBITED
Accessory Uses and Structures
Agricultural & Transitional Districts
Residential Districts
Commercial Districts
IndustrialDistricts
Special Purpose Districts
PlannedDevelopmentDistrict
Use-SpecificStandards
AG
T
RCE
RSF-1A
RSF-1B
RTF
RMF
RMU
MHP
C-N
C-C
O
C-COR
C-R
I-L
I-H
MU-D
MU-ES
INST
PR
AIR
PD
NM
GT
RTE
Green roof
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Helipad (as an accessory use)
P
P
P
A
4.3.4.B.8
Home garden
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Home occupation
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
4.3.4.B.9
Laundromat (as accessory to a multifamily dwelling, mobile home park, marina, or campground)
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Limited fuel/oil/bottled gas distribution
P
P
P
A
4.3.4.B.10
Nursery and garden center (as accessory to a nursery use)
P
P
P
P
4.3.4.B.11
Outdoor display of merchandise (as accessory to a retail sales use
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
4.3.4.B.12
Outdoor seating ( as accessory to an eating or drinking establishment)
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
4.3.4.B.13
Outdoor storage (as an accessory use)
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
4.3.4.B.14
Parking facility (as an accessory use)
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Pier
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Produce stand (as accessory use to farm or community garden)
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
4.3.4.B.15
Rainwater cistern or barrel
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
4.3.4.B.16
Satellite dish antenna
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
4.3.4.B.17
Solar energy collection facility, small-scale
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
4.3.4.B.18
Stable, private
P
P
Storage shed
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
Swimming pool (as an accessory use)
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
4.3.4.B.19
Wind energy conversion system, small-scale
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
4.3.4.B.20
Land Development Code Page 4 40 Apopka, FL
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.3 Accessory Uses and Structures
4.3.3 General Standards for all Accessory Uses and Structures
4.3.3. GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ALL ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
A. Relationship to Principal Uses or Structures
1.
Except as otherwise expressly allowed in this LDC, an accessory use or structure shall not be established or constructed before the establishment or construction of the principal use or structure it serves.
2.
If the principal use or structure served by the accessory use or structure is destroyed or removed, the accessory use or structure shall no longer be allowed.
B. Location of Accessory Uses and Structures
1.
Except as otherwise expressly allowed in this LDC, an accessory use or structure shall not be located within any platted or recorded easement or over any known utility, or in an area designated as a fire lane or emergency access route on an approved development plan (minor or major).
2.
No accessory structures shall be located within a perimeter buffer except a screening fence or wall.
3.
No accessory structure shall impede the access to or function of a vehicular use area.
4.
Unless otherwise provided in Sec. 4.3.4, Standards Specific to Accessory Uses and Structures, or Sec. 10.2.4.B, Allowable Encroachments into Required Yards/Build-to Zones, no accessory structure shall be located in a required front yard or corner lot side yard.
5.
Unless otherwise provided in subparagraph 3 or 4 above, or Sec. 4.3.4, Standards Specific to Accessory Uses and Structures, or Sec. 10.2.4.B, Allowable Encroachments into Required Yards/Build-to Zones, accessory uses and structures shall comply with the minimum yard standards and structure height limits applicable in the zoning district where the structure is located.
4.3.4. STANDARDS SPECIFIC TO ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
A. General
Standards for a specific accessory use or structure shall apply to the particular individual accessory use or structure regardless of the zoning district in which it is located or the review procedure by which it is approved, unless otherwise specified in this LDC. This subsection sets forth and consolidates the standards for all accessory uses and structures for which a reference to this section is provided in the "Use-Specific Standards" column of Table 1.1.1.A: Accessory Use and Structures Table, and in the same order as they are listed in the table. These standards may be modified by other applicable standards or requirements in this LDC.
B. Standards for Specific Accessory Uses and Structures
1. Amateur ham radio antenna
a.
The antenna shall not exceed a height of 90 feet above grade.
b.
An antenna attached to a principal structure on the lot shall be located on a side or rear elevation of the structure.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 4 41
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.3 Accessory Uses and Structures
4.3.4 Standards Specific to Accessory Uses and Structures
c.
A freestanding antenna shall be located to the rear of the principal structure on the lot, but not within 10 feet of any lot line.
d.
The Director shall waive or approve a deviation of the above standards if the ham radio operator demonstrates that such waiver or deviation is necessary to accommodate the operator’s amateur communications needs.
2. Automated teller machine (ATM)
a.
An ATM designed for walk-up use and located in the exterior wall of a building or a parking area shall be designed to avoid obstructions to pedestrian movement along sidewalks, through public use areas, or between parking areas and building entrances, or vehicular movement in front of buildings or through parking areas.
b.
If an ATM is designed for use by customers in their vehicles, it shall comply with the accessory use standards in Section 4.3.4.B.6, Drive-through Facility.
3. Bed and Breakfast (as accessory to a single-family detached dwelling)
a.
The property owner or a member of the owner’s immediate family shall live in the dwelling as a primary residence and manage the bed and breakfast use.
b.
The maximum number of guest rooms shall be five.
c.
The guest rooms may be within or attached to the principal dwelling or exist within or as a detached structure (e.g., above a detached garage).
d.
Guest stays shall be limited to no more than two weeks in any one visit.
e.
No more than two nonresident persons may be employed on the premises.
f.
Interior residential features shall be retained in a manner that will allow reconversion to solely a single-family residential use.
g.
Breakfasts only may be served only to dwelling residents, and overnight resident guests.
h.
At least one additional parking space per guestroom available for rent shall be provided in addition to those required for the principal dwelling.
i.
There shall be no sign or other evidence of the bed and breakfast accessory use except one sign not exceeding two feet by three feet in area. Such sign may be double-faced and illuminated, but not internally illuminated or back-lit
j.
Other than the sign authorized above, the dwelling and site shall be maintained and landscaped to eliminate outward signs of transient use, and shall be compatible with the neighborhood surroundings.
4. Community Recreation Facility (as accessory to a residential use)
a. A community recreation facility (as accessory to a residential use) is allowed, subject to the following standards:
1. The facility shall not abut a thoroughfare (access to the facility shall be provided by an access drive).
Land Development Code Page 4 42 Apopka, FL
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.3 Accessory Uses and Structures
4.3.4 Standards Specific to Accessory Uses and Structures
5. Donation Bin
a.
A donation bin is only permitted as an accessory use where the principal use is a place of worship.
b.
The donation bin shall be affixed to a level paved surface as a part of a larger developed and occupied nonresidential building site.
c.
The donation bin shall be located with adequate driveway access for loading or service vehicles.
d.
All donation bins on a building site shall be arranged side by side with no more than 12 inches between two bins.
e.
The maximum number of donation bins on a site shall be:
1.
One donation bin on any building site less than two acres in area;
2.
Two donation bins on any building site between two and five acres in area; or
3.
Three donation bins on any building site more than five acres in area..
f.
The receiving door on the donation bin shall be oriented toward the interior of the building site and away from the public right-of-way.
g.
The donation bin shall be closed by use of a receiving door or safety chute to prevent vandalism, and locked so that the contents of the bin cannot be accessed by anyone other than those responsible for the retrieval of the contents.
h.
No donation bin shall exceed 25 square feet in area or seven feet in height.
i.
The donation bin shall not be in view from the front of the building site.
j.
The donation bin shall be setback:
1.
Twenty-five (25) feet from any Residential use, residential zone district boundary, or public right of way; and
2.
Five feet from any other property line
k.
The donation bin shall not encroach on required landscaping, and no required landscaping shall be removed to install a donation bin.
l.
Signs shall be permitted on two sides of the donation bin, if one of the two sides is the front or depositing side. Signage shall be limited to five square feet per side and shall only advertise the donation bin's (1) permittee, and (2) if applicable, the benefitting organization. Any donation bin operated by a person or entity other than a non-profit permittee shall also include the following statement on the depositing side of the bin, not less than two inches (2") high, below the bin chute, in conspicuous and clear lettering at least two inches (2") high, "[Permittee name] is not a charitable organization. The materials deposited in the bin are not reused by any charitable organization but are instead recycled and re-sold for profit, and are not tax deductible contributions." A permittee's donation bin with a benefitting foundation or organization may also state: "A portion of the proceeds of the sale of the materials deposited in this bin benefits [name of benefitting foundation or organization]." Each donation bin must be clearly marked to identify the name and telephone number of its responsible operator.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 4 43
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.3 Accessory Uses and Structures
4.3.4 Standards Specific to Accessory Uses and Structures
m.
No donation bin shall occupy or block access to any parking space needed to comply with the requirements of this LDC.
n.
No processing of donations is allowed on-site.
o.
Notwithstanding any other requirement of this subsection, donation bins may be located within a principal building or structure without further review or regulation.
p.
Operation of the donation bin shall be conducted in a manner as not to constitute a nuisance with regard to odor, noise, dust, or other environmental effects. Collection facilities must be regularly emptied of their contents so that materials and donations do not overflow. The permittee and property owner shall be individually and jointly responsible for abating and removing all garbage, trash, debris and other refuse material in the area surrounding any donation bin within 72 hours of written or verbal notice by the City.
q.
The owner of the donation bin, the permittee, and the owner of any private property upon which a violation of these regulations occur may be held individually and severally responsible and liable for such violation.
6. Drive-through Facility
a.
The drive-through facility shall be designed in accordance with Sec. 5.1.10, Vehicle Stacking Spaces and Lanes .
b.
The drive-through facility shall be designed to avoid obstructions to pedestrian movement along sidewalks, through public use areas, or between parking spaces and building entrances.
c.
The design of any roof or awning over the drive-through facility and lanes, including any supporting columns and brackets, shall match the design and exterior building materials of the principal building.
7. Electric Vehicle (EV) Level 1, 2, or 3 Charging Station
a.
In the RMU districts, EV Level 3 charging stations are allowed as accessory uses to: continuing care retirement communities; colleges or universities; major utility facilities; and townhome or multifamily developments that contain more than 75 dwelling units.
b.
Except as otherwise provided in subsection c. below, EV charging station spaces shall be reserved for the charging of electric vehicles only. Such reserved spaces shall be posted with signage identifying the spaces as reserved only for the charging of electric vehicles, the amperage and voltage levels, any enforceable time limits or tow-away provisions, and contact information for reporting non-operating equipment or other problems.
c.
A required accessible parking space for persons with physical disabilities may also serve as an EV charging station space, provided the charging station and its controls meet ADA standards for accessibility to persons with physical disabilities.
d.
EV charging station equipment shall be located so as not to interfere with vehicle, bicycle, or pedestrian access and circulation, or with required landscaping.
Land Development Code Page 4 44 Apopka, FL
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.3 Accessory Uses and Structures
4.3.4 Standards Specific to Accessory Uses and Structures
8. Helipad (as an accessory use)
a.
There shall be no existing or proposed flight obstructions that are located outside the helipad site and fall within the approach zone to any landing area.
b.
Auxiliary facilities such as parking, waiting room, fueling, and maintenance equipment are not permitted.
9. Home Occupation
a.
The purpose and intent of these home occupation standards is to:
1.
Ensure the compatibility of the home occupation with other uses permitted in the Residential districts;
2.
Maintain and preserve the character of residential neighborhoods;
3.
Provide peace and domestic tranquility within all residential neighborhoods within the City, and guarantee all residents freedom from excessive noise, excessive traffic, nuisance, fire hazard, and other adverse effects of commercial uses being conducted in residential neighborhoods;
b.
A home occupation shall be conducted entirely within a dwelling or accessory building on the lot of the occupant conducting the home occupation, and comply with all of the following standards:
1.
The home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to the use of the dwelling unit by its occupants for residential purposes, and shall under no circumstances change the residential character of the unit;
2.
No person other than members of the family residing on the premises shall be engaged in the home occupation;
3.
The home occupation shall not change the outside appearance of the building or premises, or create other visible evidence of the conduct of the home occupation;
4.
A home occupation shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the dwelling unit. A room which has been constructed as an addition to the dwelling, or an attached porch or garage which has been converted into living quarters, shall not be used for a home occupation until two years after the date of its completion, as shown by the records of the Building Division;
5.
Traffic shall not be generated by the home occupation that is in greater volumes than is normally expected by the residential dwelling unit;
6.
No commercial licensed vehicles shall be used by the home occupation;
7.
The home occupation shall not use commercially licensed vehicles or vehicles which exceed three-quarter ton, for delivery of materials or supplies to or from the premises;
8.
The off-street parking needed to accommodate the home occupation generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a required front yard;
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 4 45
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.3 Accessory Uses and Structures
4.3.4 Standards Specific to Accessory Uses and Structures
9.
No equipment or process shall be used by the home occupation that creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises. No explosive or combustible material shall be used or stored on the premises.
10.
No demonstration of products for sale is permitted.
11.
The home occupation shall comply with all applicable City occupational licenses and other business taxes.
10. Limited Fuel/Oil/Bottled Gas Distribution
a.
Limited fuel/oil/bottled gas distribution is allowed as an accessory use to convenience stores, consumer good establishments, automobile service stations, and personal and commercial vehicle sales and rental uses.
b.
Any structure housing the fuel, oil, or bottled gas that is located on a sidewalk or other walkway shall be located to maintain at least five feet of clearance along the walkway for use by pedestrians.
c.
Limited fuel/oil/bottled gas distribution as an accessory use is prohibited within 1,000 feet of an airport, a school, and a hospital.
11. Nursery and Garden Center (as accessory to a nursery use)
a.
The subject property shall contain at least five contiguous acres.
b.
The display and sale of nursery stock and garden supplies not grown or produced on the premises shall not exceed 25 percent of the total display and sales area.
c.
The display, sale, or repair of motorized nursery or garden equipment is prohibited.
d.
All parking, loading, sales, and display areas shall be set back at least 25 feet from any street right-of-way and 150 feet from any residential use or a Residential zoning district.
12. Outdoor Display of Merchandise (as accessory to a retail sales use or wholesale use)
a. Outdoor display of merchandise is allowed as an accessory use to any retail sales and service use or wholesale use that is conducted within a building located on the same lot, subject to the following standards:
1.
Merchandise displayed shall be limited to that sold or rented by the principal use on the lot.
2.
All outdoor display of goods shall be located immediately adjacent to the front or side of the principal building, and not in drive aisles, loading zones, fire lanes, or parking lots.
3.
Outdoor display areas along the front or side of a principal building shall be limited to no more than one-half of the length of the building’s front or side, as appropriate.
Land Development Code Page 4 46 Apopka, FL
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.3 Accessory Uses and Structures
4.3.4 Standards Specific to Accessory Uses and Structures
4.
Outdoor display areas shall be located to maintain a clearance area in front of primary building entrances for at least ten feet directly outward from the entrance width.
5.
An obstruction-free area at least five feet wide shall be maintained through the entire length of the display area or between it and adjacent parking areas so as to allow pedestrians and handicapped persons with disabilities to safely and conveniently travel between parking areas or drive aisles to the building and along the front and side of the building, without having to detour around the display area.
13. Outdoor Seating (as accessory to an eating or drinking establishment)
a. Outdoor seating is allowed as an accessory use to any eating or drinking establishment, subject to the following standards:
1.
No sound production or reproduction machine or device (including, but not limited to musical instruments, loud-speakers, and sound amplifiers) shall be played in the outdoor seating area at volumes that disturb the peace, quiet, or comfort of adjoining properties.
2.
Hours of operation of the outdoor seating area shall be the same as those for the eating or drinking establishment.
3.
Food preparation shall occur only within the enclosed principal building containing the eating or drinking establishment.
4.
The outdoor seating area shall not obstruct the movement of pedestrians along sidewalks or through areas intended for public use.
5.
No tables, chairs, umbrellas, or other furnishings or equipment associated with the outdoor seating area shall be attached, chained, or otherwise affixed to any curb, sidewalk, tree, post, sign, or other fixture within the outdoor seating area.
6.
The outdoor seating area may be permitted on a public sidewalk abutting or adjacent to the front of the property containing an eating or drinking establishment subject to the following requirements:
(a)
The outdoor seating area shall be limited to that part of the sidewalk directly in front of the property containing the eating or drinking establishment unless the owner of adjoining property agrees in writing to an extension of the outdoor seating area to that part of the sidewalk in front of the adjoining property.
(b)
The operator of the establishment shall enter into a revocable agreement with the City that has been approved as to form by the City Attorney, as appropriate, that:
i. Ensures that the operator is adequately insured against and indemnifies and holds the City harmless for any claims for damages or injury arising from sidewalk dining operations, and will maintain the sidewalk seating area and facilities in good repair and in a neat and clean condition;
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 4 47
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.3 Accessory Uses and Structures
4.3.4 Standards Specific to Accessory Uses and Structures
ii. Authorizes the City to suspend authorization of the outdoor seating use, and to remove or relocate or order the removal or relocation of any sidewalk seating facilities, at the owner’s expense, as necessary to accommodate repair work being done to the sidewalk or other areas within the right-of-way containing or near the outdoor seating area; and
iii. Authorizes the City to remove or relocate or order the removal or relocation of any sidewalk seating facilities, at the operator’s expense, if the operator fails to comply with a City order to do so within a reasonable time period.
(c)
A clear pathway at least five feet wide shall be maintained to allow through public pedestrian traffic along the sidewalk and from the sidewalk into the entrance to the establishment. A greater width may be required where necessary to ensure the safe and convenient flow of pedestrian traffic.
(d)
A clear separation of at least five feet shall be maintained from any alley, crosswalk, fire hydrant, or similar public or emergency access feature in or near the sidewalk. A greater clear distance may be required where necessary to ensure use of the public or emergency access feature.
(e)
No objects shall be placed along the perimeter of the outdoor sidewalk seating area that would have the effect of forming a physical or visual barrier discouraging the use of the sidewalk by the general public.
(f)
Tables, chairs, umbrellas, and other furnishings associated with the outdoor seating area shall be of sufficient quality, design, materials, and workmanship to ensure the safety and convenience of the users and compatibility with adjacent uses.
14. Outdoor Storage (as an accessory use)
a.
Within the MU-D: Mixed-Use Downtown and RMU: Residential Mixed Use districts, outdoor storage areas shall be located to the rear of the development’s principal building(s). In other zones, outdoor storage areas shall be located to the side or rear of the development’s principal structure(s).
b.
Where an outdoor storage area stores goods intended for sale or resale, such goods shall be limited to those sold on the premise in conjunction with the principal use of the lot.
c.
Flammable liquids or gases in excess of 100 gallons shall be stored underground.
d.
No materials shall be stored in areas intended for vehicular or pedestrian circulation.
e.
Outdoor storage areas shall be enclosed with either a wall made of masonry material consistent with that of the primary building(s) on the lot, wood, or vinyl (or a combination of such a masonry wall and metal fencing). The height of the wall or fence shall be sufficient to screen stored materials from view from public street rights-of-way, private streets, public sidewalks, and any adjoining residential development.
Land Development Code Page 4 48 Apopka, FL
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.3 Accessory Uses and Structures
4.3.4 Standards Specific to Accessory Uses and Structures
15. Produce stand (as accessory to a farm or community garden)
a. A produce stand (as accessory to a farm or community garden) shall comply with the following standards:
1.
The produce stand shall not exceed 750 square feet in area and shall not be more than 15 feet in height.
2.
The produce stand shall be located on the lot where the farm or community garden is located.
3.
The produce stand shall be:
(a)
Limited to the retail sale of vegetables and fruits grown on the farm or in the community garden.
(b)
Located to minimize the visual impact of the structure from adjacent public streets.
(c)
Limited to a six-month duration in a given location.
(d)
Situated so that adequate ingress, egress, and off-street parking areas are provided.
16. Rainwater Cistern or Barrel
a. An aboveground rainwater cistern or barrel is allowed as an accessory use or structure to any principal use or structure, provided it shall:
1.
Be located directly adjacent to the principal structure on the lot.
2.
Not serve as signage or have signage affixed to it.
17. Satellite Dish Antenna
a. A satellite dish antenna is allowed as an accessory use or structure to any principal use or structure, subject to the following standards:
1.
A satellite dish antenna that is more than 18 inches in diameter, located on property within the exclusive use or control of the antenna user, and designed to receive direct broadcast satellite service, including direct-tohome satellite service, or to receive or transmit fixed wireless signals via satellite, is subject to the standards in this subsection only to the extent that the standards do not unreasonably delay, prevent, or increase the cost of its installation, maintenance, or use or preclude reception of an acceptable quality signal.
2.
Only one antenna is allowed to serve a residential dwelling unit. For all other uses, one or more antennas are allowed.
3.
The maximum size of the satellite dish antenna, whether ground-or pole-mounted, shall be 12 feet in diameter, unless approved concurrently with a principal use approved by special exception.
4.
Antennas shall be located only in a rear or side yard, at least two feet from any rear or side lot line. On lots having no rear yard (through lots) and on corner lots where the designated front of the main building faces a side street, the
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 4 49
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.3 Accessory Uses and Structures
4.3.4 Standards Specific to Accessory Uses and Structures
rear and side yards, as used herein, shall mean the yards at the rear and side of the building, respectively.
5.
Antennas shall be ground-mounted, except an antenna with a diameter of six feet four inches or less may be mounted on the roof of any building other than a single-family detached dwelling unit.
6.
The maximum height of a ground-mounted antenna shall be 15 feet.
7.
The maximum height of a pole-mounted satellite dish antenna shall be 13.5 feet above the eaves of the roof, but in all instances shall not exceed 35 feet
8.
The satellite dish antenna shall be of a nonreflective surface material and be made, to the maximum extent practicable, to conform and blend, taking into consideration color and location, with the surrounding area and structures.
9.
A ground-mounted antenna shall be screened from ground-level view from adjacent streets and parcels.
10.
The satellite dish antenna shall, to the maximum extent possible, be screened from view from a public right-of-way and adjacent properties.
11.
The satellite dish antenna, whether ground or pole mounted, shall be mounted at a fixed point and shall not be portable.
12.
The satellite dish antenna shall contain no advertising or signage of any type.
13.
The satellite dish antenna and any part thereof shall maintain vertical and horizontal clearances from any electric lines and shall conform to the National Electrical Code.
14.
The satellite dish antenna installation shall provide certification of and shall meet all FCC and manufacturer specifications, rules, and requirements.
15.
A satellite dish antenna 18 inches in diameter or less shall not require a building permit before its installation, but shall comply with the standards of this subsection.
18. Solar Energy Collection Facility, Small-Scale
a.
The facility may be located on the roof of a principal or accessory structure, on the side of such structures, on a pole, or on the ground in accordance with the standards in Sec. 4.3.3.B, Location of Accessory Uses and Structures.
b.
The facility shall comply with the maximum height standards for the zoning district in which it is located, except that a roof-mounted system shall not extend more than 15 feet above the roofline of the structure on which it is mounted.
c.
Where an existing structure exceeds the applicable height limit, a solar energy collection facility may be located on its roof irrespective of applicable height standards, provided the system extends no more than five feet above the roof surface.
d.
The property owner shall be responsible for negotiating with other property owners in the vicinity to establish any solar easement designed to protect solar access for the small-scale solar energy collection facility, and for recording any such solar easement with the Director.
Land Development Code Page 4 50 Apopka, FL
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.3 Accessory Uses and Structures
4.3.4 Standards Specific to Accessory Uses and Structures
19. Swimming Pool (as an accessory use)
a.
An outdoor swimming pool accessory to a single-family dwelling may be located in a required side or rear yard except that it shall be set back at least eight feet from the rear lot line and five feet from all side lot lines.
b.
An outdoor swimming pool accessory to a use other than a single-family detached dwelling shall comply with the minimum yard depth requirements for a principal building and any applicable locational standards in provisions d and e below.
c.
An outdoor swimming pool accessory to a townhome or multifamily development is subject to the following additional standards:
1.
The pool shall be for the sole use of the development’s or subdivision’s residents, and their guests.
2.
The pool (including the apron, filtering and pumping equipment, and buildings) shall be located at least:
(a)
One hundred and twenty-five (125) feet from land in a single-family zoning district (RSF-1A and RSF-1B districts) or an existing single-family detached dwelling.
(b)
Fifty (50) feet from adjoining land in a Residential zoning district, or land an existing residential use; and
(c)
Twenty-five (25) feet from land in a Nonresidential zoning district or existing nonresidential development.
3.
The use of any public address or other loudspeaker system for an outdoor swimming pool shall be restricted to that necessary for safety purposes, and shall not be used for the playing of music or other entertainment.
20. Wind Energy Conversion System, Small-Scale
a.
Tower-mounted small-scale wind energy conversion systems shall not be located within a front yard.
b.
A small-scale wind energy conversion system shall be set back a distance equal to its total extended height (e.g., if on a roof, roof height plus the height of any tower extending from the roof), plus five feet from all property lines, public street rights-of-way, and overhead utility lines. Guy wires and other support devices shall be set back at least five feet from all property lines.
c.
The maximum height of a small-scale wind energy conversion system (including the tower and extended blades) shall be the maximum height allowed in the zoning district plus 40 feet.
d.
Sound produced by the wind turbine under normal operating conditions, as measured at the property line abutting an existing residential use, shall not exceed 55 dBA at any time. The 55 dBA sound level, however, may be exceeded during short-term events that occur beyond the property owner’s control, such as utility outages and/or severe wind storms.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 4 51
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.4 Temporary Uses and Structures
4.4.1 General
e.
The wind turbine and tower shall be painted or finished in the color originally applied by the manufacturer, or a matte neutral color (e.g., gray, white) that blends into a range of sky colors, or a color consistent with that of the buildings on the site. Bright, luminescent, or neon colors are prohibited.
f.
The blade tip or vane of any small-scale wind energy conversion system shall have a minimum ground clearance of 15 feet, as measured at the lowest point of the arc of the blades. No blades may extend over parking areas, public right of ways, driveways, or sidewalks.
g.
No illumination of the turbine or tower shall be allowed unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
h.
On a freestanding tower, any climbing foot pegs or rungs below 12 feet shall be removed to prevent unauthorized climbing. For lattice or guyed towers, sheets of metal or wood or similar barriers shall be fastened to the bottom tower section such that it cannot readily be climbed.
i.
No wind generator, tower, building, or other structure associated with a small-scale wind energy conversion system shall include any signage visible from any public street other than the manufacturer’s or installer’s identification, appropriate warning signs, or owner identification.
j.
No small-scale wind energy conversion system intended to connect to the electric utility shall be installed until evidence has been provided to the Planning Director that the relevant electric utility company has been informed of the customer’s intent to install an interconnected customer-owned generator.
k.
If use of the facility is discontinued for a continuous period of six months, the City shall deem it abandoned and provide the owner a written notice of abandonment stating that the owner has 90 days from the date of receipt of the notice to either resume use of the facility or file a notice of termination with the City. The owner shall remove the facility (including all towers, turbines, and above-ground structures and equipment) within 90 days after a notice of termination is filed.
Section 4.4. TEMPORARY USES AND STRUCTURES
4.4.1. GENERAL
A. Purpose
The purpose of this section is to authorize the establishment of certain temporary uses and structures, which are uses (including special events) and structures of a limited duration. This section also identifies the zoning districts in which temporary uses and structures are allowed, identifies what type of permit or review is required to establish them, sets out general standards applicable to all temporary uses and structures, and sets out any special standards applicable to particular temporary uses and structures. This section is intended to ensure that such uses or structures do not negatively affect
Land Development Code Page 4 52 Apopka, FL
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.4 Temporary Uses and Structures
4.4.2 Temporary Uses and Structures Table
adjacent land, are discontinued upon the expiration of a set time period, and do not involve the construction or alteration of any permanent building or structure.
B. Organization of this Section
Table 4.4.2.C: Temporary Uses and Structure Table, in Sec. 4.4.2, Temporary Uses and Structures Table, shows whether a particular type of temporary use or structure is permitted or prohibited within the various zoning districts. Sec. 4.4.3, General Standards for All Temporary Uses and Structures, establishes general standards that apply to all allowed temporary uses and structures. Sec. 4.4.2.B, Standards for Specific Temporary Uses and Structures, establishes standards that apply to particular types of temporary uses or structures regardless of the zoning district in which they are allowed or the review procedure by which they are approved, unless expressly stated to the contrary. These standards may be modified by other applicable requirements in this LDC.
4.4.2. TEMPORARY USES AND STRUCTURES TABLE
A. Organization of Temporary Uses and Structures
1. Designation of Uses and Structures
The following abbreviations are used in the table to designate whether and how a
temporary use or structure is allowed in a particular zoning district.
A “P” in a cell of the temporary uses and structures table indicates that the use or structure is allowed by right as a temporary use or structure in the corresponding base or PD zoning district, subject to Sec. 4.4.3, General
P Standards for All Temporary Uses and Structures, any use-specific standards referenced in the final column of the table and set down in Sec. 4.4.4, Standards Specific to Temporary Uses and Structures, and all other applicable regulations of this LDC.
A blank cell in the temporary uses and structures table indicates that the use or structure is prohibited as a temporary use or structure in the corresponding zoning district.
B. Standards for Specific Temporary Uses and Structures
When a particular use or structure is permitted as a temporary use or structure in a zoning district, there may be additional regulations that are applicable to the use or structure. The existence of these standards for specific temporary uses and structures is noted through a section reference in the last column of the use table titled “Standards for Specific Temporary Uses and Structures.” References refer to Sec. 4.4.4, Standards Specific to Temporary Uses and Structures. These standards shall apply to a particular use or structure regardless of the base zoning district where it is proposed, unless otherwise specified.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 4 53
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.4 Temporary Uses and Structures
4.4.2 Temporary Uses and Structures Table
Land Development Code Page 4 54 Apopka, FL
-
=
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.4 Temporary Uses and Structures
4.4.2 Temporary Uses and Structures Table
C. Temporary Uses and Structure Table
TABLE 4.4.2.C: TEMPORARY USE / STRUCTURE TABLE P= PERMITTED TEMPORARY USE OR STRUCTURE BLANK CELL PROHIBITED
Temporary Uses and Structures
Agricultural & Transitional Districts
Residential Districts
Commercial Districts
IndustrialDistricts
Special Purpose
Districts
PlannedDevelopmentDistrict
Use-SpecificStandards
AG
T
RCE
RSF-1A
RSF-1B
RTF
RMF
RMU
MHP
C-N
C-C
O
C-COR
C-R
I-L
I-H
MU-D
MU-ES
INST
PR
AIR
PD
NM
GT
RTE
Construction-related building, structure, or use
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
4.4.4.A
Factory fabricated transportable building or room (temporary use)
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Farmers’ market, temporary
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
4.4.4.B
Flea market, temporary
P
P
P
P
P
P
4.4.4.C
Garage sale
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
4.4.4.D
Model sales home / unit
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
4.4.4.E
Portable shipping container
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Seasonal sales
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
4.4.4.F
Special event
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
4.4.4.G
Storage in portable shipping container
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
4.4.4.H
Temporary use or factory-fabricated transportable building
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
4.4.4.J
Temporary shelter for commercial displays,, sales, and services
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
4.4.4.K
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 4 55

-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.4 Temporary Uses and Structures
4.4.3 General Standards for All Temporary Uses and Structures
4.4.3. GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ALL TEMPORARY USES AND STRUCTURES
Unless otherwise specified in this LDC, all temporary uses and structures shall:
A. Obtain any other applicable City, State, or federal permits;
B. Not involve the retail sales or display of goods, products, or services within a public rightof-way, except as part of a City-authorized event;
C. Not be detrimental to property or improvements in the surrounding area or to the public health, safety, or general welfare;
D. Be compatible with the principal uses taking place on the site;
E. Not have adverse health, safety, noise, or nuisance impacts on any adjoining permanent uses or nearby residential neighborhoods;
F. Not include permanent alterations to the site;
G. Not violate the applicable conditions of approval that apply to a site or a use on the site;
H. Not interfere with the normal operations of any permanent use located on the property; and
I. Be located on a site containing sufficient land area to allow the temporary use, structure, or special event to occur and accommodate associated pedestrian, parking, and traffic movement without disturbing environmentally sensitive lands.
4.4.4. STANDARDS SPECIFIC TO TEMPORARY USES AND STRUCTURES
The standards set forth in this subsection for a specific temporary use or structure shall apply to the particular individual temporary use or structure, regardless of the zoning district in which it is located or the review procedure by which it is approved, unless otherwise specified in this LDC. This subsection is intended to set forth and consolidate the standards for all temporary uses and structures for which a reference to this subsection is provided in the “Standards for Specific Temporary Uses and Structures” column of Table: 4.4.2.C, Temporary Uses and Structure Table. These standards may be modified by other applicable standards or requirements in this LDC.
A. Construction-related Building, Structure, or Use
A construction-related building, structure, or use shall comply with the following
standards:
1.
The temporary building, structure, or use shall not be moved onto the project site prior to the issuance of a building permit and shall be removed within 30 days after issuance of the final certificate of occupancy for the building or completed development.
2.
The temporary building, structure, or use may be placed on a property adjacent to the construction site if site constraints make it infeasible to locate the structures or facilities on the construction site, provided the adjacent site is restored to its previous condition within 60 days after issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the building or completed development.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 4 57
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.4 Temporary Uses and Structures
4.4.4 Standards Specific to Temporary Uses and Structures
3.
Adequate off-street parking for the temporary building, structure, or use shall be provided in accordance with the minimum standards for number of off-street parking spaces in Section 5.1, Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards.
4.
Construction site fencing may remain in place provided the building permit remains active and has not expired.
5.
The Director shall issue the temporary use permit for an appropriate period of time not to exceed 12 months and may extend the temporary use permit for an additional 12 months on finding that the building construction or land development is proceeding in a reasonably timely manner.
B. Farmers’ Market, Temporary
1.
The farmers’ market shall operate only with written permission from the owner of the property on which it is located.
2.
The farmers’ market shall operate for no more than 50 days in any one calendar year.
3.
The farmers’ market shall be open only during daylight hours.
4.
Except as provided in provision e below, a farmers’ market shall only be located on the open area or parking lot of private or publicly owned property.
5.
The farmers’ market may operate inside a public or privately owned building during the months of December through March for a period not to exceed a total of 30 days.
6.
The farmers’ market shall provide adequate ingress, egress, and off-street parking areas. Vehicular access to the subject property shall not be by means of streets internal to subdivisions or neighborhoods for single-family detached dwellings.
7.
Sales shall be limited to the retail sale of agriculture, aquaculture, and horticulture products produced by the vendor, including the sale of products made by the vendor from such products (e.g., baked goods, jams and jellies, juices, cheeses) and incidental sales of crafts or similar home-made products made by the vendor.
8.
Items for sale shall not be displayed or stored within customer pathways.
9.
The market shall have an established set of operating rules addressing the governance structure of the market, hours of operation, and maintenance and security requirements and responsibilities.
10.
The market shall have a manager authorized to direct the operations of all participating vendors during all hours of operation.
C. Flea Market, temporary
1.
The market shall operate only with written permission from the owner of the property on which it is located.
2.
The market shall operate for no more than 30 days in any one calendar year.
3.
The market shall be open only during daylight hours.
4.
The market shall only be located on the open area or parking lot of property owned by a public agency or a not-for-profit organization.
Land Development Code Page 4 58 Apopka, FL
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.4 Temporary Uses and Structures
4.4.4 Standards Specific to Temporary Uses and Structures
5.
Stalls, sales tables, and any other facilities related to the flea market shall be located at least 25 feet from any adjoining street. If located within a parking lot, the facilities shall be located so as to provide sufficient parking facilities for the patrons.
6.
Market sales shall be limited to the retail sale of merchandise, collectibles, crafts, antiques, and other items, excluding automobiles, automobile parts, and non-portable household appliances.
7.
Items for sale shall not be displayed or stored within customer pathways.
8.
The market shall have an established set of operating rules addressing the governance structure of the market, hours of operation, and maintenance and security requirements and responsibilities.
D. Garage Sale
1.
Sales are held no more than twice in a calendar year.
2.
Sales last no longer than three consecutive days.
3.
Sales are conducted on the owner's property. Multiple-family sales are permitted if they are held on the property owned by one of the participants;
4.
No goods purchased for resale may be offered for sale;
5.
All signs shall comply with Section 5.10, Signs.
E. Model Sales Home/Unit
A single model sales home/unit may be located on a new development site and temporarily used for sales or leasing uses associated with a residential development, or mixed-use development with residential units, subject to the following standards:
1.
A model sales home/unit shall be located on a lot or building site approved as part of the development, or within a building approved as part of the development.
2.
A temporary use permit for the use shall be issued only when actual construction on or in the immediate vicinity of the development site necessitates the model sales home/unit. The permit shall be initially valid for no more than three years. The Planning Director may grant written extensions of this time period for up to three years per extension provided, however, the permit shall remain valid no longer than the time required for the construction of the development.
3.
Adequate measures shall be taken to ensure the use will not adversely affect the health and safety of residents or workers in the area, and will not be detrimental to the use or development of adjacent properties or the surrounding neighborhood.
4.
There shall be no more than one model sales home/unit per builder in the development.
5.
The building used as or containing a sales office shall comply with all building setbacks and other development requirements.
6.
The building shall be aesthetically compatible with the character of the community and surrounding area in terms of exterior color, predominant exterior materials, and landscaping.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 4 59
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.4 Temporary Uses and Structures
4.4.4 Standards Specific to Temporary Uses and Structures
7.
At least one parking space shall be provided for every 300 square feet of gross floor area devoted to the sales office use. Accessible parking for persons with physical disabilities is required.
8.
A model sales home/unit may be used for temporary sales/leasing until such time as the last lot is developed.
9.
On termination of the temporary real estate sales/leasing use of a model sales home/unit, the home/unit shall be converted into, or removed and replaced with, a permanent permitted use, and any excess parking shall be removed and landscaped in accordance with the development permits and approvals for the development.
10.
A model sales home shall not be used for storage of building materials.
F. Seasonal Sales
1.
The display/sales area shall be located at least 25 feet from an existing street line and from any adjacent lot lines.
2.
Adequate measures shall be taken to ensure that the use will not adversely affect the health and safety of residents or workers in the area, and will not be detrimental to the use or development of adjacent properties or the general neighborhood.
3.
Off-street parking shall be adequate to accommodate the proposed sale of products.
4.
Shall be valid for no more than 45 consecutive days.
G. Special Event
1. Applicability
a.
All special events (including but not limited to cultural events, musical events, celebrations, festivals, fairs, carnivals, circuses, and communal camping) held on private property within the City shall comply with the requirements and standards in this subsection, unless exempted in accordance with section b below.
b.
The following events or activities are exempt from the standards of this subsection and may occur without a temporary use permit for a special event. They are subject to all other applicable procedures and standards of this LDC:
1.
Special events or activities occurring within, or on the grounds of, a single-family detached development.
2.
Block parties or neighborhood activities with fewer than 100 attendees.
3.
Any event sponsored in whole or in part by the City, the County, or the State.
4.
Any organized activities conducted at sites or facilities typically intended and used for such activities. Examples of such exempt activities include, but are not limited to, sporting events such as golf, soccer, softball, and baseball tournaments conducted on courses or fields intended and used for such activities; fairs and carnivals at fairgrounds; wedding services conducted at places of worship, reception halls, or similar facilities (not including agricultural or food and beverage production facilities) ; funeral services conducted at places of worship, funeral homes, or cemeteries.
Land Development Code Page 4 60 Apopka, FL
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.4 Temporary Uses and Structures
4.4.4 Standards Specific to Temporary Uses and Structures
2. Standards
An application for a temporary use permit for a special event shall not be approved unless it complies with the following standards, in addition to the standards in Sec. 4.3.3, General Standards for all Accessory Uses and Structures:
a.
The application does not contain intentionally false or materially misleading information.
b.
There is a finding that the special event would not create an unreasonable risk of significant:
1.
Damage to public or private property, beyond normal wear and tear;
2.
Injury to persons;
3.
Public or private disturbances or nuisances;
4.
Unsafe impediments or distractions to, or congestion of, vehicular or pedestrian travel;
5.
Additional and impracticable or unduly burdensome police, fire, trash removal, maintenance, or other public services demands; and
6.
Other adverse effects upon the public health, safety, or welfare.
c.
The special event shall not be of such a nature, size, or duration that the particular location requested cannot reasonably accommodate the event.
d.
The special event shall not be at a time and location that has already been permitted or reserved for other activities.
3. Conditions of Approval
In approving the temporary use permit for the special event, the Planning Director is authorized to impose such conditions upon the premises benefited by the permit as may be necessary to reduce or minimize any potential adverse impacts upon other property in the area, as long as the condition relates to a situation created or potentially created by the proposed special event. The Planning Director is authorized, where appropriate, to require:
a.
Provision of temporary parking facilities, including vehicular access and egress.
b.
Control of nuisance factors, such as but not limited to, the prevention of glare or direct illumination of adjacent properties, noise, vibrations, smoke, dust, dirt, odors, gases, and heat.
c.
Regulation of temporary buildings, structures and facilities, including placement, height and size, location of equipment and open spaces, including buffer areas and other yards.
d.
Provision of sanitary and medical facilities.
e.
Provision of solid waste collection and disposal.
f.
Provision of security and safety measures.
g.
Use of an alternative location or date for the proposed special event.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 4 61
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.4 Temporary Uses and Structures
4.4.4 Standards Specific to Temporary Uses and Structures
h.
Modification or elimination of certain proposed activities.
i.
Regulation of operating hours and days, including limitation of the duration of the special event to a shorter time period than that requested or specified in this subsection.
j.
Submission of a performance guarantee to ensure that any temporary facilities or structures used for such proposed special event will be removed from the site within a reasonable time following the event and that the property will be restored to its former condition.
4. Duration of Permit
A temporary use permit for a special event authorized in accordance with this subsection shall be limited to a maximum duration of 14 days per site per calendar year, unless otherwise specifically authorized by the Director.
H. Storage in Portable Shipping Container
Temporary storage in portable shipping containers shall comply with the following standards:
1.
Storage containers shall not exceed 160 square feet in floor area or be taller than eight feet.
2.
Containers shall be located within a driveway, parking, or loading area. In cases where the driveway, parking, or loading area extends behind the front façade of a building, the container shall be placed behind the front façade.
3.
In cases where improved driveways, parking, or loading areas are not present, containers shall be located so as to minimize their visibility from streets or adjacent residential areas, to the extent practicable.
4.
Nothing in these standards shall limit the placement of more than one container on a lot or site, provided compliance with all other applicable standards is maintained.
5.
Except for storage containers located on construction sites, storage containers shall not be located on an individual parcel or site for more than 30 consecutive days per site per occurrence.
6.
Storage containers may be placed on a residential site a maximum of two occurrences per year, per unit.
7.
A minimum period of six months is required between the removal of a storage container from a nonresidential site and the subsequent placement of a storage container on the site.
I. Temporary use of an accessory use or accessory structure as a principal dwelling after a catastrophe
An existing structure that is accessory to an existing principal dwelling that has been damaged or destroyed by a fire, hurricane, or other physical catastrophe may be temporarily used as the principal dwelling on the lot while the damaged or destroyed principal dwelling is being repaired or reconstructed, provided it complies with the following standards:
Land Development Code Page 4 62 Apopka, FL
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.4 Temporary Uses and Structures
4.4.4 Standards Specific to Temporary Uses and Structures
1.
The building or inhabited part shall meet all applicable building, health, and other regulations for a habitable dwelling.
2.
The building complies with any additional standards set forth in a Declaration of Emergency issued by authorized officials in response to the catastrophe.
3.
The building is removed or converted to an authorized accessory use within 30 days after issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the permanent principal dwelling. In no case shall the building be used as the principal dwelling for more than two years unless authorized by a longer time period set forth in a Declaration of Emergency issued by authorized officials in response to the catastrophe.
J. Temporary Use of Factory-Fabricated, Transportable Building
Factory-fabricated, transportable buildings that are designed to arrive at the site ready for occupancy (except for minor unpacking and connection to utilities), and for relocation to other sites, may be temporarily placed on land, subject to the following standards:
1. The building may be placed on a lot and temporarily used only for the following purposes:
a.
Temporary on-site expansion of space for an existing community services use, government administrative offices, health care use, place of worship, public school, or other community-serving institutional use pending implementation of City-approved plans for the permanent expansion of existing facilities.
b.
Temporary on-site office space for construction management and security uses during construction of new development in accordance with City-approved plans.
c.
Temporary on-site office space pending completion of permanent office space if a building permit has been issued for the permanent office space.
d.
A temporary on-site space for real estate sales or leasing activities associated with a new development pending construction of the development.
e.
Temporary on-site space for recreational use for a new residential development pending construction of permanent recreational facilities approved as part of the development.
f.
A temporary building providing temporary quarters for the occupants of a principal dwelling or nonresidential building damaged or destroyed by a fire, hurricane, or other physical catastrophe while the dwelling or building is being repaired or reconstructed.
g.
A temporary room used as a bedroom and bathroom for the temporary care of a parent or grandparent who is elderly or disabled.
2. Except as otherwise provided in this LDC, the temporary building may be located anywhere on the site except within the following areas:
a.
Existing required landscaping or perimeter buffer areas;
b.
Areas designated as future required landscaping areas, whether or not vegetation currently exists;
c.
Natural areas, floodplains, and environmentally-sensitive areas; and
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 4 63
-
Article 4: Use Regulations
Section 4.4 Temporary Uses and Structures
4.4.4 Standards Specific to Temporary Uses and Structures
d. Other areas designated on the site for open space, vehicular access, or parking.
3.
Adequate off-street parking for the temporary building or room shall be provided in accordance with the minimum standards for number of off-street parking spaces in Sec. Section 5.1, Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards.
4.
All permits required by applicable building, electrical, plumbing, and mechanical codes shall be obtained before placement of the temporary building or room.
5.
The temporary building or room shall be compatible with any existing buildings on the site in terms of exterior color.
6.
The exterior of the temporary building or room shall not be used to display advertising other than signage authorized by Sec. Section 5.10, Signs.
7.
A temporary use permit issued for a temporary building in accordance with this subsection shall have a period of validity of 12 months or less, except the permit for the temporary room used as a bedroom and bathroom for the care of a parent or grandparent who is elderly or disabled may be for up to three years. The temporary use permit may be extended for an additional 12 months, up to three times, if a written request for an extension is submitted to the Planning Director 30 days prior to the expiration of the temporary use permit, except that an unlimited number of extensions are allowed for temporary classrooms for use as part of an existing public educational facility and for a temporary room used as a bedroom and bathroom for the care of a parent or grandparent who is elderly or disabled. In all other instances, the temporary building shall not remain on the site for more than four years.
8.
The temporary building shall be removed from the site within 30 days after issuance of the final certificate of occupancy for the permanent expansion, new development, permanent office space, permanent recreation facility, permanent facility, repaired or reconstructed dwelling/building, as appropriate, or the removal of the elderly parent or grandparent.
K. Temporary Shelter for Commercial Displays, Sales, and Services
Promotional displays or sales, seasonal activities carload sales of products, sidewalk sales, and demonstration of products in a parking lot may be allowed in a trailer or tent, provided the temporary use permit is not valid for more than two months in a calendar year.
Land Development Code Page 4 64 Apopka, FL
Development Standards

Article 5
: Development Standards
................................................................
5-1
Section 5.1. Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
.............................................
5-1
5.1.1.
Purpose and Intent
.............................................................................................
5-1
5.1.2.
Applicability
........................................................................................................
5-1
5.1.3.
Timing of Review
.................................................................................................
5-1
5.1.4.
Parking Plan Required
.........................................................................................
5-1
5.1.5.
General Standards for Off-Street Vehicular Parking and Loading Areas
............
5-2
5.1.6.
Off-Street Vehicular Parking Space Standards
....................................................
5-7
5.1.7.
Dimensional Standards for Vehicular Parking Spaces and Aisles
.....................
5-16
5.1.8.
Off-Street Parking Alternatives
.........................................................................
5-18
5.1.9.
Reduced Parking Standards for Parking Demand Reduction Strategies
...........
5-23
5.1.10.
Vehicle Stacking Spaces and Lanes
...................................................................
5-26
5.1.11.
Bicycle Parking Standards
.................................................................................
5-28
5.1.12.
Loading Area Standards
....................................................................................
5-33
Section 5.2. Landscaping and Buffer Standards
..................................................................................
5-36
5.2.1.
Purpose
.............................................................................................................
5-36
5.2.2.
Applicability
......................................................................................................
5-36
5.2.3.
Timing of Review
...............................................................................................
5-37
5.2.4.
Landscape Plan
.................................................................................................
5-37
5.2.5.
Landscaping and Buffer Standards
...................................................................
5-37
5.2.6.
Alternative Landscape Plan
...............................................................................
5-51
Section 5.3. Tree Protection Standards
...............................................................................................
5-53
5.3.1.
Purpose
.............................................................................................................
5-53
5.3.2.
Applicability
......................................................................................................
5-53
5.3.3.
Arbor Permit Required
......................................................................................
5-54
5.3.4.
Timing of Review
...............................................................................................
5-54
5.3.5.
Responsibility for Compliance
..........................................................................
5-54
5.3.6.
Existing Tree Canopy Defined
...........................................................................
5-54
5.3.7.
Retention of Existing Canopy
............................................................................
5-55
5.3.8.
Retention of Specimen Trees
............................................................................
5-59
5.3.9.
Tree Protection During Construction
................................................................
5-61
5.3.10.
Deferral of Tree Replacement
..........................................................................
5-62
Section 5.4. Open Space Set-Aside Standards
....................................................................................
5-63
5.4.1.
Purpose
.............................................................................................................
5-63
5.4.2.
Applicability
......................................................................................................
5-63
5.4.3.
Timing of Review
...............................................................................................
5-63
5.4.4.
Amount of Open Space Set-Asides Required
....................................................
5-63
5.4.5.
Areas Counted as Open Space Set-Asides
........................................................
5-64
5.4.6.
Areas Not Counted as Open Space Set-Asides
.................................................
5-67
5.4.7.
Design Standards for Open Space Set-Asides
...................................................
5-68
5.4.8.
Development in Open Space Set-Asides
...........................................................
5-69
5.4.9.
Ownership, Management, and Maintenance of Open Space Set-Asides
.........
5-69
Section 5.5. Fences and Walls
.............................................................................................................
5-71
5.5.1.
Purpose
.............................................................................................................
5-71
5.5.2.
Applicability
......................................................................................................
5-71
5.5.3.
Timing of Review
...............................................................................................
5-71
5.5.4.
General Standards
............................................................................................
5-71
5.5.5.
Height Standards
...............................................................................................
5-72
5.5.6.
Materials Standards
..........................................................................................
5-75
5.5.7.
Perimeter Fences and Walls Abutting Street Right-of-Way
.............................
5-76
5.5.8.
Appearance
.......................................................................................................
5-77
5.5.9.
Fence and Wall Construction
............................................................................
5-79
5.5.10.
Gates
.................................................................................................................
5-79
5.5.11.
Retaining Walls
.................................................................................................
5-79
5.5.12.
Security Exemption Plan
...................................................................................
5-79
Section 5.6. Exterior Lighting
..............................................................................................................
5-80
5.6.1.
Purpose and Intent
...........................................................................................
5-80
5.6.2.
Applicability
......................................................................................................
5-80
5.6.3.
Timing of Review
...............................................................................................
5-81
5.6.4.
Lighting Plan
......................................................................................................
5-81
5.6.5.
Prohibited Lighting
............................................................................................
5-81
5.6.6.
Street Lighting
...................................................................................................
5-82
5.6.7.
General Standards for Exterior Lighting
...........................................................
5-82
5.6.8.
Lighting Design Standards for Specific Uses and Site Features
........................
5-84
5.6.9.
Measurement
...................................................................................................
5-86
5.6.10.
Exemptions for a Security Plan
.........................................................................
5-87
Section 5.7. Development Design Guidelines
.....................................................................................
5-87
Section 5.8. Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
..........................................................................
5-88
5.8.1.
Purpose and Intent
...........................................................................................
5-88
5.8.2.
Applicability
......................................................................................................
5-88
5.8.3.
Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
...........................................................
5-89
Section 5.9. Agricultural Compatibility Standards
..............................................................................
5-94
5.9.1.
Purpose and Intent
...........................................................................................
5-94
5.9.2.
Applicability
......................................................................................................
5-94
5.9.3.
Agricultural Compatibility Standards
................................................................
5-94
Section 5.10. Signs
.................................................................................................................................
5-98
5.10.1.
Purpose and Intent
...........................................................................................
5-98
5.10.2.
No Defense of Nuisance Action
........................................................................
5-98
5.10.3.
Maintenance
.....................................................................................................
5-98
5.10.4.
Permitting Requirements
..................................................................................
5-99
5.10.5.
Development Plan Application Contents
..........................................................
5-99
5.10.6.
Prohibited Signs
..............................................................................................
5-100
5.10.7.
General Standards for Permanent Signs
.........................................................
5-101
5.10.8.
Standards for Specific Sign Types
...................................................................
5-105
5.10.9.
Standards for Special Purpose Signs
...............................................................
5-117
5.10.10.
Temporary Signs
.............................................................................................
5-121
5.10.11.
Illegal Signs
......................................................................................................
5-125
Section 5.11. Green Building Standards
..............................................................................................
5-126
5.11.1.
Purpose and Intent
.........................................................................................
5-126
5.11.2.
Applicability
....................................................................................................
5-126
5.11.3.
Timing of Review
.............................................................................................
5-127
5.11.4.
Green Building Standards
...............................................................................
5-127
5.11.5.
Failure to Install or Maintain Green Building Elements for Compliance
........
5-130
Section 5.12. Green Building Incentives
..............................................................................................
5-131
5.12.1.
Purpose and Intent
.........................................................................................
5-131
5.12.2.
Incentives
........................................................................................................
5-131
5.12.3.
Applicability
....................................................................................................
5-131
5.12.4.
Conflict with Neighborhood Compatibility
.....................................................
5-132
5.12.5.
Procedure
........................................................................................................
5-132
5.12.6.
Menu of Green Building Features
...................................................................
5-133
5.12.7.
Failure to Install or Maintain Green Building Practices
..................................
5-135
Section 5.13. Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
......................................................................
5-136
5.13.1.
Mobility, Circulation, and Connectivity Standards
.........................................
5-136
5.13.2.
Minimum Street Design and Construction Standards
....................................
5-143
5.13.3.
Street and Road Access
...................................................................................
5-149
5.13.4.
Streets
.............................................................................................................
5-155
5.13.5.
Private Streets
.................................................................................................
5-159
5.13.6.
Sidewalks and Bikeways
..................................................................................
5-162
5.13.7.
Rights-of-way
..................................................................................................
5-163
5.13.8.
Transit Stops
...................................................................................................
5-165
5.13.9.
Numbering of Buildings
..................................................................................
5-165
5.13.10.
Complete Streets
............................................................................................
5-168
Section 5.14. Utilities
...........................................................................................................................
5-173
5.14.1.
General Standards
..........................................................................................
5-173
5.14.2.
Utility Easements
............................................................................................
5-175
5.14.3.
Utility Excavation, Trenching, and Backfilling
.................................................
5-176
5.14.4.
Water Distribution Systems
............................................................................
5-176
5.14.5.
Sanitary Sewer
................................................................................................
5-177
5.14.6.
Reclaimed Water System
................................................................................
5-178
Section 5.15. Guarantees and Sureties
...............................................................................................
5-179
5.15.1.
Applicability
....................................................................................................
5-179
5.15.2.
Improvements Agreement Required
..............................................................
5-179
5.15.3.
Amount and Type of Security
.........................................................................
5-180
5.15.4.
Completion of Improvements
.........................................................................
5-180
5.15.5.
Maintenance of Improvements.
.....................................................................
5-180
Section 5.16. Miscellaneous Standards
...............................................................................................
5-182
5.16.1.
Noise Standards
..............................................................................................
5-182
5.16.2.
Air Pollution Standards
...................................................................................
5-183
5.16.3.
Fire and Explosive Hazards Standards
............................................................
5-183
5.16.4.
Electromagnetic Interference Standards
........................................................
5-183
5.16.5.
Traffic Impact Analysis(TIA)
............................................................................
5-184

-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
5.1.1 Purpose and Intent
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1. OFF-STREET PARKING, BICYCLE PARKING, AND LOADING STANDARDS
5.1.1. PURPOSE AND INTENT
The purpose of this section is to ensure provision of off-street vehicular parking, bicycle parking, and loading facilities in proportion to the generalized vehicular parking, bicycle parking, and loading demand of the different zoning districts and different uses allowed by this LDC. The standards in this section are intended to provide for adequate off-street vehicular parking, bicycle parking, and loading while supporting walkable urbanism in appropriate locations, and allowing the flexibility needed to accommodate alternative parking solutions. The standards are also intended to achieve City policies of supporting redevelopment of commercial corridors, accommodating appropriate infill development, and avoiding excessive paved surface areas.
5.1.2. APPLICABILITY
A. New Development
All new development shall provide off-street vehicular parking, bicycle parking, and
loading areas in accordance with the standards of this section.
B. Existing Development
1. Change in Use
Any change in use of existing development shall be accompanied by provision of any additional off-street vehicular parking, bicycle parking, and loading spaces required for the change in use by this section, as approved by the DRC.
2. Expansion
If an existing structure or use is expanded or enlarged (in terms of the number of dwelling units, floor area, number of employees, or seating capacity), any additional off-street vehicular parking bicycle parking, and loading spaces that may be required shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this section for both the existing and expanded or enlarged part of the structure or use.
5.1.3. TIMING OF REVIEW
Review for compliance with these standards shall occur during review of a planned development (2.5.1.F, Planned Development), development plan (major or minor) (Sec. 2.5.2.A, Development Plan (Major and Minor)), or plat (subdivision), (Sec. 2.5.2.B, Plat (Subdivision), or building permit (Code of Ordinances Art.VI, Sec. 6.08.00), whichever occurs first.
5.1.4. PARKING PLAN REQUIRED
All development applications subject to review for compliance with the standards of this section which propose more than ten off-street vehicular parking spaces shall include a
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 1
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
5.1.5 General Standards for Off-Street Vehicular Parking and Loading Areas
parking plan. The parking plan shall accurately designate the number and location of required parking spaces, access aisles, and driveways, and the relation of the vehicular off-street parking facilities and bicycle parking facilities (if applicable) to the development they are designed to serve, including how the parking facilities coordinate with the vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle circulation systems for the development.
5.1.5. GENERAL STANDARDS FOR OFF-STREET VEHICULAR PARKING AND LOADING AREAS
A. Use of Vehicular Parking and Loading Areas
1. General
Off-street vehicular parking areas required by this section shall be used solely for the parking of licensed motorized vehicles in operating condition. Required parking spaces and loading berths may not be used for the display of goods for sale (except that farmers' markets and food trucks permitted under this LDC may be permitted to operate within parking areas), or the sale, lease, storage, dismantling, or service of any vehicles, boats, motor homes, campers, mobile homes, building materials, equipment, or supplies.
2. Parking of Vehicles at Residential Development
Off-street vehicular parking shall not be located within any required front yard of a residential development, except up to two vehicles may be parked on-site of a residential use within an area whose surface is specifically prepared for parking and surfaced with concrete, asphalt, brick, gravel, or other similar materials clearly delineating such parking spaces.
3. Rear-Loading Lots
Lots 50 feet or less in width shall be rear-loading and locate on-site parking and access in the rear of the lot.
4. Parking of Commercial Vehicles in Residential Districts
a. General
Commercial vehicles are prohibited on any public or private property in any
Residential district, except:
1.
Where construction is ongoing for which a valid Building Permit has been issued, and the construction requires the use of the prohibited vehicles.
2.
Persons are performing lawful and authorized work upon the premises where the vehicle is parked, and are using the vehicle for immediate pickup or delivery service.
3.
The vehicle is a standard pickup and paneled truck having a carrying capacity of one ton gross weight, or less.
4.
The vehicle is an emergency service vehicle.
5.
The vehicle is parked entirely inside a garage, or is parked in a carport where no part of the vehicle extends outside the roofline of the carport.
Land Development Code Page 5 2 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
5.1.5 General Standards for Off-Street Vehicular Parking and Loading Areas
6. For one travel trailer or recreational vehicle, if the travel trailer or recreational vehicle is not parked or stored for more than 48 hours on the site, unless it is located behind the front yard building line. (A travel trailer or recreational vehicle shall not be occupied either temporarily or permanently while it is parked, unless it is located in a mobile home or recreational vehicle park.)
b. Commercial vehicles
For the purposes of this subsection, commercial vehicles include:
1.
Trucks or other vehicles having a rated capacity of over three-quarters of a ton, including trucks or other vehicles used or designed for use in transporting or as a temporary or permanent base, platform or support of equipment, machinery or power plant of all types;
2.
Truck tractors having dual rear wheels.
3.
Disabled vehicles on an emergency basis, if they are not parked for more than 24 hours, by which time the vehicle shall be removed by wrecker towing or other means, regardless of the nature of the emergency. (Disabled vehicles or trailers may be stored on a site within a completely enclosed building or carport.)
4.
Trailers or semitrailers having dual rear wheels or such trailers having an overall length of more than 12 feet.
5.
Stake body trucks, buses, and walk-in vans.
6.
Trailers used to transport and store commercial equipment and/or materials, except for utility vehicles (Nothing contained in this subsection shall prohibit the parking of vehicles of public or private utility companies on the public streets for the period of time required in locating, relocating, servicing, testing, or repairing the company’s equipment, nor shall these provisions be construed to prohibit parking of vehicles actually in use in the construction, repair, or maintenance of any road, street or alley, as long as the vehicles do not exceed 10,000 pounds of gross vehicle weight.)
B. Identified as to Purpose and Location
Off-street vehicular parking areas of three or more spaces and all off-street loading areas shall include painted lines, wheel stops, or other methods of identifying individual parking spaces and loading berths and distinguishing such spaces or berths from aisles. Specific dimensional and marking standards are defined in Sec. 5.1.5.F, Markings.
C. Surfacing
1. General
Except as provided for in paragraph 2 and 3 below, all off-street vehicular parking and loading areas shall be surfaced with all-weather hard surface with asphaltic concrete, concrete, brick, stone, pavers, or an equivalent hard, dustless, and bonded surface material. Use of surfacing that includes recycled materials (e.g., glass, rubber, used asphalt, brick, block, and concrete) is encouraged. These surfaces shall be maintained in a smooth, well-graded, clean, orderly, and dust-free condition.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 3
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
5.1.5 General Standards for Off-Street Vehicular Parking and Loading Areas
2. Pervious or Semi-Pervious Surfacing
The use of pervious or semi-pervious parking area surfacing materials—including, but not limited to—pervious asphalt and concrete, open joint pavers, and reinforced grass/gravel/shell grids may be approved for off-street vehicular parking and loading areas, provided such surfacing is subject to an on-going maintenance program (e.g., sweeping, annual vacuuming). Any pervious or semi-pervious surfacing used for aisles within or driveways to parking and loading areas shall be certified as capable of accommodating anticipated traffic loading stresses and maintenance impacts. Figure 5.1.5.C.2: Use of Pervious Materials in an Off-Street Vehicular Parking Area
D. Certain Residential Uses
Off-street parking spaces and driveways for single-family detached, two-family (duplex), and townhouse dwellings may, in-lieu of surfacing in accordance with 5.1.5.C.1, General, or Pervious or Semi-Pervious Surfacing , and 5.1.5.C.2, Pervious or Semi-Pervious Surfacing above:
1. Be covered with pervious material such as crushed stone, gravel, or mulch, if such material is:
a.
Confined to the vehicular parking space and/or driveway with a device expressly designed for such purposes, including but not limited to bricks, railroad ties, and plastic/PVC landscaping boarders; and
b.
Renewed or replaced as reasonably necessary to maintain a neat and orderly appearance; or
2. Include surfacing in two strips (“tire ribbons”) of a material specified in Sec. 5.1.5.C, Surfacing above, designed to provide a driving surface for the wheels of an automobile along the length of the parking space and/or driveway, provided the overall parking space meets the minimum dimensional requirements in this section.
Land Development Code Page 5 4 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
5.1.5 General Standards for Off-Street Vehicular Parking and Loading Areas
E. Location and Arrangement
1. Safe and Convenient Access
a.
Off-street vehicular parking and loading areas shall be arranged for convenient access between an adjacent road or street and all parking spaces and loading berths to facilitate ease of mobility, ample clearance, and safety of vehicles and pedestrians. Each off-street parking space and loading berth shall have adequate, unobstructed means for the ingress and egress of vehicles.
b.
Except for off-street vehicular parking areas serving single-family detached or two-family (duplex) dwellings, off-street parking areas shall be arranged so no parking or maneuvering incidental to parking shall occur on a public road, street, or sidewalk.
c.
Except for off-street vehicular parking areas serving single-family detached, two-family (duplex), and townhouse dwellings, off-street parking areas shall be arranged so an automobile may be parked or un-parked without moving another automobile, unless it is within an automated or mechanical parking deck or garage or part of valet or tandem parking in accordance with Sec. 5.1.8, Off-Street Parking Alternatives .
d.
Off-street vehicular parking areas, aisles, pedestrian walks, landscaping, and open space shall be designed as integral parts of an overall development plan and shall be properly related to existing and proposed buildings.
e.
Buildings, parking and loading areas, landscaping, and open spaces shall be designed so that pedestrians moving from parking areas to buildings and between buildings are not unreasonably exposed to vehicular traffic.
f.
Landscaped, paved, and gradually inclined or flat pedestrian walks shall be provided along the lines of the most intense use, particularly from building entrances to streets, parking areas, and adjacent buildings. Pedestrian walks should be designed to discourage incursions into landscaped areas except at designated crossings.
g.
Each off-street parking space shall open directly onto an aisle or driveway that, except for single-family detached and two-family (duplex) dwellings, is not a public street.
h.
Aisles and driveways shall not be used for parking vehicles, except that the driveway of a single-family detached or two-family (duplex) dwelling shall be counted as a parking space for the dwelling unit.
i.
The design of the off-street vehicular parking area shall be based on a definite and logical system of drive lanes to serve the parking and loading spaces. A physical separation or barrier, such as vertical curbs, may be required to separate parking spaces from travel lanes.
j.
No parking space shall be located so as to block access by emergency vehicles.
k.
A maximum of a two-foot overhang is allowed from a curb or wheel stop onto a non-paved surface for all off-street vehicular parking spaces except parallel spaces. The two-foot overhang areas may not intrude onto pedestrian walkways,
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 5
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
5.1.5 General Standards for Off-Street Vehicular Parking and Loading Areas
landscaped buffers, accessways, rights-of-way, or adjacent property not a part of
the site.
l.
Access ways for internal traffic circulation of parking areas shall be a minimum of 18 feet for one-way traffic and 24 feet for two-way traffic.
m.
Off-street loading areas shall be arranged so no loading berth extends into the required aisle of a vehicular parking area.
n.
An entrance or exit to a vehicular parking area shall not be located within 25 feet of a Residential district.
2. Backing onto Streets Prohibited
Except for parking areas serving single-family detached or attached, or two-family (duplex) dwellings, all off-street vehicular parking and loading areas shall be arranged so that no vehicle is required to back out from such areas directly onto a street.
F. Markings
1.
Except for vehicular parking areas serving single-family detached or two-family (duplex) dwellings, each required off-street parking area and space, and each off-street loading area and berth, shall be identified by surface markings that are arranged to provide for orderly and safe loading, unloading, parking, and storage of vehicles. Such markings—including striping, directional arrows, lettering on signs and in handicapped-designated areas, and labeling of the pavement—shall be maintained so as to be readily visible at all times.
2.
One-way and two-way accesses into required parking facilities shall be identified by directional arrows. Any two-way access located at any angle other than 90 degrees to a street shall be marked with a traffic separation stripe running the length of the access. This requirement does not apply to parking lot drive aisles.
G. Stormwater Management/Drainage
All off-street vehicular parking and loading areas shall comply with Sec. 6.7, Stormwater Management Systems, and shall be properly drained so as to eliminate standing water and prevent damage to adjacent land and public and private roads, streets, and alleys.
H. Exterior Lighting
Lighted off-street vehicular parking and loading areas shall comply with Sec. 5.7, Exterior Lighting, or Lighting Standards.
I. Landscaping, Buffering, and Tree Protection
1.
Off-street vehicular parking areas shall comply with the requirements of Sec. 5.3, Landscape and Buffer Standards, and Sec. 5.4, Tree Protection Standards.
2.
Except for off-street vehicular parking areas serving single-family detached or two-family dwellings (duplex), each parking space shall include a permanently anchored wheel stop, except for tandem parking spaces at the edge of a vehicular parking area, or impervious area. Wheel stops are not required between parking spaces used for tandem parking.
Land Development Code Page 5 6 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
5.1.6 Off-Street Vehicular Parking Space Standards
3.
Wheel stops, when used, shall be made of concrete, metal, rubber, or other material of comparable durability, and shall be at least six feet long and at least six inches high. When used, one wheel stop shall be provided per parking space.
4.
A rail, fence, curb or other continuous barricade sufficient to retain the parked vehicles completely within the parking area shall be provided, except at exit and access driveways.
J. Accessible Parking for Physically Disabled
1.
Development required to provide off-street vehicular parking spaces shall ensure that a portion of the total number of required off-street parking spaces shall be specifically designated, located, and reserved for use by persons with physical disabilities, in accordance with Table 5.1.5.J: Accessible Parking, the standards in Ch. 316, Fla. Stat.; the Florida Accessibility Code for Building Construction adopted pursuant to Sec. 553.503, Fla. Stat.; and the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines.
TABLE 5.1.5.J: ACCESSIBLE PARKING
TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES IN LOT
MINIMUM NUMBER OF ACCESSIBLE SPACES
Up to 25
1
26 to 50
2
51 to 75
3
76 to 100
4
101 to 150
5
151 to 200
6
201 to 300
7
301 to 400
8
401 to 500
9
501 to 1,000
2 percent of total
Over 1,000
20, plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000
2.
Where van parking is provided pursuant to state and federal requirements, for every six parking spaces or fraction thereof required by Table 5.1.5.J: Accessible Parking, at least one shall be a van parking space.
K. Maintained In Good Repair at All Times
All off-street vehicular parking and loading areas shall be maintained in safe condition and good repair at all times so as not to constitute a hazard to public safety or a visual or aesthetic nuisance to surrounding land.
5.1.6. OFF-STREET VEHICULAR PARKING SPACE STANDARDS
A. Minimum Number of Off-Street Vehicular Parking Spaces
Except as otherwise provided for mixed-use developments (see Sec. 5.1.6.C), new development, a change in use, or expansion of development shall provide the minimum number of off-street vehicular parking spaces in accordance with Table 5.1.6.A: Minimum Number of Off-Street Vehicular Parking Spaces, based on the principal use(s) involved and the extent of development. Interpretation of the off-street parking space standards
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 7
-
- -
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
5.1.6 Off-Street Vehicular Parking Space Standards
for principal uses with variable parking demands or unlisted principal uses shall be in accordance with Sec. 5.1.6.B, Unlisted Uses .
TABLE 5.1.6.A: MINIMUM NUMBER OF OFF-STREET VEHICULAR PARKING SPACES
PRINCIPAL USE CATEGORY
PRINCIPAL USE TYPE
MINIMUM NUMBER OF VEHICULAR PARKING SPACES [1] [2]
MU D
MU ES
OTHER BASE ZONING DISTRICTS
Rural and Agricultural Uses
Agriculture/ Forestry Uses
Agricultural production
N/A
N/A
1/1,000 sf of office or sales use
Apiaries
N/A
N/A
No minimum
Community garden
No minimum
No minimum
No minimum
Forestry
N/A
N/A
No minimum
Greenhouse and nursery
N/A
N/A
No minimum
Keeping horses or ponies
N/A
N/A
No minimum
Other agricultural use
N/A
N/A
1/1,000 sf of office or sales use
Agriculture/ Forestry Related Uses
Agriculture research facility
N/A
N/A
No minimum
Agritourism (570, Fla. Stat.)
N/A
N/A
3
Equestrian center
N/A
N/A
No minimum
Farm distribution hub
N/A
N/A
1/1,000 sf
Farm supply sales and farm machinery/impleme nt sales, rental, or repair
N/A
N/A
1/2,500 sf of outdoor display
Farm winery
N/A
N/A
1/1,000 sf
Riding stable
N/A
N/A
1/2 stalls
Rural corporate retreat
N/A
N/A
1/ 4 guest rooms
Open Space Uses
Arboretum or botanical garden
N/A
N/A
No minimum
Cemetery
N/A
2/acre used for grave space
2/acre used for grave space
Park
No minimum
No minimum
No minimum
Residential Uses
Household Living Uses
Dwelling, live-work
1/du
1/du
2/du
Dwelling, mobile home
N/A
N/A
2/du
Dwelling, multifamily
1/studio and 1 bedroom for residents;
1/studio and 1 bedroom for
2/du for residents; 0.1/resident space for
Land Development Code Page 5 8 Apopka, FL
-
- -
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
5.1.6 Off-Street Vehicular Parking Space Standards
TABLE 5.1.6.A: MINIMUM NUMBER OF OFF-STREET VEHICULAR PARKING SPACES
PRINCIPAL USE CATEGORY
PRINCIPAL USE TYPE
MINIMUM NUMBER OF VEHICULAR PARKING SPACES [1] [2]
MU D
MU ES
OTHER BASE ZONING DISTRICTS
1.35 for all other units for residents; 0.1/resident space for visitors
residents; 1.35 for all other units for residents; 0.1/resident space for visitors
visitors
Dwelling, single-family detached
N/A
2/du
2/du
Dwelling, townhome
1.5/du for residents; 0.1/resident space for visitors
1.5/du for residents; 0.1/resident space for visitors
2/du for residents; 0.1/resident space for visitors
Dwelling, two-family (duplex)
N/A
1.5/du for residents; 0.1/resident space for visitors
2/du for residents; 0.1/resident space for visitors
Group Living Uses
Assisted living facility
1/5 beds, and 1/500 sf of office
1/4 beds, and 1/500 sf of office
1/4 beds, and 1/500 sf of office
Adult living facility, extended congregate care
1/5 beds, and 1/500 sf of office
1/4 beds, and 1/500 sf of office
1/4 beds, and 1/500 sf of office
Adult foster home
1/5 beds, and 1/500 sf of office
1/4 beds, and 1/500 sf of office
1/4 beds, and 1/500 sf of office
Boardinghouse or roominghouse
1/guestroom
1/guestroom
1/guestroom
Child foster home
1/bedroom
1/bedroom
1/bedroom
Continuing care retirement community (CCRC)
1/5 residents
1/4 residents
1/4 residents
Emergency shelter or home
2/bedroom and office, plus spaces for emergency vehicles
2/bedroom and office, plus spaces for emergency vehicles
2/bedroom and office, plus spaces for emergency vehicles
Family day care home
1/bedroom
1/bedroom
1/bedroom
Public, Civic, and Institutional Uses
Communication Uses
Broadcasting studio
1/400 sf, plus 1/ 4 seats of audience seating
1/400 sf, plus ¼ seats of audience seating
1/400 sf, plus 1/ 4 seats of audience seating
Newspaper/periodic al publishing establishment
1/300 sf
1/400 sf
1/400 sf
Wireless communication facility
No minimum
No minimum
No minimum
Community Service Uses
Adult day care facility
1/ 4 occupants
1/ 4 occupants
1/3 occupants
Child care facility
1/20 children
1/15 children
1/10 children
Community center facility
1.5/1,000 sf
2/1,000 sf
3/1,000 sf
Cultural facility
1.5/1,000 sf
2/1,000 sf
3/1,000 sf
Emergency services facility
1.25/each employee on a shift
1.25/each employee on a shift
1.25/each employee on a shift
Philanthropic institution
1.5/1,000 sf
2/1,000 sf
3/1,000 sf
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 9
-
- -
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
5.1.6 Off-Street Vehicular Parking Space Standards
TABLE 5.1.6.A: MINIMUM NUMBER OF OFF-STREET VEHICULAR PARKING SPACES
PRINCIPAL USE CATEGORY
PRINCIPAL USE TYPE
MINIMUM NUMBER OF VEHICULAR PARKING SPACES [1] [2]
MU D
MU ES
OTHER BASE ZONING DISTRICTS
Post office
1/2 employees, plus 1/govt. vehicle, plus 4/ service window
1/2 employees, plus 1/govt. vehicle, plus 4/ service window
1/2 employees, plus 1/govt. vehicle, plus 4/ service window
Place of worship
1/3 seats
1/4 seats
1/5 seats
Educational Uses
Boarding school
N/A
1/2 faculty/FTE, plus 1/1,000 sf classroom and research space
1/2 faculty/FTE, plus 1/500 sf classroom and research space
College or university
N/A
1/2 faculty/FTE, plus 1/1,000 sf classroom and research space
1/2 faculty/FTE, plus 1/500 sf classroom and research space
School, elementary, middle, or high
1/8 students (design capacity) under 10th grade; 1/2 students 10th grade and above
1/8 students (design capacity) under 10th grade; 1/2 students 10th grade and above
1/6 students (design capacity) under 10th grade; 1/2 students 10th grade and above
Vocational or trade school
N/A
1/2 students or seats. plus 1/staff member
1/2 students or seats. plus 1/staff member
Health Care Uses
Clinic
1/250 sf
1/250 sf
1/250 sf
Hospital
1/4 beds, plus 1/doctor, plus 1/4 other employees
1/4 beds, plus 1/doctor, plus 1/4 other employees
1/4 beds, plus 1/doctor, plus 1/4 other employees
Laboratory, medical or dental
1/250 sf, plus 1/employee
1/250 sf, plus 1/employee
1/250 sf, plus 1/employee
Medical or dental lab
1/250 sf, plus 1/employee
1/250 sf, plus 1/employee
1/300 sf, plus 1/employee
Nursing care facility
N/A
1/4 beds, plus 1/doctor, plus 1/4 other employees
1/4 beds, plus 1/doctor, plus 1/4 other employees
Transportation Uses
Airport
N/A
N/A
No minimum
Heliport
N/A
N/A
No minimum
Park and ride facility
No minimum
No minimum
No minimum
Parking facility as a principal use
No minimum
No minimum
No minimum
Parking structure
No minimum
No minimum
No minimum
Terminal
1/500 sf office facilities
N/A
1/500 sf office facilities
Utility Uses
Solar energy conversion system (large scale)
N/A
N/A
1/500 sf office facilities
Utility facility, major
1/500 sf office facilities
1/500 sf office facilities
1/500 sf office facilities
Utility facility, minor
No minimum
No minimum
No minimum
Commercial Uses
Adult Uses
Adult book store or video store
1/500 sf
1/500 sf
1/500 sf
Adult entertainment
1/750 sf
1/750 sf
1/750 sf
Animal Care Uses
Animal shelter
N/A
1/500 sf
1/250 sf
Kennel
N/A
1/250 sf
1/250 sf
Land Development Code Page 5 10 Apopka, FL
-
- -
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
5.1.6 Off-Street Vehicular Parking Space Standards
TABLE 5.1.6.A: MINIMUM NUMBER OF OFF-STREET VEHICULAR PARKING SPACES
PRINCIPAL USE CATEGORY
PRINCIPAL USE TYPE
MINIMUM NUMBER OF VEHICULAR PARKING SPACES [1] [2]
MU D
MU ES
OTHER BASE ZONING DISTRICTS
Kennel, hobby
N/A
1/250 sf
1/250 sf
Pet beauty parlor
1/200 sf
1/250 sf
1/250 sf
Veterinary hospital or clinic
2/1,000 sf
2.5/1,000 sf
3/1,000 sf
Business Support Service Uses
Business service center
2/1,000 sf
3/1,000 sf
4/1,000 sf
Conference or training center
2/1,000 sf training or display space, plus 2/1,000 sf office or other admin. space
3/1,000 sf training or display space, plus 2/1,000 sf office or other admin. space
4/1,000 sf training or display space, plus 2/1,000 sf office or other admin. space
Data processing facility
1.5/1,000 sf administrative or office
2/1,000 sf administrative or office
2/1,000 sf administrative or office
Employment or travel agency
2/1,000 sf
3/1,000 sf
4/1,000 sf
Telephone call center
2/1,000 sf
3/1,000 sf
4/1,000 sf
Eating and Drinking Establishment Uses
Alcoholic beverage establishments
8/1,000 sf of seating area
8/1,000 sf of seating area
8/1,000 sf seating area
Brewpub or microbrewery
6/1,000 sf of seating area
8/1,000 sf of seating area
10/1,000 sf seating area
Restaurant
1/ 3 seats
1/ 4 seats
1/ 4 seats
Restaurant, drive-in
1/ 4 fixed seats provided for patron use, plus 1/75 sf of patron floor area not containing fixed seats, provided no use shall have less than 4 spaces
1/ 4 fixed seats provided for patron use, plus 1/75 sf of patron floor area not containing fixed seats, provided no use shall have less than 4 spaces
1/ 4 fixed seats provided for patron use, plus 1/75 sf of patron floor area not containing fixed seats, provided no use shall have less than 4 spaces
Restaurant, fast food
1/ 4 fixed seats provided for patron use, plus 1/75 sf of patron floor area not containing fixed seats, provided no use shall have less than 4 spaces
1/ 4 fixed seats provided for patron use, plus 1/75 sf of patron floor area not containing fixed seats, provided no use shall have less than 4 spaces
1/ 4 fixed seats provided for patron use, plus 1/75 sf of patron floor area not containing fixed seats, provided no use shall have less than 4 spaces
Funeral and Mortuary Services Uses
Crematory
N/A
N/A
No minimum
Funeral home or mortuary
1/175 sf in assembly area
1/175 sf in assembly area
1/150 sf in assembly area
Office Uses
Contractor's office
N/A
3/1,000 sf
1/500 sf
General business
2.5/1,000 sf
3/1,000 sf
3/1,000 sf
Office, professional
2.5/1,000 sf
3/1,000 sf
3/1,000 sf
Personal Services Uses
Art, music, dance, or martial arts studio/school
2.5/1,000 sf
3/1,000 sf
3/1,000 sf
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 11
-
- -
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
5.1.6 Off-Street Vehicular Parking Space Standards
TABLE 5.1.6.A: MINIMUM NUMBER OF OFF-STREET VEHICULAR PARKING SPACES
PRINCIPAL USE CATEGORY
PRINCIPAL USE TYPE
MINIMUM NUMBER OF VEHICULAR PARKING SPACES [1] [2]
MU D
MU ES
OTHER BASE ZONING DISTRICTS
Beauty salon or barbershop
2/1,000 sf
2.5/1,000 sf
2.5/1,000 sf
Confectionary store, ice cream, candy
2/1,000 sf
2.5/1,000 sf
2.5/1,000 sf
Dry cleaning or laundry dropoff/pick-up establishment
1.5/1,000 sf
1.7/1,000 sf
1.7/1,000 sf
Fortune telling establishment
N/A
2.5/1,000 sf
2.5/1,000 sf
Laundry, self-service
2/1,000 sf
2.5/1,000 sf
2.5/1,000 sf
Lawn care, pool, or pest control service
N/A
3/1,000 sf
3/1,000 sf
Massage establishment
2/1,000 sf
2.5/1,000 sf
2.5/1,000 sf
Nail care establishment
2/1,000 sf
2.5/1,000 sf
2.5/1,000 sf
Pawnshop
N/A
3/1,000 sf
3/1,000 sf
Personal or household goods repair establishment
2/1,000 sf
2.5/1,000 sf
2.5/1,000 sf
Tanning salon
2/1,000 sf
2.5/1,000 sf
2.5/1,000 sf
Tattoo or body-piercing establishment
2/1,000 sf
2.5/1,000 sf
2.5/1,000 sf
Taxidermy
2/1,000 sf
2.5/1,000 sf
2.5/1,000 sf
Tobacco shop
2/1,000 sf
2.5/1,000 sf
2.5/1,000 sf
Recreation/ Entertainment Uses
Arena, stadium, or amphitheater
1/3 seats
N/A
1/3 seats
Cinema
1/ 6 seats
1/ 5 seats
1/ 4 seats
Country club
N/A
5/1,000 sf
5/1,000 sf
Golf course
N/A
1 for every 6 seats
1 for every 5 seats
Golf driving range
N/A
5/1,000 sf
5/1,000 sf
Nightclub
5/1,000 sf
7/1,000 sf
10/ 1,000 sf
Performance arts theater
1/ 5 seats
1/ 4 seats
1/ 4 seats
Recreation facility, indoor
3/1,000 sf
4/1,000 sf
6/1,000 sf
Recreation facility, outdoor
N/A
1/ 5 seats
1/ 5 seats
Retail Sales Uses
Alcoholic beverage establishments
1/4 fixed seats, plus 1/75 sf of floor area without fixed seats, provided all uses have at least 4 spaces
1/4 fixed seats, plus 1/75 sf of floor area without fixed seats, provided all uses have at least 4 spaces
1/4 fixed seats, plus 1/75 sf of floor area without fixed seats, provided all uses have at least 4 spaces
Bank or other
1/800
1/600
1/400 sf
Land Development Code Page 5 12 Apopka, FL
-
- -
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
5.1.6 Off-Street Vehicular Parking Space Standards
TABLE 5.1.6.A: MINIMUM NUMBER OF OFF-STREET VEHICULAR PARKING SPACES
PRINCIPAL USE CATEGORY
PRINCIPAL USE TYPE
MINIMUM NUMBER OF VEHICULAR PARKING SPACES [1] [2]
MU D
MU ES
OTHER BASE ZONING DISTRICTS
financial institution
Check cashing business
1/250 sf
1/250 sf
1/250 sf
Consumer goods establishment
1/200 sf
1/200 sf
1/250 sf
Drug store or pharmacy
1/200 sf
1/200 sf
1/250 sf
Farmers' market
1/500 sf of vending area
1/750 sf of vending area
1/1,000 sf of vending area
Flea market
N/A
1/1,000 sf of vending area
1/1,000 sf of vending area
Grocery store and food market
2.5/1,000 sf
3/1,000 sf
3.5/1,000
Vehicle Sales and Services Uses
Automobile service station
1/600 sf
1/300 sf
1/300 sf
Commercial fuel depot
N/A
N/A
1/employee
Commercial vehicle repair and maintenance
N/A
N/A
4/1,000 sf
Commercial vehicle sales and rentals
N/A
N/A
2/1,000 sf
Personal vehicle repair and maintenance
N/A
N/A
4/1,000 sf
Personal vehicle sales and rentals
N/A
N/A
3/1,000 sf
Taxi or limousine service facilities
2/employee
N/A
2/employee
Vehicle equipment supplies sales and rentals
N/A
N/A
4/1,000 sf
Vehicle paint finishing shop
N/A
N/A
4/1,000 sf
Vehicle or trailer storage yard
N/A
N/A
2/1,000 sf
Vehicle towing and wrecker service
N/A
N/A
1/1,000 sf
Visitor Accommodatio ns Uses
Bed and breakfast
N/A
1/bedroom
1/bedroom
Hotel or motel
0.7/ guest room, plus 1/2 employees, plus 1/300 sf of restaurant space or meeting or banquet area
0.7/ guest room, plus 1/2 employees, plus 1/300 sf of restaurant space or meeting or banquet area
1/guest room, plus 1/2 employees, plus 1/200 sf of restaurant space or meeting or banquet area
Water-Related Uses
Boat sales, rental, service, or repair
N/A
N/A
1/ 2,500 sf of outdoor display area
Boat storage yard
N/A
N/A
2/1,000 sf of office or indoor space
Marina
N/A
1/boat slip
1/boat slip
Waterfront fuel sales
N/A
N/A
2/1,000 sf of office or
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 13
-
- -
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
5.1.6 Off-Street Vehicular Parking Space Standards
TABLE 5.1.6.A: MINIMUM NUMBER OF OFF-STREET VEHICULAR PARKING SPACES
PRINCIPAL USE CATEGORY
PRINCIPAL USE TYPE
MINIMUM NUMBER OF VEHICULAR PARKING SPACES [1] [2]
MU D
MU ES
OTHER BASE ZONING DISTRICTS
indoor space
Industrial Uses
Extraction Uses
Surface mining
N/A
N/A
1/ 2 employees
Industrial Service Uses
Building, heating/air conditioning, plumbing, or electrical contractor’s storage
N/A
N/A
2/1,000 sf
Dry cleaning, laundry, or carpet cleaning plant
N/A
N/A
2/1,000 sf
Educational, scientific, or industrial research and development
N/A
N/A
2/1,000 sf
Fuel oil or bottled gas distribution
N/A
N/A
2/1,000 sf
Fuel oil storage
N/A
N/A
2/1,000 sf
General industrial services
N/A
N/A
2/1,000 sf
Heavy equipment sales, rental, repair, servicing, or storage
N/A
N/A
2/1,000 sf
Machine shop
N/A
N/A
2/1,000 sf
Metal-working, welding, plumbing, or gas, steam, or water pipe fitting
N/A
N/A
2/1,000 sf
Repair of scientific or professional instruments
N/A
2/1,000 sf
2/1,000 sf
Manufacturing and Production Uses
Asphalt plant
N/A
N/A
2/1,000 sf
Bakery
N/A
N/A
2/1,000 sf
Brewery or distillery
N/A
1/ 1,000 sf
1/ 1,000 sf
Concrete batching plant
N/A
N/A
2/1,000 sf
Food processing or beverage bottling
N/A
N/A
2/1,000 sf
Manufacturing, assembly, or fabrication, heavy
N/A
2/1,000 sf
2/1,000 sf
Manufacturing, assembly, or fabrication, light
N/A
N/A
2/1,000 sf
Warehouse and Freight Movement Uses
Consolidated storage (self-service storage)
N/A
N/A
1/1,000 sf of rental storage space, plus 2 for resident manager
Moving and storage
N/A
N/A
2/ 1,000 sf of offices
Land Development Code Page 5 14 Apopka, FL
-
- -
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
5.1.6 Off-Street Vehicular Parking Space Standards
TABLE 5.1.6.A: MINIMUM NUMBER OF OFF-STREET VEHICULAR PARKING SPACES
PRINCIPAL USE CATEGORY
PRINCIPAL USE TYPE
MINIMUM NUMBER OF VEHICULAR PARKING SPACES [1] [2]
MU D
MU ES
OTHER BASE ZONING DISTRICTS
facility
Outdoor storage (as a principal use)
N/A
N/A
2/ 1,000 sf of offices
Warehouse distribution
N/A
2/ 1,000 sf of offices
2/ 1,000 sf of offices
Warehouse storage
N/A
1/ 600 sf up to 3,000 sf, then 1/additional 3,000
1/ 600 sf up to 3,000 sf, then 1/additional 3,000 sf
Waste-Related Uses
Composting facility
N/A
N/A
2/1,000 sf offices
Incinerator
N/A
N/A
2/1,000 sf offices
Land clearing debris disposal facility
N/A
N/A
2/1,000 sf offices
Recovered materials processing facility
N/A
N/A
2/1,000 sf offices
Recycling drop-off center
N/A
N/A
3/1,000 sf
Salvage/recycling facility
N/A
N/A
1/1,200 sf
Solid waste transfer station
N/A
N/A
1.5/1,000 sf
Wholesale Uses
Showroom, wholesale
N/A
2/1,000 sf
2/1,000 sf
Other wholesale use
N/A
N/A
1/ 1,000 sf
Notes: [1] “/” is an abbreviation of “for each,” and “sf” is an abbreviation of “square feet of gross floor area.” [2] “N/A” in the "Proposed" column indicates the use is not permitted in the districts.
B. Unlisted Uses
An applicant proposing to develop a principal use that is unlisted in Table 5.1.6.A: Minimum Number of Off-Street Vehicle Parking Spaces, shall propose the amount of required parking by one of the three methods outlined in this subsection. On receiving the application proposing to develop a principal use not expressly listed in Table 5.1.6.A, with the proposed amount of parking, the Director shall:
1. Apply the minimum off-street vehicular parking space requirement specified in Table
5.1.6.A for the listed use that is deemed most similar to the proposed use; or
2.
Establish the minimum off-street parking space requirement by reference to standard parking resources published by the Institute for Transportation Engineers (ITE), Urban Land Institute (ULI), National Parking Association, or the American Planning Association; or
3.
Require the applicant to conduct a parking demand study to demonstrate the appropriate minimum off-street parking space requirement. The study shall estimate parking demand based on the recommendations of the ITE, ULI or another
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 15
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
5.1.7 Dimensional Standards for Vehicular Parking Spaces and Aisles
acceptable source of parking demand data. This demand study shall include relevant data collected from uses or combinations of uses from at least three different sites that are the same or comparable to the proposed use in terms of density, scale, bulk, area, type of activity, and location. The study methodology shall be approved by the Director prior to being conducted.
C. Mixed-Use Development
1.
Unless an alternative parking plan is approved in accordance with Sec. 5.1.6.C.2, below, development containing more than one use shall provide parking spaces in an amount equal to the total of the standards for all individual uses.
2.
An applicant for a development containing more than one use may submit an alternative parking plan (see Sec. 5.1.8, Off-Street Parking Alternatives ) that proposes a reduction in the minimum number of required off-street parking spaces for the development based on a comprehensive analysis of parking demand for each use by time of day, in addition to any other reduction for off-street parking alternatives (see Sec. 5.1.8, Off-Street Parking Alternatives ).
D. Maximum Number of Off-Street Vehicular Parking Spaces
For a multifamily development, mixed-use development, or any use in the Office Uses or Retail Sales and Service Uses category, the maximum number of off-street parking spaces shall not exceed 125 percent of the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for that use in Table 5.1.6.A: Minimum Number of Off-Street Vehicular Parking Spaces, except as may be allowed through approval of an alternative parking plan in accordance with Sec. 5.1.8.B, Provision over Maximum Allowed .
E. Electric Vehicle (EV) Charging Stations
Up to ten percent of the required number of off-street vehicular parking spaces may be used and designated as electric vehicle (EV) charging stations, subject to the standards in this section. The Director shall have authority to approve the use and designation of additional required parking spaces as electric vehicle charging stations, provided that such additional spaces shall count as only one-half of a parking space when computing the minimum number of parking spaces required. Parking spaces used as electric vehicle charging stations shall consist as one or more group(s) of contiguous spaces located where they can be readily identified by electric vehicle drivers (e.g., through signage), but where their use by non-electric vehicles is discouraged.
5.1.7. DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR VEHICULAR PARKING SPACES AND AISLES
A. General
Except as otherwise provided in Sec. 5.1.7.B, Smaller Parking Spaces for Compact Cars, Tandem Parking, and Certain Uses, below or other parts of this subsection, standard vehicle parking spaces and parking aisles shall comply with the minimum dimensional standards established in Table 5.1.7.A: Dimensional Standards for Vehicular Parking Spaces and Aisles, and be located on the site of the development it serves. See Figure
5.1.7.A: Measurement of Parking Space and Aisle Dimension.
Land Development Code Page 5 16 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
5.1.7 Dimensional Standards for Vehicular Parking Spaces and Aisles
TABLE 5.1.7.A: DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR VEHICULAR PARKING SPACES AND AISLES [1][2] [3]
PARKING ANGLE (DEGREES) STALL WIDTH (FT) STALL DEPTH PERPENDICULAR TO CURB (FT) AISLE WIDTH (FT) [2] [3] STALL LENGTH ALONG CURB (FT) DOUBLE ROW + AISLE, CURB TO CURB (FT)
A B C D E F
Residential, Public, Civic, and Institutional, and Commercial Uses Only
(Parallel Parking)
8
8
11
22
27
45
9
18
13
14
49
60
9
20
16
12
56
90
9
18
24
9
60
NOTES: [1] Refer to Figure 5.2.7.A, below, for illustrations showing how dimensions for parking spaces and aisles in various configurations (A-F) are measured. [2] Dimensional standards may be modified by the Director for parking structures to ensure adequate room is provided. [3] Aisles for two-way traffic shall be at least 22 feet wide (for all parking angles). The Director may approve an aisle width less than the minimum upon determining that the aisle is sufficiently wide to allow vehicles to conveniently maneuver through the parking area and access each parking space without driving through any other parking space.
F
igure 5.1.7: Measurement of Parking Space and Aisle Dimensions
B. Smaller Parking Spaces for Compact Cars, Tandem Parking, and Certain Uses
1.
Up to 20 percent of required off-street vehicular parking spaces may be designated for use by compact cars. The dimensions of such designated off-street parking spaces may be reduced to a width of eight feet and a depth/length of 16 feet per vehicle.
2.
The dimensions of off-street vehicular parking spaces may be reduced to a width of eight feet and a depth/length of 18 feet per vehicle where the parking spaces are:
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 17
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
5.1.8 Off-Street Parking Alternatives
a.
Used for tandem parking (see 5.1.8.F, Valet and Tandem Parking); or
b.
Located within a development containing industrial services uses, manufacturing
and production uses, or warehouse and freight movement uses.
3. The dimensions of off-street vehicular parking spaces for single-family detached and attached, and two-family (duplex) dwellings may be reduced to a width of eight feet and a depth/length of 16 feet per vehicle.
C. Vertical Clearance
All off-street vehicular parking spaces shall have a minimum overhead clearance of seven feet for vehicle parking, and 8.2 feet for van-accessible parking.
5.1.8. OFF-STREET PARKING ALTERNATIVES
A. Alternative Parking Plan
The Director is authorized to approve an alternative parking plan that proposes alternatives to providing the off-street vehicular parking spaces required by Table 5.1.6.A: Minimum Number of Off-Street Vehicular Parking Spaces, in accordance with the following standards. The alternative parking plan shall be submitted with a development application for a planned development (2.5.1.F, Planned Development), development plan (major or minor) (Sec. 2.5.2.A, Development Plan (Major and Minor)), or plat (subdivision), (Sec. 2.5.2.B, Plat (Subdivision), or building permit (Code of Ordinances Art.VI, Sec. 6.08.00), whichever occurs first.
B. Provision over Maximum Allowed
1. General
An alternative parking plan prepared specifically for the proposed plan for development may propose to exceed the maximum number of off-street vehicular parking spaces allowed in Sec. 5.1.6.D, Maximum Number of Off-Street Vehicular Parking Spaces .
2. Parking Demand Study
The alternative parking plan shall include a parking demand study demonstrating how the maximum number of parking spaces allowed by Sec. 5.1.6.D, Maximum Number of Off-Street Vehicular Parking Spaces , is insufficient for the proposed development.
C. Shared Parking for Single-Use Development
An applicant for a single-use development may use an alternative parking plan to meet a portion of the minimum number of off-street vehicular parking spaces required in Table
5.1.6.A: Minimum Number of Off-Street Vehicular Parking Spaces, for that use through sharing parking with other existing uses. Such use of shared parking shall be allowed in accordance with the following standards:
1. Adequate Spaces
There are adequate parking spaces for current developments relying on the shared
parking lot.
Land Development Code Page 5 18 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
5.1.8 Off-Street Parking Alternatives
2. Maximum Shared Spaces
Up to 50 percent of the number of parking spaces required for the use may be shared with other uses, provided that parking demands do not overlap.
3. Location
a.
Shared parking spaces shall be located adjacent to the development or on the same block and within 800 feet of the primary pedestrian entrances to the uses served by the parking.
b.
Shared parking spaces shall not be separated from the use they serve by a street.
4. Pedestrian Access
Adequate and safe pedestrian access by a walkway protected by a landscape buffer or a curb separation and elevation from the street grade shall be provided between the shared parking areas and the primary pedestrian entrances to the uses served by the parking.
5. Signage Directing Public to Parking Spaces
Signage shall be provided to direct the public to the shared parking spaces.
6. Justification
The alternative parking plan shall include justification of the feasibility of shared parking among the proposed uses, using methods from ITE, ULI, or another acceptable source. Such justification shall address, at a minimum, the size and type of the uses proposed to share off-street vehicular parking spaces, the composition of their tenants, the types and hours of their operations, the anticipated peak parking and traffic demands they generate, and the anticipated rate of turnover in parking space use.
7. Shared Parking Agreement
a.
An approved shared parking arrangement shall be enforced through written agreement among all the owners or long-term lessees of lands containing the uses proposed to share off-street vehicular parking spaces.
b.
The agreement shall provide all parties the right to joint use of the shared parking area for at least 15 years, and shall ensure that as long as the off-site parking is needed to comply with this section, land containing either the off-site parking area or the served use will not be transferred, except in conjunction with the transfer of land containing the other.
c.
The agreement shall state that no party can cancel the agreement without first sending notice by certified mail to the Director, at least 30 days prior to the termination of the agreement.
d.
The agreement shall be submitted to the Director for review and comment, and then to the City Attorney for review and approval before execution.
e.
An attested copy of an approved and executed agreement shall be recorded in the public records of Orange County before issuance of a Building Permit for any use to be served by the shared parking area.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 19
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
5.1.8 Off-Street Parking Alternatives
f.
The agreement shall be considered a restriction running with the land and shall bind the heirs, successors, and assigns of the landowners. A violation of the agreement shall constitute a violation of this LDC, which may be enforced in accordance with Article 9: Enforcement.
g.
No use served by the shared parking agreement may be continued if the shared parking becomes unavailable to the use, unless substitute off-street vehicular parking spaces are provided in accordance with this section.
D. Off-Site Vehicular Parking
An alternative parking plan may be proposed to meet a portion of the minimum number of off-street vehicular parking spaces required for a use with off-site parking—i.e., off-street vehicular parking spaces located on a parcel or lot separate from the parcel or lot containing the use—in accordance with the following standards.
1. Zoning District Classification
The zoning district classification of the off-site vehicular parking shall be one that allows the use served by off-site parking (and thus off-street parking accessory to such use), or that allows the parking as a principal use.
2. Location
a.
Off-site parking spaces shall be located within a walking distance of the primary pedestrian entrances to the uses served by the parking, in accordance with Table
5.1.8.D.2.a: Allowed Distances for Off-site Vehicular Parking.
TABLE 5.1.8.D.2.A: ALLOWED DISTANCES FOR OFF-SITE VEHICULAR PARKING
PRIMARY USE
MAXIMUM ALLOWED DISTANCE (FEET)[1]
Residential Uses (including mixed-use dwelling)
200
All Other Uses
400
Notes: [1] Distance shall be measured by the actual distance of the pedestrian walkway from the shared parking area to the primary pedestrian entrance(s), not a straight-line, point-to-point distance.
b.
Off-site parking spaces shall not be separated from the use they serve by any street more intensive than a local street unless safe pedestrian access across the street is provided by appropriate traffic controls (e.g., signalized crosswalk), or a grade-separated pedestrian walkway.
3. Space Clearly Marked
Each parking space shall be clearly marked with signage that:
a.
Indicates that the space is reserved exclusively for the use being served, and that the user may cause violators to be towed;
b.
Does not exceed two square feet in sign area; and
c.
Does not include any commercial message.
Land Development Code Page 5 20 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
5.1.8 Off-Street Parking Alternatives
4. Pedestrian Access
Adequate, safe, and well-lit pedestrian access shall be provided between the off-site vehicular parking area and the primary pedestrian entrances to the use served by the off-site parking.
5. Off-Site Parking Agreement
If land containing the off-site vehicular parking area is not under the same ownership as land containing the principal use served, the off-site parking arrangement shall be established in a written agreement between the owners of land containing the off-site vehicular parking area and land containing the served use. The agreement shall comply with the following requirements:
a.
The agreement shall provide the owner of the served use the right to use the off-site vehicular parking area for at least 15 years, and shall specify that the parking spaces are for the exclusive use of the served use, including any customers and employees;
b.
The agreement shall state that no party can cancel the agreement without first sending notice by certified mail to the Director, at least 30 days prior to the termination of the agreement;
c.
The agreement shall be submitted to the Director, for review and comment, and then to the City Attorney, for review and approval before execution;
d.
An attested copy of an approved and executed agreement shall be recorded in the public records of Orange County before issuance of a Building Permit for any use to be served by the off-site vehicular parking area;
e.
The agreement shall be considered a restriction running with the land and shall bind the heirs, successors, and assigns of the landowner(s);
f.
A violation of the agreement shall constitute a violation of this LDC, which may be enforced in accordance with Article 9: Enforcement; and
g.
No use served by the off-site vehicular parking may be continued if the off-site parking becomes unavailable, unless substitute off-street parking spaces are provided in accordance with this section.
E. Deferred Parking
An alternative parking plan may propose to defer construction of up to 25 percent of the number of off-street vehicular parking spaces required by Table 5.1.6.A: Minimum Number of Off-Street Vehicular Parking Spaces, in accordance with the following standards:
1. Justification
The alternative parking plan shall include a study demonstrating that because of the location, nature, or mix of uses, there is a reasonable probability the number of vehicular parking spaces actually needed to serve the development is less than the minimum required by Table 5.1.6.A: Minimum Number of Off-Street Vehicular Parking Spaces.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 21
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
5.1.8 Off-Street Parking Alternatives
2. Reserve Parking Plan
The alternative parking plan shall include a reserve parking plan identifying: (a) the amount of off-street vehicular parking being deferred, and (b) the location of the area to be reserved for future parking, if future parking is needed.
3. Parking Demand Study
a.
The alternative parking plan shall provide assurance that within 24 months after the initial Certificate of Occupancy is issued for the proposed development, an off-street parking demand study evaluating the adequacy of the existing parking spaces in meeting the off-street vehicular parking demand generated by the development will be submitted to the Director.
b.
If the Director determines that the study demonstrates the existing vehicular parking is adequate, then construction of the remaining number of vehicular parking spaces shall not be required. If the Director determines the study indicates additional parking is needed, such parking shall be provided consistent with the reserve parking plan and the standards of this section.
4. Limitations on Reserve Areas
Areas reserved for future vehicular parking shall not be used for buildings, storage, loading, or other purposes. Such area may be used for temporary overflow parking, provided such use is sufficiently infrequent to ensure maintenance of its ground cover in a healthy condition.
5. Landscaping of Reserve Areas Required
Areas reserved for future off-street vehicular parking shall be landscaped with an appropriate ground cover, and if ultimately developed for off-street parking, shall be landscaped in accordance with Sec. 5.2.5.B, Off-Street Vehicular Parking Area Planting.
F. Valet and Tandem Parking
An alternative parking plan may propose to use valet and tandem parking to meet a portion of the minimum number of off-street vehicular parking spaces required for commercial uses in accordance with the following standards:
1. Number of Valet or Tandem Spaces
No more than 35 percent of the total number of vehicular parking spaces provided shall be designated for valet or tandem spaces except for restaurants, where up to 50 percent of spaces may be designated for valet parking, and hotels, where up to 60 percent of parking spaces may be designated for valet parking.
2. Drop-Off and Pick-Up Areas
The development shall provide a designated drop-off and pick-up area. The drop-off and pick-up area may be located adjacent to the building(s) served, but may not be located in a fire lane or where its use would impede vehicular and/or pedestrian circulation, cause queuing in a public street, or impede an internal drive aisle serving the development. Drop-off and pick-up areas shall not be allowed to use sidewalks for any stationing of vehicles.
Land Development Code Page 5 22 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
5.1.9 Reduced Parking Standards for Parking Demand Reduction Strategies
3. Valet or Tandem Parking Agreement
a.
Valet or tandem parking may be established and managed only in accordance with a valet or tandem parking agreement. The agreement shall be for a minimum of 10 years, and include provisions ensuring that a valet parking attendant will be on duty during hours of operation of the uses served by the valet parking.
b.
The agreement shall be submitted to the Director for review and comment, and then to the City Attorney for review and approval before execution.
c.
An attested copy of an approved and executed agreement shall be recorded in the public records of Orange County before issuance of a Building Permit for any use to be served by the valet or tandem parking.
d.
The agreement shall be considered a restriction running with the land and shall bind the heirs, successors, and assigns of the landowner(s). A violation of the agreement shall constitute a violation of this LDC, which may be enforced in accordance with Article 9: Enforcement.
e.
No use served by valet or tandem parking may be continued if the valet or tandem service becomes unavailable, unless substitute off-street vehicular parking spaces are provided in accordance with this section.
G. Property on Local Register of Historic Places or in a Historic District
An alternative parking plan may be proposed for any property placed on the local register of historic places, or that is located in an historic district that contributes to the historic character of the district, if the applicant demonstrates that the reduction or exemption of off-street vehicular parking is necessary to allow for a viable use of the historic structure and the reduction or exemption will not create a severe parking shortage or severe traffic congestion.
5.1.9. REDUCED PARKING STANDARDS FOR PARKING DEMAND REDUCTION STRATEGIES
Use of alternative transportation and transportation demand reduction strategies allows development to reduce the amount of vehicular parking provided below the requirements of Table 5.1.6.A: Minimum Number of Off-Street Vehicular Parking Spaces. All reductions shall be taken as cumulative and not exclusive.
A. Transportation Demand Management
The Director may, through approval of a Transportation Demand Management (TDM) plan, authorize up to a 30 percent reduction in the minimum number of off-street vehicular parking spaces required by Table5.1.6.A: Minimum Number of Off-Street Vehicular Parking Spaces, for nonresidential or mixed-use developments having a floor area of at least 25,000 square feet, in accordance with the following standards.
1. TDM Plan
The TDM plan shall include facts, projections, an analysis (e.g., type of development, proximity to transit and/or other multi-modal systems, anticipated number of employees and/or patrons, minimum parking requirements) and indicate the types of transportation demand management activities that will be instituted to reduce
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 23
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
5.1.9 Reduced Parking Standards for Parking Demand Reduction Strategies
single-occupant vehicle use and reduce traffic congestion. The plan shall identify the amount by which parking requirements have been reduced from the amounts otherwise required by this section.
2. Transportation Demand Management Activities
The TDM plan shall be required to provide the following transportation demand management activities:
a.
A Guaranteed Ride Home program that offers emergency ride services to each employee with an allowance of no fewer than four rides per year, which an applicant may establish to serve the development or in partnership with other developments or uses.
b.
Written disclosure of transportation information and educational materials to all employees, that makes transportation and ride-sharing information available to employees. (This may be met by Human Resources Officers or other administrators of an organization.)
c.
Formation of transportation demand reduction programs such as carpooling, vanpooling, ridesharing, subsidy of employee bus passes, teleworking, and shuttle service programs.
3. Two Transportation Demand Management Options Required
The plan will also require two of the following transportation demand management strategies.
a.
Establishment of a development-specific website that provides multi-modal transportation information such as real-time travel/traffic information, bus schedules and maps, and logging of alternative commutes (e.g., bicycle, pedestrian, carpool, and vanpool). Specific information will vary depending on the specific services and transportation infrastructure available in the vicinity of the development, but in general will allow tenants or customers to compare travel modes available.
b.
In-lieu of the website described in 1 above, installation of a real-time visual display screen or other display device of this type that provides multi-modal transportation information.
c.
A parking cash-out or transportation stipend, or provision of a cash incentive to employees not to use vehicular parking spaces otherwise available to tenants of a development.
d.
Unbundling of vehicular parking spaces from leases, or issuing tenant leases that do not include parking as an integral part of a floor-area space lease and require parking to be leased, purchased, or otherwise accessed through separate payment.
e.
Creation of a Preferential Parking Management Plan that specifically marks spaces for registered carpool and/or vanpool vehicles that are located near building entrances or in other preferential locations.
Land Development Code Page 5 24 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
5.1.9 Reduced Parking Standards for Parking Demand Reduction Strategies
f.
Institution of off-peak work schedules that allow employees to arrive and depart at times other than the peak morning commute period (defined as 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.) and peak evening commute period (defined as 5:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m.).
g.
Any other transportation demand management activity as may be approved by the Director as a means of complying with the parking reduction provisions of this subsection.
4. Recording of TDM Plan
A copy of the approved TDM plan shall be recorded in the public records of Orange County before issuance of a Building Permit for the development to be served by the plan. The TDM plan shall be recorded against the land, and the applicant and/or successors in interest in the land shall be responsible for implementing the plan in perpetuity.
5. TDM Program Coordinator
a.
The applicant shall appoint a TDM program coordinator to oversee transportation demand management activities.
b.
The TDM program coordinator shall be a licensed engineer, certified planner, or a traffic consultant that is also a qualified or trained TDM professional.
c.
The TDM program coordinator shall be appointed prior to issuance of a Building Permit for the buildings to be served by the transportation demand management program.
6. TDM Report
The TDM program coordinator shall submit to the Director a report on a biennial basis that details implementation of the approved TDM plan and the extent to which it has achieved the target reduction in drive-alone trips that justified the original reduction in parking. The report shall include, but is not limited to, the following:
a.
A description of transportation demand management activities undertaken;
b.
An analysis of vehicular parking demand reductions based on employee and/or resident use of ridership programs or alternative transportation options;
c.
Changes to the TDM plan to increase bus ridership, bicycle ridership, and other commuting alternatives, as defined in g below; and
d.
The results of an employee transportation survey.
7. Amendments
The Director may approve amendments to an approved TDM plan in accordance with the procedures and standards for its original approval. Changes in transportation options subsequent to the approval of the original plan that allow a development to meet the reduction targets identified in the original plan, such as introduction of new transit service to a development area, shall not require amendments to the plan as long as annual reports can demonstrate that these services are contributing to the plan’s intent.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 25
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
5.1.10 Vehicle Stacking Spaces and Lanes
8. Parking Required if TDM Terminated
If the applicant or successors in interest in the development subject to a TDM plan stop implementing the plan or fail to submit a TDM report within one year of the regularly scheduled date the biennial report is due, the TDM plan shall be terminated and become null and void. Any such termination of the TDM plan does not negate the parties’ obligations to comply with parking requirements of this section and this LDC, and thus shall constitute a violation of this LDC. No use served by the TDM plan may be continued unless another TDM plan is approved or all required off-street vehicular parking spaces are provided in accordance with this section, within 120 days of termination of the TDM plan.
B. Special Facilities for Bicycle Commuters
The Director may authorize up to a five percent reduction in the minimum number of off-street vehicular parking spaces required by Table 5.1.6.A: Minimum Number of Off-Street Vehicular Parking Spaces, for developments that comply with the bicycle parking standards in Sec. 5.1.11, Bicycle Parking Standards , Bicycle Parking Standards, and provide both of the following:
1.
Additional enclosed (indoor or locker) and secure bicycle parking spaces equal to at least five percent of the number of vehicle parking spaces provided; and
2.
Shower and dressing areas for employees.
C. Other Eligible Alternatives
The Director may authorize up to a 10 percent reduction in the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required by Table 5.1.6.A: Minimum Number of Off-Street Vehicular Parking Spaces, if an applicant submits an alternative parking plan that demonstrates the applicant will effectively reduce parking demand on the site of the subject development, provided the applicant also demonstrates that the proposed plan of development will do at least as good a job in protecting surrounding neighborhoods, maintaining traffic-circulation patterns, and promoting quality urban design as would strict compliance with the otherwise applicable off-street vehicular parking standards.
5.1.10. VEHICLE STACKING SPACES AND LANES
A. Drive-Through and Similar Facilities
1. Required Number of Stacking Spaces
In addition to meeting the off-street vehicular parking standards in Table 5.1.6.A: Minimum Number of Off-Street Vehicular Parking Spaces, uses with drive-through facilities and other auto-oriented uses where vehicles queue up to access a service facility shall provide at least the minimum number of stacking spaces established in Table 5.1.10.A.1: Minimum Stacking Spaces for Drive-Through and Similar Facilities.
Land Development Code Page 5 26 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
5.1.10 Vehicle Stacking Spaces and Lanes
TABLE 5.1.10.A.1: MINIMUM STACKING SPACES FOR DRIVE-THROUGH AND SIMILAR FACILITIES
USE OR ACTIVITY [1]
MINIMUM NUMBER OF STACKING SPACES
MEASURED FROM
Assisted living facility and Adult living facility, extended congregate care
3 spaces
Primary location for pick-up/drop-off
Automobile service station
1
Each end of the outermost gas pump island
Bank or financial Institution, with drive-through facility or with automated teller machine (ATM) as an accessory use
4 per lane
Teller window or teller machine
Consumer goods establishment, with drive-through facility
4 per lane
Agent window
Continuing care retirement community
3 spaces
Primary location for pick-up/drop-off
Elementary, middle, or high school Vocational or trade school
6 spaces
Primary Building entrance, if this is the primary location for student pick-up/drop-off
8 spaces
Designated student waiting area, if this is the primary location for student pick-up/drop-off
Gated driveway (for any principal use)
3
Gate
Personal Vehicle Repair and Maintenance, specifically with car wash and auto detailing, automatic
4 per bay
Bay entrance
Personal Vehicle Repair and Maintenance, specifically with car wash and auto detailing, self-service
2 per bay
Bay entrance
Personal Vehicle Repair and Maintenance, specifically with oil change/lubrication shop
3 per bay
Bay entrance
Recycling center
3 per bay
Bay entrance
Restaurant, fast food restaurant, drive-in, or restaurant with drive-through facility[2]
4
Order box
Other
Uses not specifically listed are determined by the Director based on standards for comparable uses, or alternatively based on a parking demand study
NOTES: [1] See Article 4: Use Regulations. [2] Restaurants with drive-through facilities shall provide at least four additional stacking spaces between the order box and the pick-up window.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 27
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
5.1.11 Bicycle Parking Standards
2. Stacking Space Standards
Required stacking spaces shall:
a.
Be a minimum of 10 feet wide and 20 feet long;
b.
Be contiguous;
c.
Not impede onsite or offsite vehicular traffic movements or movements into or out of off-street parking spaces;
d.
Not impede onsite or offsite bicycle or pedestrian traffic movements; and
e.
Be separated from access aisles and other vehicular surface areas by raised medians, if necessary for traffic movement and safety.
f.
Where turns are required at the exit lanes, the minimum distance from any drive-up station to the beginning point of the curve shall be 34 feet. The minimum inside turning radius shall be 25 feet.
5.1.11. BICYCLE PARKING STANDARDS
A. Minimum Bicycle Parking Required
In the MU-D and MU-ES districts, the following shall include short-term and long-term bicycle parking spaces in accordance with Table 5.1.11.A: Bicycle Parking Standards in the MU-D and MU-ES Districts:
1.
All new development; and
2.
Any individual expansion or alteration of a building existing prior to March 6, 2019 if the expansion increases the building’s gross floor area by 50 percent or more, or the alteration involves 50 percent or more of the building’s gross floor area (including interior alterations), provided no long-term bicycle parking is required if the building has a gross floor area of less than 2,500 square feet after the expansion or alteration.
Land Development Code Page 5 28 Apopka, FL
-
- -
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
5.1.11 Bicycle Parking Standards TABLE 5.1.11.C.2: BICYCLE PARKING STANDARDS IN THE MU-D AND MU-ES DISTRICTS PRINCIPAL USE TYPE REQUIRED BICYCLE PARKING SPACES [4] SHORT TERM [1] [2] LONG TERM [2] Agricultural and Forestry Uses Use type in the Agricultural and Forestry Uses use classification No minimum No minimum Residential Uses Dwelling, Multifamily 1 for every 20 dwelling units 1 for every 4 dwelling units Use type in the Residential Uses classification not elsewhere listed No minimum No minimum Public, Civic, and Institutional Uses Place of worship 1 for every 1,500 gsf of assembly area 1 for every 15 employees Use type in the Community Service Uses category not elsewhere listed 1 for every 2,000 gsf 1 for every 6,000 gsf Educational Uses category 1 for every 10 students of planned capacity 1 for every 10 employees plus 1 for every 20 students of planned capacity Hospital 1 for every 10,000 gsf 1 for every 20,000 gsf Use type in the Health Care Uses category not listed elsewhere 1 for every 2,000 gsf 1 for every 10,000 gsf Airport No minimum No minimum Park and ride facility 1 for every 50 required automobile parking spaces 1 for every 10 required automobile parking spaces Parking facility (as a principal use) 1 for every 10 automobile parking spaces 1 for every 20 automobile parking spaces, with a minimum of 4 and a maximum of 40 required spaces Parking structure (as a principal use) 2 1 for every 20 automobile parking spaces, with a minimum of 6 and a maximum of 40 Terminal 1 for every 50 projected a.m. peak period daily riders 1 for every 10 projected a.m. peak period daily riders Utility facility, minor No minimum No minimum Use type in the Public, Civic, and Institutional Uses classification not elsewhere listed 1 for every 10,000 gsf 1 for every 20,000 gsf Commercial Uses Use type in the Animal Care Uses category 2 2 Use type in the Business Support Uses category 1 for every 2,000 gsf 1 for every 10,000 gsf Use type in the Eating or Drinking Establishment Uses category 1 for every 2,000 gsf 1 for every 10,000 gsf Amusement park 8 for every acre 2 for every per acre Arena, stadium, or amphitheater 1 for every 40 seats plus 1 for every 3,000 gsf of non-seated assembly area 1 for every 10,000 gsf Performing arts theater 1 for every 40 seats 1 for every 10,000 gsf Recreation/Entertainment Uses, not elsewhere listed 1 for every 40 seats plus 1 for every 3,000 gsf of non-seated area 1 for every 10,000 gsf Use type in the Retail Sales Uses category 1 for every 2,000 gsf 1 for every 10,000 gsf Use type in the Vehicle Sales and Services Uses category 2 1 for every 10,000 gsf Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 29
-
- -
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
5.1.11 Bicycle Parking Standards TABLE 5.1.11.C.2: BICYCLE PARKING STANDARDS IN THE MU-D AND MU-ES DISTRICTS PRINCIPAL USE TYPE REQUIRED BICYCLE PARKING SPACES [4] SHORT TERM [1] [2] LONG TERM [2] Use type in the Visitor Accommodations Uses category 2 1 for every 20 lodging units Use type in the Commercial Uses classification not elsewhere listed 1 for every 5,000 gsf 1 for every 10,000 gsf Industrial Uses Use type in the Extraction Uses category No minimum No minimum Use type in the Industrial Services Manufacturing Uses category No minimum 1 per 40,000 gsf Use type in Industrial Uses classification not elsewhere listed No minimum No minimum Notes: [1] Unless otherwise specified, a minimum of two short-term bicycle parking spaces are required [2] The required number of spaces shall be based on any portion of the base number rounded up (for example, a multi-family development with 17 units would have to provide 5 long-term parking spaces). [3] “No minimum” indicates that no bicycle parking spaces are required. [4] Spaces listed are the minimum number of spaces unless otherwise specified.
B. Reduction Based on Alternative Bicycle Parking Plan
The Director may authorize up to a 25 percent reduction in the minimum number of bicycle parking spaces required by Table 5.1.11.C.2: Bicycle Parking Standards in the MUD and MU-ES Districts, if the applicant submits an alternative bicycle parking plan that:
1.
Demonstrates the demand and need for bicycle parking on the site is less than required by this subsection because of the site’s location, the site design, proximity to transit, or other factors; or
2.
Offers a strategy that demonstrates other non-auto and non-bicycle travel modes will be used by occupants and users of the development that reduces the demand for bicycle parking spaces.
C. Bicycle Parking Space Standards
1.
A bicycle parking space shall be located on a paved or similar hard, all-weather surface, having a slope not greater than three percent.
2.
Lighting shall be provided for bicycle parking spaces that are accessible to the public or bicyclists after dark.
3.
Bicycle parking is encouraged to be visible from the main entrance of the building it serves; however, directional signage shall be provided where a bicycle parking space is not visible from a main entrance to the building for which the bicycle parking space is required.
4.
The minimum dimensional requirements for a bicycle parking space are:
Land Development Code Page 5 30 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
5.1.11 Bicycle Parking Standards
a.
Six feet long by two feet wide (see Figure 5.1.11.C.4.b-1: Example of Bicycle Parking Space and Parking Rack Dimensional Standards); or
b.
If designed for vertical storage, four feet long by two feet wide by eight feet high (see Figure 5.1.11.C.4.b-2: Example of Vertical Bicycle Parking Dimensional Standards). Figure 5.1.11.C.4.b-1: Example of Bicycle Parking Space and Parking Rack Dimensions Figure 5.1.11.C.4.b-2: Example of Vertical Parking Dimensional Standards Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 31
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
5.1.11 Bicycle Parking Standards
5.
A bicycle parking space shall be accessible without moving another parked bicycle.
6.
Not more than 25 percent of required short-term bicycle parking spaces and 25 percent of required long-term bicycle parking spaces may be vertical or wall-mounted parking.
7.
A bicycle parking rack shall:
a.
Allow for the securing of the frame and at least one wheel of a bicycle in a bicycle parking space to the rack with an industry-standard U-shaped bike lock;
b.
Provide each bicycle parking space with support for a bicycle in a stable position with direct support to the bicycle frame;
c.
Be securely anchored to the ground or to a structural element of a building or structure;
d.
Be designed and located so it does not block pedestrian circulation systems and pedestrian movements;
e.
Be constructed of materials designed to withstand cutting, severe weather, and permanent exposure to the elements, such as powder-coated steel or stainless steel;
f.
If bicycles must be moved onto or off of the rack parallel to their direction of travel, provide an aisle having a minimum width of five feet between all bicycle parking spaces served by the rack and any bicycle spaces served by another bicycle parking rack, vehicular surface areas, or obstructions, including but not limited to fences, walls, doors, posts, columns, or landscaping areas (see Figure 5.1.11.C.4.b-1: Example of Bicycle Parking Space and Parking Rack Dimensional Standards, and Figure 5.1.11.C.4.b-2: Example of Vertical Bicycle Parking Dimensional Standards);
g.
Be located at least three feet from any vertical surface, such as another bicycle parking rack, the side of a building, a tree, or a fence or wall (see Figure 5.1.11.C.4.b-1: Example of Bicycle Parking Space and Parking Rack Dimensional Standards); and
h.
Be separated from any abutting vehicular surface area by at least three feet and a physical barrier, such as bollards, curbing, wheel stops, reflective wands, or a fence or wall.
8.
Bicycle parking areas shall be maintained free of inoperable bicycles (such as bicycles with flat tires or missing parts) and debris. Bicycle parking racks shall be maintained in good repair, securely anchored, and free of rust.
D. Short-Term Bicycle Parking Standards
A short-term bicycle parking space shall:
1.
Include independent access to a bicycle parking rack for supporting and securing a bicycle;
2.
Be located within 75 feet of a public entrance to the building for which the space is required, measured along the most direct pedestrian access route, provided, a short-term bicycle parking space located in a bicycle parking area serving more than one
Land Development Code Page 5 32 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
5.1.12 Loading Area Standards
use shall be located within 150 feet of a public entrance to the building for which the space is required, measured along the most direct pedestrian access route; and
3. Be located to ensure significant visibility by the public and users of the building for which the space is required.
E. Long-Term Bicycle Parking Standards
A long-term bicycle parking space shall:
1. Include one of the following features:
a.
A bicycle locker or similar structure manufactured for the sole purpose of securing and protecting a standard size bicycle from rain, theft, and tampering by fully securing the bicycle in a temporary enclosure; or
b.
A secured and dedicated bicycle parking area provided either inside the principal building on the lot, within a parking structure, or in a structure located elsewhere on the lot. The secured and dedicated bicycle parking area shall be designed to protect each bicycle from weather, theft, and vandalism and shall have a minimum of eight feet of clearance above the floor or ground.
2. Be located within 500 feet of a public entrance to the building for which the space is required, measured along the most direct pedestrian access route, provided, a longterm bicycle parking space located in a bicycle parking area serving more than one use shall be located within 750 feet of a public entrance to the building for which the space is required, measured along the most direct pedestrian access route.
5.1.12. LOADING AREA STANDARDS
A. Minimum Number of Off-Street Loading Berths
Any new development involving the routine vehicular delivery or shipping of goods, supplies, or equipment to or from the development shall provide a sufficient number of off-street loading berths to accommodate the delivery and shipping operations of the development’s uses in a safe and convenient manner. Table 5.1.12.A: Minimum Number of Off-Street Loading Berths, sets forth the minimum number of loading berths for the different principal uses. For proposed uses not listed in Table 5.1.12.A, the requirement for a use most similar to the proposed use shall apply. The off-street loading birth berth shall be arranged so that vehicles shall maneuver for loading and unloading entirely within the property lines of the site.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 33
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
5.1.12 Loading Area Standards
TABLE 5.1.12.A: MINIMUM NUMBER OF OFF-STREET LOADING BERTHS
PRINCIPAL USE CLASSIFICATION/CATEGORY
GROSS FLOOR AREA (GFA)
MINIMUM NUMBER OF LOADING BERTHS
Commercial, Public and Institutional, and Certain Residential Uses
Household Living Uses (Multifamily only) and Group Living Uses (Residential Care Facility only)
At least 100 dwelling units and up to 300 dwelling units
1
Each additional 200 dwelling units or major fraction thereof
add 1
Health Care Uses, Commercial Services Uses, Office Uses, Personal Service Uses, and Visitor Accommodations Uses (Hotel or Motel only)
At least 25,000 sq. ft. and up to 75,000 sq. ft.
1
Each additional 100,000 SF or major fraction thereof
add 1
Commercial Uses not elsewhere listed
At least 2,000 sq. ft. but less than 10,000 sq. ft.
1
Each additional 20,000 sq. ft.
add 1
Industrial Uses
All Industrial Uses
At least 2,000 sq. ft. but less than 10,000 sq. ft.
1
Each additional 10,000 sq. ft.
add 1
B. Dimensional Standards for Loading Areas
1.
Each loading berth shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the types of vehicles likely to use the loading area. The minimum loading berth size that presumptively satisfies loading berth needs is least 15 feet wide and 45 feet long in industrial uses. For all other uses, a berth as short as 25 feet may be allowed. The length of a loading area should be increased up to 55 feet if full-length tractor trailers must be accommodated. The Director may require a larger loading berth or allow a smaller loading berth on determining that the characteristics of the particular development warrant such increase or reduction and the general standard is met.
2.
Each loading berth shall have at least 15 feet of overhead clearance.
C. Location of Loading Areas
1.
To the maximum extent practicable, loading areas should be located to the rear of the use they serve (see Figure 5.1.12.B.2: Loading Area Configuration).
2.
To the maximum extent practicable, loading areas should be located adjacent to the building’s loading doors.
Land Development Code Page 5 34 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards
5.1.12 Loading Area Standards
3. Loading areas shall be located and designed so vehicles using them can maneuver safely and conveniently to them from a public street and complete loading without obstructing or interfering with any public right-of-way or any parking space or parking lot aisle. Figure 5.1.12.B.2: Loading Area Configuration Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 35
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards
5.2.1 Purpose
Section 5.2. LANDSCAPING AND BUFFER STANDARDS
5.2.1. PURPOSE
The purpose of this section is to provide for the planting and maintenance of shrubs, trees, undercover, and other plants by:
A. Ensuring the planting, maintenance, and survival of trees, shrubs, and other plants in appropriate locations;
B. Mitigating against erosion and sedimentation;
C. Reducing storm water runoff;
D. Preserving and protecting the water table and surface waters;
E. Improving air quality;
F. Increasing tree canopy to provide shade and moderate the effect of heat;
G. Reducing visual pollution from the built environment, and mitigating between incompatible land uses;
H. Providing visual screening, where appropriate;
I. Restoring land denuded as a result of construction and clearing;
J. Protecting and enhancing property values; and
K. Improving the visual quality of the City.
5.2.2. APPLICABILITY
A. Unless exempted in accordance with B, below, or expressly stated to the contrary in this section, the standards in this section apply to:
1.
All new development;
2.
Any individual expansion or alteration of a building existing prior to March 6, 2019 if the expansion increases the building's floor area by 50 percent or more, or the alteration involves 50 percent or more of the building's floor area (including interior alterations); and
3.
Any change in use.
B. The following types of development are exempt from the requirements of Sec. 5.2.4, Landscape Plan; Sec. 5.2.5, Landscaping and Buffer Standards; and Sec. 5.2.6, Alternative Landscape Plan:
1.
Single-family detached dwellings; and
2.
Two-family (duplex) dwellings;
Land Development Code Page 5 36 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards
5.2.3 Timing of Review
C. Development exempted in accordance with subsection B shall be required to plant three canopy trees on the lot, except that two canopy trees may be planted on lots less than 55 feet wide (two understory trees may be substituted for one canopy tree.)
D. No Certificate of Occupancy for development subject to the requirements of this section shall be issued until the applicant has installed landscaping in accordance with the landscaping plan approved in accordance with the requirements of this section.
5.2.3. TIMING OF REVIEW
Review for compliance with the standards of this section shall occur during review of a development application for a planned development (2.5.1.F, Planned Development), special exception (Sec.2.5.1.G, Special Exception Permit), development plan (major or minor) (Sec. 2.5.2.A, Development Plan (Major and Minor)), plat (subdivision), (Sec. 2.5.2.B, Plat (Subdivision), or building permit (Code of Ordinances Art.VI, Sec. 6.08.00), as appropriate.
5.2.4. LANDSCAPE PLAN
A landscape plan demonstrating how landscaping will be planted on a development site to comply with the standards of this section, signed and sealed by a landscape architect licensed to practice in the State of Florida, shall be included with the development application where compliance with this section is reviewed in accordance with Sec. 5.2.3, Timing of Review.
5.2.5. LANDSCAPING AND BUFFER STANDARDS
A. Foundation Planting
1. Applicability
The standards in Sec. 5.2.5.A.1.a, Foundation Planting Standards, apply to all multifamily, commercial, and industrial development (except in the I-H district), and all development approved as a special exception (see Sec2.5.1.G, Special Exception Permit).
a. Foundation Planting Standards
1. Except for a building built to the lot line, all buildings facing rights-of-way shall contain a foundation landscaping area adjacent to the building that is a minimum of four feet in width and extends the entire length of the building facade. The foundation landscaping area shall contain:
(a)
Shrubs a minimum of 24 inches in height, planted a minimum of 30 inches on-center, depending on variety and approved by the DRC; and
(b)
A minimum of one small decorative or ornamental tree that is at least 15 gallons for every 20 feet of length.
2.
Foundation landscaping adjacent to pedestrian walkways shall be protected by a barrier, such as curbing.
3.
All landscape planting materials shall be Florida No. One Grade or better.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 37
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards
5.2.5 Landscaping and Buffer Standards
4. In addition, multifamily and nonresidential development shall plant one canopy shade tree and ten shrubs (minimum height 36 inches) per 35 lineal feet, or fraction thereof, of property perimeter both abutting and not abutting a street or parking area.
B. Off-Street Vehicular Parking Area Planting
1. Applicability
All off-street vehicular parking areas shall include landscaping both within the interior of the vehicular parking area and around its perimeter.
2. Interior Vehicular Parking Area Landscaping
Except for a parking structure, an off-street vehicular area shall include interior planting areas that comply with the standards of this subsection.
a. Size and Configuration
1. General Parking Lot Standards
(a) Parking Islands
A parking island shall be provided for every ten parking spaces in a row. The parking island shall be a minimum width of ten feet, measured from the back of all required curbing, and a minimum length of the parking space. Parking islands shall be distributed so that rows of parking between any two landscaped islands contain an average of ten or fewer contiguous spaces. Terminal parking islands shall be required at the ends of rows. (see Figure 5.2.5.B.2.i: Interior Parking Area Minimum Plantings)
(b)
Building-and Sidewalk-Adjacent Parking
i. Where parking spaces are adjacent to a building, there shall be foundation landscaping between the parking spaces and the building.
ii. Parking spaces that are adjacent to a building shall include a wheel stop for each space.
iii. Parking spaces that are adjacent to an internal sidewalk shall include a wheel stop for each space that ensures a minimum four foot wide sidewalk is maintained.
(c)
Minimum Plantings
i. A minimum of one canopy shade tree, plus an additional one canopy shade tree for every ten spaces or any portion thereof, shall be required for an off-street vehicular parking area.
ii. Interior landscaping shall account for a minimum of ten percent of an off-street vehicular parking area.
iii. Interior landscaping should consist of a mix of vegetation including, but not limited to, trees, shrubs and ground cover.
iv. Tree clumping within interior islands is encouraged.
Land Development Code Page 5 38 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards
5.2.5 Landscaping and Buffer Standards
v. Sufficient shade trees shall be planted so that 30 percent of the gross parking lot area shall be covered by canopy at mature growth.
(d)
All parking islands shall be protected from vehicular encroachment by curbing or wheel stops, which should be raised unless such areas are designed as a part of the on-site retention and recharge areas.
(e)
Where wheel stops are used, the length of the parking stall may be reduced to 18 feet if a landscaped dividing strip (or a parking island) is widened to at least eight feet.
(f)
Interior aisleway intersections shall be defined by planters.
(g)
Interior planters shall be designed at the same elevation as adjacent vehicular parking areas, except as necessary to save existing trees.
(h)
Interior planters for nonpublic, specialized vehicular use areas where large machinery or large vehicles are stored, serviced, or used, may be relocated to perimeter areas as additional buffers, screening, or beautification.
(i)
Driveway medians without shrubs shall be at least four feet wide, and driveway medians with shrubs or trees shall be at least six feet wide.
(j)
At least 90 percent of the parking spaces shall be within 80 feet of the trunk of a tree. Landscaping around the perimeter, in bufferyards, or other required plantings may be used to meet this requirement. (see Figure 5.2.5.B.2.j: Interior Parking Area Minimum Plantings)
F
igu
re
5
.2.5.B.2.j
:
I
nterior Parking Area Minimum
P
lantings
N
o more than 10 contiguous spaces between landscape areas Landscape islands minimum dimensions ten feet wide and the length of the depth of a parking space in that row.. Terminal landscape islands at the ends of rows Plantings distributed so that 90% of spaces are within 80 feet of a tree trunk (k) Low Impact Design (LID) is encouraged for landscaped areas. 2. Large Parking Lot Standards In addition to the standards in subsection 1, above, off-street vehicular surface parking areas with 300 or more spaces shall be organized into a series Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 39
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards
5.2.5 Landscaping and Buffer Standards
of smaller modules 25,000 square feet or less per module, and be visually separated by continuous landscaped islands at least 11 feet wide that contain pedestrian pathways located at least every six parking bays.
b. Perimeter Off-street Vehicular Parking Area Landscaping
1.
Landscaping shall be installed to provide visual relief, screen off-street vehicular parking areas, and reduce noise and vibration from adjacent properties.
2.
A hedge row, consisting of shrubs a minimum height of 36 inches and planted three and one-half feet on center, or other approved screening shall be required where off-street vehicular parking areas are adjacent to a street.
c. All lime rock or any other similar base material must be removed below landscape islands or medians prior to installation of soil and plant materials to assure proper plant growth and prevent plants from becoming root bound.
3. Bufferyards
a. Applicability
Unless exempted in accordance with subsection b, below, all new development shall comply with the requirements of this section.
b. Relation to Setbacks
Bufferyards shall be in addition to setbacks (See Article 3: Zoning Districts) or use standards (See Article 4: Use Regulations)
c. Required Width and Plantings
1.
Different types of bufferyards are required when different types of uses are proposed adjacent to existing types of uses or vacant lands in different zoning districts. (See Table 5.2.5.B.3.d-1: Bufferyard Application) The options for the different types of bufferyards required by different uses are established in Table: 5.2.5.B.3.d-2: Bufferyards and Types.
2.
The planting requirement for each type of bufferyard established in Table 5.2.5.B.3.d-2: Bufferyards and Types.
Land Development Code Page 5 40 Apopka, FL
-
- - - -
-
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards
5.2.5 Landscaping and Buffer Standards
TABLE 5.2.5.B.3.D-1 : BUFFERYARD APPLICATION A=A TYPE BUFFER B=B TYPE BUFFER C=C TYPE BUFFER D=D TYPE BUFFER
EXISTING USE TYPE ON ABUTTING LAND
ZONING OF ABUTTING VACANT LAND
PROPOSED USE TYPES
INDIVIDUAL SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING
HOUSEHOLD LIVING 4 12 UNITS/ACRE , RURAL AND AGRICULTURAL
HOUSEHOLD LIVING 12 20 UNITS/ACRE , GROUP LIVING, COMMUNITY SERVICE, EDUCATIONAL
HOUSEHOLD LIVING 20+ UNITS/ACRE , MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT, ALL OTHER PUBLIC, CIVIC, AND INSTITUTIONAL
HEALTHCARE, COMMERCIAL
INDUSTRIAL
Single-Family Detached Dwelling
RCE, RSF1A, RSF-1B, RTF, PR
N/A
B
C
C
D
D
Household Living 4-12 units/acre , Rural and Agricultural
RTF, MHP
A
N/A
B
C
C
D
Household Living 12-20 units/acre , Group Living, Community Service, Educational
RMF, RMU, MU-D, MUES, MU-KPI, INST
B
B
N/A
A
B
D
Household Living 20+ units/acre , Mixed Use Development, All other Public, Civic, and Institutional
C-N, C-C,
C
B
A
N/A
B
D
Healthcare, Commercial
O, C-COR, C-R
C
C
B
B
N/A
C
Industrial
I-L, I-H, AIR
D
D
C
C
B
N/A
Notes: 1. Letters in cells correspond to the bufferyard types depicted in Table 5.2.5.B.3.D: Bufferyards and Types. 2. Regardless of bufferyard type, a six-foot-tall wall shall be included between residential and commercial use. 3. Regardless of bufferyard type, a six-foot-tall wall shall be included between a school and any use. 4. Development in PD Districts will follow approved PD plans. 5. Multifamily developments, Townhome developments, shopping centers, mixed use developments, and mobile home parks shall provide buffers around the perimeter of the development instead of around individual buildings. 6. Residential developments abutting an existing railroad right-of-way must use a Type D Buffer
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 41
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards
5.2.5 Landscaping and Buffer Standards
TABLE 5.2.5.B.3.D-2 : BUFFERYARDS AND TYPES
BUFFER TYPE AND CONFIGURATION
OPTION 1: MINIMUM WIDTH 25 FEET
OPTION 2: MINIMUM WIDTH 15 FEET
OPTION 3: MINIMUM WIDTH 5 FEET
PLANTINGS PER 100 LINEAR FEET
PLANTINGS PER 100 LINEAR FEET
CANOPY TREES
UNDERSTORY TREES
SHRUBS
CANOPY TREES
UNDERSTORY TREES
SHRUBS
Type A: Basic
This bufferyard functions as basic edge demarcating individual properties with a slight visual obstruction from the ground to a height of ten feet.
3
0
0
1
6
0
3-foot-tall semi-opaque (75% transparent) fence or wall + 5 evergreen shrubs per every 100 linear feet
Type B: Aesthetic
This bufferyard functions as an intermittent visual obstruction from the ground to a height of at least 20 feet, and creates the impression of spatial separation without eliminating visual contact between uses.
3
0
12
1
7
5
4-foot-tall semi-opaque (50% transparent) fence or wall + 10 evergreen shrubs per every 100 linear feet
Type C: Semi Opaque
This bufferyard functions as a semi-opaque screen from the ground to at least a height of four feet.
3
5
11
2
6
15
6-foot-tall opaque fence or wall + 15 evergreen shrubs per every 100 linear feet
Type D: Opaque
This bufferyard functions as an opaque screen from the ground to a height of at least six feet. This type of buffer prevents visual contact between uses and creates a strong impression of total separation.
3
7
23
2
8
29
6-foot-tall opaque wall + 20 evergreen shrubs per every 100 feet
Land Development Code Page 5 42 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards
5.2.5 Landscaping and Buffer Standards
TABLE 5.2.5.B.3.D-2 : BUFFERYARDS AND TYPES
BUFFER TYPE AND CONFIGURATION
OPTION 1: MINIMUM WIDTH 25 FEET
OPTION 2: MINIMUM WIDTH 15 FEET
OPTION 3: MINIMUM WIDTH 5 FEET
PLANTINGS PER 100 LINEAR FEET
PLANTINGS PER 100 LINEAR FEET
CANOPY TREES
UNDERSTORY TREES
SHRUBS
CANOPY TREES
UNDERSTORY TREES
SHRUBS
Type E: Alternative Special Exception
15 feet wide; one canopy tree every 30 feet, on center, with each tree a minimum three inch caliper DBH and 8 feet in height at the time of planting; if adjacent to road rights of way, one understory tree every 15 feet, on center, with each tree a minimum two and one-half inch caliper DBH; and one shrub every 42 inches, on center, with a minimum height of three feet at time of planting.
Notes 1. Perimeter buffer widths (but not vegetation amounts) may be reduced in accordance with Section 2.5.5.B, Administrative Adjustment. 2. Where an adjacent use is designed for solar access, small trees shall be substituted for shade trees. 3. All canopy trees must be a minimum three inch caliper DBH and eight feet in height at the time of planting. 4. All understory trees must be a minimum two inch caliper DBH at the time of planting.
Example of a Type A (Basic) Buffer
Example of a Type B (Aesthetic) Buffer
Example of a Type C (Semi-Opaque) Buffer
Example of a Type D (Opaque) Buffer
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 43
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards
5.2.5 Landscaping and Buffer Standards
d. Location of Bufferyards
Bufferyards required by this section shall be located along the outer perimeter of the parcel and shall extend to the parcel boundary line or right-of-way line; however, the bufferyard may be located along shared access easements between parcels in nonresidential development.
e.
Development Within Required Bufferyards
1.
The required bufferyard shall not contain any development, impervious surfaces, screen enclosures, decks, or site features (except fences or walls) that do not function to meet the standards of this section or that require removal of existing vegetation, unless otherwise permitted in this LDC.
2.
Sidewalks, trails, and other elements associated with passive recreation may be placed in bufferyards if all required landscaping is provided and damage to existing vegetation is minimized.
3.
Overhead and underground utilities required or allowed by the City are permitted in bufferyards, but shall minimize the impact to vegetation, to the maximum extent practicable. Where required landscaping material is damaged or removed due to utility activity within a required bufferyard, the landowner shall be responsible for replanting all damaged or removed vegetation as necessary to ensure the bufferyard meets the standards in this LDC.
f.
Credit for Existing Vegetation
Existing vegetation located within ten feet of a required bufferyard that meets the size standards of Table 5.3.4.B.4.D-1., may be preserved and credited toward the perimeter bufferyard standards provided it is retained during and after the development process
g. Credit for Required Landscaping
Required landscaping associated with perimeter landscaping around an off-street vehicular parking area may be credited towards the bufferyard requirements.
4. Maintenance Standards
The owner of land subject to the requirements of this section shall be responsible for the maintenance of landscaping in a healthy and good condition. Maintenance of a landscape area includes compliance with following standards.
a. Maintenance Standards for Cultivated Landscape Areas
1. Maintenance of Mulch Layers
Any required mulch layer shall be maintained.
2. Maintenance of Plants, Replacement
All plants required to be planted shall be maintained in a healthy, pest-free condition. Within six months of a determination by the Director that a plant is dead or severely damaged or diseased, the plant shall be replaced by the property owner in accordance with the standards in this section.
Land Development Code Page 5 44 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards
5.2.5 Landscaping and Buffer Standards
3. Removal of Dead, Diseased or Dangerous Trees or Shrubs
The property owner shall be responsible for the removal of any dead, diseased, or dangerous trees or shrubs, or parts thereof, which overhang or interfere with traffic control devices, public sidewalks, rights-of-way, or property owned by the City. The City shall have the authority to order the removal of any such trees or shrubs.
4. Pruning
(a)
All pruning shall be accomplished according to good horticultural standards.
(b)
Trees shall be pruned only as necessary to promote healthy growth. Trees shall be allowed to attain their normal size and shall not be severely pruned or "hat-racked" in order to permanently maintain growth at a reduced height. Trees may be periodically pruned or thinned in order to reduce the leaf mass in preparation for tropical storms. All pruning shall be accomplished in accordance with the standards established by the
Tree Care Industry Association. Figure 5.3.4.B.7.a.4.(b): Example of “Hat-Racking”
5.
Grass shall be mown in order to encourage deep root growth and the preservation of irrigation water.
6.
All roads, streets, curbs, and sidewalks shall be edged when necessary in order to prevent encroachment from the adjacent grassed areas.
7.
All watering of planted areas shall be managed so as to:
(a)
Maintain healthy flora;
(b)
Make plant material more drought tolerant;
(c)
Avoid excessive turf growth;
(d)
Minimize fungus growth;
(e)
Stimulate deep root growth; and
(f)
Minimize leaching of fertilizer.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 45
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards
5.2.5 Landscaping and Buffer Standards
8. Irrigation systems shall be installed, operated, and maintained in accordance with Sec. 5.2.5.D.4.
b. Maintenance of Natural Plant Communities
All open space areas that are to be preserved as natural plant communities shall be trimmed as necessary of all exotic vegetation, lawn grasses, trash or other debris, and shall be managed to maintain the plant community for the purpose it was preserved.
C. Plant Diversity
1. To curtail the spread of disease or insect infestation in a plant species, new tree plantings shall comply with the following standards:
a.
When fewer than 20 trees are required on a site, at least two different species shall be utilized, in roughly equal proportions.
b.
When more than 20 but fewer than 40 trees are required to be planted on a site, at least three different species shall be utilized, in roughly equal proportions.
c.
When 40 or more trees are required on a site, at least four different species shall be utilized, in roughly equal proportions.
2. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent the utilization of a larger number of different species than specified above.
D. Water-Wise Standards
1. Purpose
It is the intent of this subsection to assist the City in achieving water conservation through proper plant selection, installation, and maintenance through the following:
a.
Appropriate planning and design;
b.
Limiting turf areas to locations where it provides functional benefits;
c.
Efficient irrigation systems;
d.
The use of soil amendments to improve water holding capacity of the soil;
e.
The use of mulches, where appropriate;
f.
The use of drought-tolerant plants;
g.
The preservation of existing plant communities and the re-establishment of native plant communities;
h.
The use of canopy trees to reduce transpiration rates of understory plant materials;
i.
Retention of stormwater runoff on site; and
j.
The use of pervious paving materials.
2. Appropriate Plant Selection and Location
All plants, shrubs, and trees planted shall comply with the following standards:
Land Development Code Page 5 46 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards
5.2.5 Landscaping and Buffer Standards
a.
Plant selection shall be based on the plant's adaptability to the existing conditions present at the site, and shall consider the appropriate hardiness zone, soil type, and moisture conditions, exposure to sun, and mature plant size, established by the Florida Friendly Landscaping Guide to Plant Selection & Landscape Design maintained by the Florida Friendly Landscaping program. Plants selected must be suited to withstand the soil and physical growing conditions found in the microclimate of each location on site with supplemental irrigation only during periods of low rainfall.
b.
Plants shall be grouped in accordance with their respective water and maintenance needs to provide for efficient irrigation. Plants with similar water, soil, climate, sun, and light requirements shall be grouped together.
c.
Landscape shall be installed a minimum of 2.5 feet from the foundation of a building or structure.
d.
Turf and non-turf areas shall be designed to be distinctly separate when irrigation is used.
e.
A landscape maintenance checklist and information regarding the plants installed shall be provided to the property owner by the contractor.
f.
A landscape architect must verify and approve the soil types being used for the plants are approved for the development project. Soil samples are recommended to be verified prior to planting to assure growth potential for the plants being used.
3. Selection of Grass Species
Turf applications shall comply with the following:
a.
Lawn areas shall be planted with species suitable as permanent lawns. Effective erosion control is mandatory in swales, rights-of-way, or other areas subject to erosion.
b.
The primary types of grass used are encouraged to comply with the UF/IFAS Florida Yards and Neighborhoods (FYN) program for Central and South Florida.
c.
No more than 50 percent of the green space area or one-half acre, whichever is less, may be planted with a lawn grass that has a rating of low in regards to drought tolerance as established in b, above. (e.g. St. Augustine grass).
d.
Grass with a rating of medium or better is strongly encouraged (e.g. Bahia grass).
e.
Medians, and retention areas shall use drought tolerant grasses with a rating of medium or better as established in Sec b, above.
f.
In addition to those approved within b, above, drought tolerant grasses listed in Appendix B are approved for use by this code.
4. Live Oak Location
Due to potential root size expansion, live oak trees are strongly discouraged from being planted as street trees within landscape or buffer strips less than eight feet wide or 200 feet in area.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 47
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards
5.2.5 Landscaping and Buffer Standards
5. Irrigation System Standards
a. Applicability
These provisions apply to new irrigation system installations on individual residential parcels, subdivisions, and other residential common areas, multifamily development, all nonresidential developments, and additions of one or more zones to an existing irrigation system, and all expansions. No future expansion or modification will be allowed on a water wise system that would make the system non-compliant with this article.
b. Exemptions from Irrigation Standards
The following are exempted from irrigation standards.
1.
Hand watering and portable sprinklers.
2.
Bona fide agricultural uses.
3.
Golf course play areas and specialized athletic fields, provided however, the remainder of any such property shall comply with the requirements of this section.
c. New irrigation systems are required for the following types of development as features:
1. Single-family detached and two-family (duplex) dwellings:
(a)
Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum of two hose bibs.
(b)
All commons areas shall be irrigated through an automatic irrigation system. This requirement may be waived by the Director in consultation with the City Water Conservation Specialist if as a water conservation technique a landscaped area only contains plant species that do not require irrigation. Consideration of a waiver of the irrigation requirement shall include, but not be limited to, the area covered by native vegetation, local conditions such as sun or shade, type of soil, depth to water table, and size and configuration of lot.
2.
Landscape in multifamily and nonresidential development, except this requirement may be waived by the Director in consultation with the City Water Conservation Specialist for a landscaped area implementing water conservation techniques including only containing plant species that do not require irrigation. Consideration of a waiver of the irrigation requirement shall include, but not be limited to, the area covered by native vegetation, local conditions such as sun or shade, type of soil, depth to water table, and size and configuration of a lot.
3.
Irrigation systems shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the technical standards contained in Appendix F of the Plumbing Volume of the Florida Building Code, the most recent edition of the Florida Irrigation Standards Manual and the following:
(a) Irrigation systems shall be designed and installed at a water pressure of 40 p.s.i.
Land Development Code Page 5 48 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards
5.2.5 Landscaping and Buffer Standards
(b)
A rain sensing shutoff device shall be required on all irrigation systems to avoid irrigation during periods of sufficient rainfall. Equipment shall consist of an automatic sensing device or switch which will override the irrigation cycle when adequate rainfall has occurred. It must be placed where it is exposed to unobstructed natural rainfall and comply with Ch. 373, Fla. Stat., Water Conservation; Automatic Sprinkler Systems.
(c)
The use of irrigation risers is prohibited.
(d)
Check valves which are capable of holding a minimum of a five foot head shall be used in low-lying areas to prevent head drainage.
(e)
Back-flow into any water source shall be prevented as provided in Rule 62-555, FAC, Permitting, Construction, Operation, and Maintenance of Public Water Systems. Any back-flow prevention device that is testable, shall be tested by a state-licensed plumbing contractor (see Ch. 489, Fla. Stat.) upon installation, whenever the device is repaired and annually, when connected to a municipal or investor-owned drinking water system. Back-flow prevention devices are required on irrigation systems connected to private wells when the well source is also used as a private drinking water source.
(f)
Irrigation design shall be appropriate for the type of plant being grown and for the type of soil.
(g)
Irrigation system equipment shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer's specifications.
(h)
Irrigation zones shall be divided according to:
i. Available flow rate;
ii. Vegetated groupings (i.e., turf, shrubs, native plants, etc.);
iii. Sprinkler types (i.e., sprinklers with matching precipitation rates); and
iv. Soil characteristics
(i)
Spray heads and rotors shall not be mixed in the same zone.
(j)
Narrow areas, four feet or less, are not to be irrigated unless low volume/micro-irrigation is used.
(k)
Low volume irrigation is required for all trees, shrubs, and groundcover beds. (The Director in consultation with the City Water Conservation Specialist may waive this requirement if special circumstances exist).
(l)
Distribution equipment in a given zone shall have matched precipitation rates.
(m) Application rates shall be calculated and programmed with an irrigation timer to avoid runoff and to permit uniform water infiltration into the soil, considering land slope, soil hydraulic properties, vegetative ground cover, and prevailing winds.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 49
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards
5.2.5 Landscaping and Buffer Standards
(n)
There shall be a minimum separation of four inches between distribution equipment and pavement.
(o)
There shall be a minimum separation of 24 inches between distribution equipment and buildings and other vertical structures.
(p)
There shall be no direct spray onto walkways, buildings, roadways, and drives.
(q)
Rotors and sprays in turf areas shall be spaced to provide head-to-head coverage.
(r)
Water conveyance systems shall have a flow velocity of five feet per second, or less.
(s)
Pipelines shall be designed to provide the system with the appropriate pressure required for maximum irrigation uniformity.
(t)
Pressure regulating heads shall be identifiable from the top of the head.
(u)
A maintenance checklist shall be affixed to or near the controller, accompanied by a recommendations for maintenance schedule, proper irrigation system settings according to season, checking the rain sensor device, and filter cleaning; and information on current water restrictions.
(v)
Upon completion of the irrigation system, a tag or sticker shall be affixed to the timer box if it is an automatic system. If it is a manual system, a sticker or tag shall be affixed to the outside main electrical breaker box on the inside of the door. The tag or sticker shall include the permit number (for nonresidential development), a copy of the landscape and irrigation certification and checklist, the date installed, the number of zones, and the installer's names.
(w)
Any irrigation system which is used for the application of chemicals shall be equipped with an antisiphon device constructed in accordance with Ch. 487, Fla. Stat.
(x)
All irrigation system underground piping shall have a minimum soil cover of six inches.
(y)
Piping and fittings approved by the National Sanitation Foundation for potable water use shall be used upstream of a backflow device.
(z)
System controls that use low voltage wiring shall be installed in accordance with the National Electric Code.
(aa) Reclaimed irrigation water and application facilities shall be lavender in color. Routine repairs covering less than 12 inches on residential systems may use any color pipe. Irrigation heads shall be lavender in color if available from the manufacturer. A sign must be posted indicating reclaimed water is being used as irrigation (in English and Spanish). A warning sign prohibiting consumption shall be posted at any hose bib dispensing reuse water. Irrigation using reclaimed water rather than potable water when reclaimed water is reasonably available is strongly encouraged.
Land Development Code Page 5 50 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards
5.2.6 Alternative Landscape Plan
4. System Layout
(a)
A landscaped area on a site shall be divided into high, medium, and low volume irrigation areas. The areas may not be modified outside of the standards of b through d, below.
(b)
A high volume irrigation area shall not exceed 50 percent of the landscaped area, or cover more than one-half acre on single-family residential lots.
(c)
A medium volume irrigation area shall not exceed 75 percent of the landscaped area, and shall not exceed 25 percent of the landscaped area if high volume irrigation is utilized on the site.
(d)
At least 25 percent of a landscaped area must be covered by a low volume irrigation area.
5. System Operation and Maintenance
(a)
Irrigation systems shall be operated properly and in compliance with this section
(b)
All automatic controllers shall be programmed to maximize water conservation.
(c)
Automatic irrigation systems shall be operated in compliance with City administrative rules or St. John's River Water Management District rules. (see Code of Ordinances, Sec. 82-194)
(d)
Irrigation systems shall be maintained to meet the requirements of this section and the spirit of water conservation. Systems shall be routinely examined to prevent waste of water due to loss of heads, broken pipes or misadjusted nozzles.
6. Native Vegetation Retention
Any area preserved as native vegetation shall be exempt from any irrigation requirement, given:
(a)
No supplemental water shall be applied to the native vegetation area.
(b)
The native vegetation will only be pruned by hand.
(c)
Mechanical mowing or clearing is prohibited.
5.2.6. ALTERNATIVE LANDSCAPE PLAN
A. General
An alternative landscape plan may be approved where a deviation from the landscaping standards in this section, or the tree protection standards in Sec. 5.3 Tree Protection Standards, is justified because of site or development conditions that make compliance with such standards impossible or impractical. Such conditions may include:
1. Natural conditions, such as lakes, ponds, or other natural features;
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 51
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.2 Landscaping and Buffer Standards
5.2.6 Alternative Landscape Plan
2.
The likelihood that landscaping material would be ineffective at maturity due to placement, or other existing site conditions;
3.
Lot size or configuration;
4.
The presence of utility or other easements;
5.
The potential for interference with public safety; and
6.
Other situations where strict adherence to the landscaping or tree protection standards are determined to be impractical by the Director.
B. Submittal and Review
An applicant may submit an alternative landscape plan as part of an application for approval of a development plan (major or minor) (Sec. 2.5.2.A, Development Plan (Major and Minor)), or plat (subdivision), (Sec. 2.5.2.B, Plat (Subdivision), or building permit (Code of Ordinances Art.VI, Sec. 6.08.00), as appropriate. The Director shall review and approve an alternative landscape plan if it meets the purpose and intent of the landscaping standards in this section, or Section 5.3, Tree Protection Standards, as appropriate, and this section.
C. Allowable Deviations
Allowable deviations from the standards of this section and Section 5.3, Tree Protection Standards, include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Reduction in Standards Due to Protection of Natural Features, Public Safety, or Parcel Configuration
A reduction in the count, spacing, species diversity, or site standards of this section by up to 20 percent may be allowed when desirable in terms of enhanced protection of existing natural features, to address public safety issues, or a site design as determined by the DRC.
2. Substitution Near Power Lines
Required canopy tree planting may be substituted for two understory trees within 20
feet of an overhead power line.
Land Development Code Page 5 52 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.3 Tree Protection Standards
5.3.1 Purpose
Section 5.3. TREE PROTECTION STANDARDS
5.3.1. PURPOSE
The purpose of this section is to provide for protection and maintenance of trees. The standards are intended to:
A. Preserve the visual and aesthetic qualities of the City;
B. Encourage site design techniques that preserve the natural environment and enhance the developed environment;
C. Increase control of erosion and sediment runoff;
D. Conserve energy by reducing heating and cooling costs;
E. Preserve and enhancing air and water quality;
F. Reduce the heat island effect; and
G. Maintain and enhance the quality of life in the City.
5.3.2. APPLICABILITY
A. General
Unless exempted in accordance with B, below, the standards in this section apply to all new development in the City.
B. Exemptions
The following activities are exempt from this section:
1. Utility Operations
Tree removal by duly constituted communication, water, sewer, electrical, or other utility companies, or Federal, State, County or City agencies, or engineers or surveyors working under a contract with such utility companies or agencies, provided the tree removal is limited to those trees necessary for maintenance of existing lines or facilities or for construction of new lines or facilities for providing utility service to its customers, and provided that the activity is conducted in a way that avoids any unnecessary removal, and in the case of aerial electrical utility lines, is not greater than that specified by the National Electrical Safety Codes as necessary to achieve safe electrical clearances.
2. Surveyors
Tree removal by a Florida licensed land surveyor in the performance of duties, provided the tree removal or alteration is limited to a swath three feet or less in width.
3. Commercial Growers
Tree removal at commercial nurseries, botanical gardens, tree farms and groves, if the trees removed were planted for silvicultural or agricultural purposes, or for the sale or intended sale in the ordinary course of business.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 53
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.3 Tree Protection Standards
5.3.3 Arbor Permit Required
4. Emergencies
Tree removal during emergencies caused by hurricane or other natural disaster.
5. Maintenance by City Crews
The planting, pruning, or maintenance and removal of trees, plants and shrubs by City crews within the illumination lines of lights, streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, and public grounds, as necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of public grounds.
6. Intersection Visibility
The selective and limited removal of trees or vegetation necessary to obtain clear visibility at driveways or intersections
7. Single-Family Detached and Two-Family (Duplex) Homes
Removal of trees other than specimen trees on developed single-family detached and two-family (duplex) lots or lots within a single-family detached or two-family (duplex) subdivision platted before March 6, 2019;
8. Dead or Diseased Tree
The removal of dead, diseased, or naturally fallen trees, including specimen trees; and
9. On-going Agricultural Operations
The removal and cutting of trees as part of an ongoing agricultural operation, including silvicultural operations.
5.3.3. ARBOR PERMIT REQUIRED
An Arbor Permit shall be approved in accordance with Sec. 2.5.4.A, Arbor Permit, prior to removal of a tree protected by this section.
5.3.4. TIMING OF REVIEW
Review for compliance with these standards shall occur during review of a development plan (major or minor) (Sec. 2.5.2.A, Development Plan (Major and Minor)), plat (subdivision), (Sec. 2.5.2.B, Plat (Subdivision), arbor permit (Sec. 2.5.4.A, Arbor Permit), or building permit (Code of Ordinances Art.VI, Sec. 6.08.00), whichever occurs first.
5.3.5. RESPONSIBILITY FOR COMPLIANCE
Failure to comply with the standards in this section is a violation of this LDC and subject to the remedies and penalties in this section and Article 9: Enforcement
5.3.6. EXISTING TREE CANOPY DEFINED
A. For the purposes of this section, “existing tree canopy” consists of the crowns of all healthy self-supporting canopy trees with a diameter at breast height (DBH) of ten inches or greater and the crowns of all healthy self-supporting understory trees with a caliper size of four inches or greater, provided, however, that “existing tree canopy” shall not include prohibited tree species.
Land Development Code Page 5 54 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.3 Tree Protection Standards
5.3.7 Retention of Existing Canopy
B. A protected canopy tree is an individual canopy tree of 10 inches DBH or a self-supporting understory tree of four inches or greater DBH, that would qualify as a part of the existing tree canopy in Sec. 5.3.6.A, above.
5.3.7. RETENTION OF EXISTING CANOPY
A. Existing Tree Canopy Inventory Required
Prior to any tree clearing, development work, land disturbing activity, or activity to officially set aside a preservation area the owner of land subject to this section shall prepare and submit an inventory of existing canopy and understory trees on the development site, subject to the following requirements.
1. General
The inventory shall identify all existing canopy trees (which includes specimen trees and understory trees) on the development site that are healthy. Known dead or diseased trees shall be identified, where practical. Groups of existing canopy and understory trees in close proximity (i.e., those within five feet of each other) may be designated as a clump of trees, with the predominant species, estimated number, and average diameter indicated.
2. Specimen Trees
The inventory shall indicate the species, size (in DBH), health, and location of each
specimen tree on the site.
3. Protected Canopy Trees
The inventory shall indicate the number of existing canopy trees on site.
4. Protected Understory Trees
The inventory shall include the number of understory trees on site.
5. Additional Trees
The inventory shall indicate other trees at least six inches DBH on site.
6. Professional Preparation
Tree inventories for lots larger than two acres in area shall be prepared by a licensed landscape architect, surveyor under the direction of a licensed landscape architect, arborist, or registered forester, and shall have an accuracy of plus or minus three feet.
B. Existing Tree Canopy Retention Standards
1.
Table 5.3.7.B.2.c: Tree Canopy Retention Standards, establishes the minimum percentage of a development site’s existing tree canopy cover that is required to be retained and protected, based on the site’s existing tree canopy cover and its base zoning district designation. The table identifies minimum required existing tree canopy retention requirements for existing tree canopy cover at six percentage points (100%, 80%, 60%, 40%, 20%, and 0%)
2.
Where the existing tree canopy cover falls between two percentage points shown on the table (e.g., 65%), the following calculations shall be undertaken to determine minimum required tree canopy retention.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 55
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.3 Tree Protection Standards
5.3.7 Retention of Existing Canopy
a. In the AG, T, RCE, RSF-1A, RSF-1B, RTF, and PR-districts, add 0.25 to the minimum required tree canopy retention percentage for each percentage point the existing tree canopy cover falls below a percentage point identified in the first column of the table.
Example where 65% of the development site is covered by existing tree canopy: Because 65% is 15 percentage points below the 80% existing tree canopy cover shown on the table, 15 x 0.25, or 3.75 percentage points, are added to the 24% minimum required tree canopy retention designated for an existing tree canopy cover of 80%, yielding a minimum required tree canopy retention of 27.75% (from 24%
+ 3.75%)of the existing canopy, or 18.04% of the development Canopy cover of 65%. (See a graphic depiction of another example in Figure 5.3.7.B.2.a: Existing Tree Canopy Retention.) Figure5.3.7.B.2.a: Existing Tree Canopy Retention
b.
In the RMF, RMU, MHP, C-N, C-C, O, ,and INST districts, the same calculation is made, except 0.125 is added to the minimum required tree canopy retention percentage for each percentage point the existing tree canopy cover falls below a percentage point identified in the first column of the table.
c.
In the C-COR, C-R, I-L, I-H, MU-D, MU-ES, MU-KPI and AIR districts, the same calculation is made, except 0.05 is added to the minimum required tree canopy retention percentage for each percentage point the existing tree canopy cover falls below a percentage point identified in the first column of the table.
Land Development Code Page 5 56 Apopka, FL
-
-
- -
-
-
- - - - -
- -
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.3 Tree Protection Standards
5.3.7 Retention of Existing Canopy
TABLE 5.3.7.B.2.C: TREE CANOPY RETENTION STANDARDS
EXISTING TREE CANOPY COVER (AS A PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL SITE AREA) 1
MINIMUM REQUIRED TREE CANOPY RETENTION (AS A PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL PRE DEVELOPMENT TREE CANOPY COVER), BY DISTRICT 2
A, RE, RS AG, T, RCE, RSF 1A, RSF 1B, RTF, AND PR DISTRICTS
RMF, RMU, MHP, C N, C C, O, DISTRICTS
C COR, C R, I L, I H, MU D, MU ES, MU KPI, INST AND AIR DISTRICTS
100
19
7
3
80
24
9.5
4
60
29
12
5
40
34
14.5
6
20
39
17
7
0
44
19.5
8
Notes: 1. Existing tree canopy cover is the percentage of a development site covered by existing tree canopy before development or land disturbing activities. 2. Minimum required tree canopy retention is the percentage of the existing tree canopy that must be retained during and after development or land disturbing activity. Illustrative Example: The existing tree canopy inventory establishes that 65% of a 100,000-square-foot development site in the RS10 district is covered by existing tree canopy. As shown in the example following provision 1 above, the minimum required tree canopy retention for the site is 27.75% of the existing canopy tree cover, or 18.04 % of the total development site. (65% x 24.75% = 18.04%), yielding a tree protection zone of approximately 18,038 square feet.
C. Establishment of Tree Protection Area
1. The tree protection area is the area of a development site that includes the portions of the existing tree canopy cover (and the associated roots within the drip line of the canopy) that are required to be retained and protected in accordance with Table 5.3.7.B.2.c, Tree Canopy Retention Standards. The tree protection area is established in accordance with this section.
D. Tree Protection Area
1.
The tree protection area shall be identified in the application for a development plan (major or minor) (Sec. 2.5.2.A, Development Plan (Major and Minor)), plat (subdivision), (Sec. 2.5.2.B, Plat (Subdivision), arbor permit, (Sec. 2.5.4.A, Arbor Permit) or building permit (Code of Ordinances Art.VI, Sec. 6.08.00), as appropriate.
2.
To the extent practicable, tree protection areas shall be located proximate to lot lines or site boundaries to ensure that retained trees will assist in limiting visual and auditory impacts from one form of development to another.
3.
The Director shall have discretion in adjusting the exact location of the tree protection area based on site conditions and the need for efficient development of the site.
E. Priority Retention Area
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 57
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.3 Tree Protection Standards
5.3.7 Retention of Existing Canopy
1. The location and configuration of the tree protection area shall be determined in accordance with the following priority retention areas, which are listed in order of priority.
a.
Existing tree canopy containing specimen trees, and their associated root zones;
b.
Existing tree canopy located in riparian buffers, wetlands, or wetland protection areas;
c.
Existing tree canopy containing stands or groups of mature deciduous trees;
d.
Existing tree canopy needed for required landscaping (i.e., bufferyards and planting strips around off-street vehicular use areas); and
e.
Existing tree canopy that is a part of wildlife habitat and other sensitive natural areas.
F. Reforestations
Example:
Sixty-five(65) percent of a 100,000-square-foot development site in the RTF district is covered by existing tree canopy. The site is required to maintain 27.75 percent of the existing tree canopy, which equates to 18,038 square feet of the site’s land area.
The tree inventory reveals a specimen tree that covers an area of 10,000 square feet, a riparian area with existing tree canopy covering 7,000 square feet, and a group of mature deciduous trees constituting existing tree canopy that covers 51,000 square feet.
Based on the priority retention area requirements, the tree canopy protection requirements would be met by including the following in the tree protection zone:
1.
The area covered by the specimen tree (10,000 square feet);
2.
The area covered by the riparian buffer (7,000 square feet); and
3.
4,280 square feet of the area covered by the mature deciduous trees.
The exact location of the mature deciduous trees to be included in the tree protection zone is determined based on site conditions.
Protected trees may be removed from a development site if the landowner demonstrates development on the site cannot be located and designed to allow for a reasonable use, after exploration of applicable alternatives for relief, and submission and approval of an alternative landscaping plan (See Sec. 5.2.6, Alternative Landscape Plan) and if the removal of protected trees comply with the following:
1.
The trees removed are replaced on a one-to-one basis, based on the DBH of the removed trees.
2.
The replacement trees have a minimum size of three caliper inches.
Land Development Code Page 5 58 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.3 Tree Protection Standards
5.3.8 Retention of Specimen Trees
3.
The replacement trees are planted in appropriate areas of the development site and clustered to the maximum extent practicable as a means of reestablishing existing tree canopy; and
4.
The replacement trees are planted with sufficient room to accommodate future growth.
5.3.8. RETENTION OF SPECIMEN TREES
A. Specimen Tree Defined
Specimen trees are all native trees with a DBH of 24 inches or greater or trees designated by resolution of the City Council because of their type, size, age, or other criteria.
B. Specimen Tree Protection Standards
1.
Healthy specimen trees shall not be cut or destroyed except in accordance with Sec. 5.3.8.C, Removal of a Specimen Tree.
2.
The area within the drip line of any specimen tree shall not be subject to paving or soil compaction greater than ten percent of the total area within the drip line, or within 12 feet of the tree trunk. (See Figure 5.3.8.B.2.)
Figure 5.3.8.B.2: Limits of Paving or Compaction Near Specimen Trees
C. Removal of a Specimen Tree
Specimen trees may be removed if the landowner demonstrates to the Director one of the following conditions:
1. Removal of a Healthy Specimen Tree
A specimen tree is in healthy condition, and all of the following standards are met:
a.
The landowner is otherwise in compliance with this section;
b.
The specimen tree is not located within a tree protection area;
c.
The specimen tree prevents development of a lot platted before March 6, 2019 in a way that limits building area to less than otherwise allowed.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 59
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.3 Tree Protection Standards
5.3.8 Retention of Specimen Trees
d. Mitigation is provided in accordance with Sec. 3.5.8.D, Replacement or Mitigation Standards.
D. Replacement and Mitigation Standards
Removal of existing tree canopy (and specimen trees) required to be retained by this section or damage or removal of trees within a tree protection area, shall require replacement of the tree in accordance with these standards.
1. Removal or Damage in Violation
If trees required to be protected by this section are damaged or removed without an Arbor Permit or otherwise in violation of this LDC, or when work is done contrary to the permit or this LDC, the Director shall notify those conducting the work, the landowner, or the agent, and work shall stop immediately. Following notification of violation, the landowner or agent shall have up to two weeks to submit a restoration plan in accordance with Sec. 5.3.8.D.2, Restoration Plan Required, below.
2. Restoration Plan Required
a.
A restoration plan—including a narrative describing the tree replanting proposed and a schedule for restoration efforts—shall be completed prior to the certificate of occupancy being issued.
b.
If no new certificate of occupancy is required, then failure to submit and follow a restoration plan shall be subject to Article 9: Enforcement
3. Replacement Requirements
a.
As a part of development approval, for every specimen or non-specimen tree inch DBH removed, the Director shall apply a fee as calculated in the City Code of Ordinances.
b.
For every canopy tree that is removed or damaged, one canopy replacement tree is required.
c.
Minimum size of a replacement tree shall be three inches DBH with a minimum planted height of eight feet. Florida Grade A trees are required.
4. Extent of Removal Undetermined
In cases where the total DBH of trees removed in violation cannot be determined, eight replacement trees shall be provided per acre of disturbed area.
5. Transplanting Trees
All trees transplanted to the site shall be maintained in healthy living condition.
6. Irrigation Required
An irrigation system shall be provided for replacement trees. Nothing in these standards shall prevent hand-watering or other irrigation techniques, subject to approval by the Director.
Land Development Code Page 5 60 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.3 Tree Protection Standards
5.3.9 Tree Protection During Construction
7. Establishment Period
Replacement trees shall be subject to a performance guarantee posted for a one-year establishment period. In the event the replacement trees do not survive the establishment period, the landowner or agent shall install new replacement trees.
5.3.9. TREE PROTECTION DURING CONSTRUCTION
A. Owner’s Responsibility
During construction, the landowner or developer shall be responsible for the erection of any and all barriers necessary to protect trees within a tree protection area or other existing vegetation to be retained from damage both during and after construction.
B. Tree Protection Fencing
1. Where Required
Trees within the tree protection area, shall be fenced with a sturdy and visible fence before grading or other development activity begins. Fencing shall be erected no closer than one linear foot to the tree’s drip line. The Director shall consider the existing site conditions in determining the exact location of tree protection fencing. Nothing shall prevent the use of alternative tree protection measures, as approved by the Director.
Figure 5.3.9.B.1: Tree Protection Fencing
2. Type of Fencing
All fencing required by this section shall be a minimum four feet high and be made of durable construction (i.e., chain link or wooden post with 2x4 wire mesh). Posts shall be located no more than ten feet on-center. Chain link or wire fencing utilized as tree protection fencing shall not be required to be vinyl coated. Passive forms of tree protection may be utilized to delineate tree protection areas that are remote from
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 61
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.3 Tree Protection Standards
5.3.10 Deferral of Tree Replacement
areas of land disturbance. These must be surrounded by fencing, continuous rope, or durable taping (minimum four inches wide).
3. Signage
Signs shall be installed on the tree protection fence visible on all sides of the fenced-in area at a rate of at least one for every 150 linear feet. The size of each sign must be a minimum of two feet by two feet and shall contain the following language: “TREE PROTECTION AREA: KEEP OUT.”
Figure 5.3.9.B.1: Tree Protection Signage
4. Inspection
All tree protection measures shall be inspected and approved by the Director prior to start of any land disturbing activities. Failure to have tree protection measures in place prior to land disturbance (other than surveying) is a violation of this LDC.
5. When Required
No construction, grading, equipment, or material storage, or any other activity shall be allowed within the fenced area. Fencing shall be maintained until after the final site inspection.
5.3.10. DEFERRAL OF TREE REPLACEMENT
A. If the applicant can demonstrate that the market conditions are such that replacement trees are not readily available or the time of year is not suitable for planting, then compliance with this LDC may be deferred for a period of time approved by the Director, but in no case for a cumulative time in excess of 18 months.
B. The applicant shall post a cash escrow, or other financial security acceptable to the Director, for an amount sufficient to pay the costs plus ten percent for the required, but not yet installed, landscaping before such deferral shall be authorized.
Land Development Code Page 5 62 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.4 Open Space Set-Aside Standards
5.4.1 Purpose
Section 5.4. OPEN SPACE SET-ASIDE STANDARDS
5.4.1. PURPOSE
Open space set-asides are intended for the use and enjoyment of a development’s residents, employees, or users. Open space set-asides serve numerous purposes, including preserving natural resources, ensuring resident access to open areas and active recreation, reducing the heat island effect of developed areas, providing civic and meeting spaces, enhancing storm water management, and providing other public health benefits.
5.4.2. APPLICABILITY
A. General
Unless exempted in accordance with subsection B below, the standards in this section
shall apply to all new development in the City.
B. Exemptions
The following development is exempted from the standards in this section:
1.
Rural and agricultural, and open space uses; and
2.
Single-family detached dwellings or two-family (duplex) dwellings on a single lot.
5.4.3. TIMING OF REVIEW
Review for compliance with these standards shall occur during review of a planned development (2.5.1.F, Planned Development), development plan (major or minor) (Sec. 2.5.2.A, Development Plan (Major and Minor)), or plat (subdivision), (Sec. 2.5.2.B, Plat (Subdivision), or building permit (Code of Ordinances Art.VI, Sec. 6.08.00), whichever occurs first.
5.4.4. AMOUNT OF OPEN SPACE SET-ASIDES REQUIRED
Development subject to the standards in this section shall provide the minimum amounts of open space set-asides identified in Table 5.4.4: Required Open Space Set-Asides, based on the district classification.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 63
-
-
- -
-
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.4 Open Space Set-Aside Standards
5.4.5 Areas Counted as Open Space Set-Asides
TABLE 5.4.4: REQUIRED OPEN SPACE SET-ASIDES
USE CLASSIFICATION
MINIMUM OPEN SPACE SET ASIDE AREA (AS PERCENTAGE OF DEVELOPMENT SITE AREA)
AGRICULTURAL AND TRANSITIONAL BASE, AND PR DISTRICTS
RESIDENTIAL BASE
PD DISTRICTS
COMMERCIAL BASE, AND THE INST AND AIR DISTRICTS
MU D, MU ES, AND MU KPI DISTRICTS
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
Residential Uses
20
20
30
15
10
N/A
Public, Civic, and Institutional Uses
10
10
10
10
7.5
5
Commercial Uses and Mixed-Uses
10
10
20
7.5
7.5
5
Industrial Uses
N/A
N/A
20
5
N/A
5
5.4.5. AREAS COUNTED AS OPEN SPACE SET-ASIDES
The features and areas identified in Table 5.4.5: Open Space Set-Aside Features, shall be credited towards compliance with the open space set-aside standards of this section for development in the areas indicated:
TABLE 5.4.5: OPEN SPACE SET-ASIDE FEATURES
AREA COUNTED AS COMMON OPEN SPACE SET ASIDES
DESCRIPTION
DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS
Natural Features
Natural features (including lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, rivers, wetlands, drainageways, and other riparian areas), riparian buffers, flood hazard areas, wildlife habitat and woodland areas
Preservation of any existing natural features shall have highest priority for locating open space set-asides, except in the MU-D, MU-ES, and MUKPI districts. Maintenance is limited to the minimum removal and avoidance of hazards, nuisances, and unhealthy conditions.
Land Development Code Page 5 64 Apopka, FL
-
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.4 Open Space Set-Aside Standards
5.4.5 Areas Counted as Open Space Set-Asides TABLE 5.4.5: OPEN SPACE SET-ASIDE FEATURES AREA COUNTED AS COMMON OPEN SPACE SET ASIDES DESCRIPTION DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS Active Recreational Areas Land occupied by areas and facilities used for active recreational purposes, such as ballfields, playgrounds, tennis courts, pools, jogging trails, and community buildings and clubhouses, and land dedicated for parks. Active recreational areas may occupy up to 100 percent of the open space set-asides (if no natural features exist on the site) except in the Commercial districts, and the MU-D, MU-ES, and MU-KPI districts. No less than 35 percent of the total open space set-aside area within a residential development outside the Commercial districts and the MU-D, MU-ES, and MU-KPI districts shall consist of active recreational areas. Active recreational areas shall be compact and contiguous, to the maximum extent practicable, unless used to link or continue existing or public open space lands. Passive Recreation (Including Plantings and Gardens) Formally planned and regularly maintained open areas that provide passive recreation opportunities, including arranged plantings, gardens, gazebos, and similar structures Passive recreation shall have direct access to a street. Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 65
-
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.4 Open Space Set-Aside Standards
5.4.5 Areas Counted as Open Space Set-Asides TABLE 5.4.5: OPEN SPACE SET-ASIDE FEATURES AREA COUNTED AS COMMON OPEN SPACE SET ASIDES DESCRIPTION DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS Squares, Forecourts, and Plazas Squares, forecourts, plazas, and civic greens that provide active gathering places and opportunities to create special places Such features shall be at least 600 square feet in area. Such features shall have direct access to a street or sidewalk or pedestrian way that connects to a street. Surrounding buildings shall be oriented toward the square, forecourt, or plaza when possible, and a connection shall be made to surrounding development. No less than 50 percent of the total open space set-aside area within the MU-D, MU-ES, and MU-KPI districts shall be a square, forecourt, or plaza. Required Landscape Areas and Agricultural Buffer All areas occupied by required landscaping areas, tree protection areas, perimeter buffers, vegetative screening, and riparian buffers, and agricultural buffers, except landscaped area within vehicular use areas See Sec. 5.2, Landscaping and Buffer Standards, Sec. 3, Tree Protection Standards, Sec. 5.8, Neighborhood Compatibility Standards , and Sec. 5.9, Agricultural Compatibility Standards Land Development Code Page 5 66 Apopka, FL
-
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.4 Open Space Set-Aside Standards
5.4.6 Areas Not Counted as Open Space Set-Asides TABLE 5.4.5: OPEN SPACE SET-ASIDE FEATURES AREA COUNTED AS COMMON OPEN SPACE SET ASIDES DESCRIPTION DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS Stormwater Management Areas Treated as Site Amenities Up to 75 percent of the land area occupied by stormwater management facilities (including retention and detention ponds and other bioretention devices), when such features are treated as an open space site amenity To qualify, stormwater management facilities shall support passive recreation uses by providing access, gentle slopes (less than 3:1), and pedestrian elements such as paths and benches. Public Access Easements with Paths or Trails Public access easements that combine utility easements with paths or trails that are available for passive recreational activities such as walking, running, and biking Such public access easements shall include at least one improved access from a public street, sidewalk, or trail that includes signage designating the access point.
5.4.6. AREAS NOT COUNTED AS OPEN SPACE SET-ASIDES
The following areas shall not be counted as open space set-asides:
A. Private yards not subject to an open space or conservation easement;
B. Street rights-of-way or private access easements, including sidewalks located within those rights-of-way or easements;
C. Vehicular parking areas or lots (excluding the landscaped areas);
D. Driveways for dwellings;
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 67
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.4 Open Space Set-Aside Standards
5.4.7 Design Standards for Open Space Set-Asides
E. Land covered by structures not designated for active recreational uses;
F. Designated outdoor storage areas; and
G. Storm water management facilities and ponds, unless located and designed as a site amenity (e.g., with low fencing, vegetative landscaping, gentle slopes, fountain or other visible water circulation device, and pedestrian access or seating).
5.4.7. DESIGN STANDARDS FOR OPEN SPACE SET-ASIDES
Land used as an open space set-aside shall comply with the following design standards:
A. Location
Open space shall be located so as to be readily accessible and useable by occupants and users of the development. Where possible, a portion of the open space set-aside should provide focal points for the development through prominent placement or easy visual access from streets.
B. Configuration
1.
Open space set-asides shall be compact and contiguous unless a different configuration is needed to continue an existing trail or accommodate preservation of natural features.
2.
If the development site is adjacent to existing or planned public trails, parks, or other public open space area land, the open space set-aside shall, to the maximum extent practicable, be located to adjoin, extend, and enlarge the trail, park, or other public land (see Figure 5.4.7.C: Example Open Space Set-Aside Configuration).
3.
If a passive recreation open space set-aside area with a minimum width of 20 feet or more abuts an existing or planned public open space area, no perimeter buffer shall be established between the two open space areas.
C. Orientation of Adjacent Buildings
To the maximum extent possible, buildings adjacent to the required open space set-asides shall have at least one entrance facing the open space set-aside. Figure 5.4.7.C: Example Open Space Set-Aside Configuration Land Development Code Page 5 68 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.4 Open Space Set-Aside Standards
5.4.8 Development in Open Space Set-Asides
D. Prioritization of Open Space Set-Aside
1. Except in the MU-D, MU-ES, and MU-KPI districts, and to the maximum extent practicable, open space set-asides shall be located and organized to include, protect, and enhance as many of the following open areas and features as possible, in the following general order of priority:
a.
Natural features such as riparian areas, riparian buffers, flood hazard areas, floodplains, and wildlife habitat and woodland areas;
b.
Water features such as rivers, bays, lakes, creeks, canals, natural ponds, and retention and detention ponds;
c.
Protected trees and other mature trees;
d.
Parks and trails;
e.
Lands with active agricultural uses and activities;
f.
Perimeter buffers or visual transitions between different types or intensities of uses; and
g.
Areas that accommodate multiple compatible open space set-aside uses rather than a single use.
2. In the MU-D, MU-ES, and MU-KPI districts, and to the maximum extent practicable, open space set-asides shall be located and organized to include, protect, or enhance the open areas and features identified in Table 5.4.5: Open Space Set-Aside Features, above, except that the establishment of squares, plazas, forecourts, civic greens, and similar urban open space amenities shall have the highest priority.
5.4.8. DEVELOPMENT IN OPEN SPACE SET-ASIDES
Development within open space set-asides shall be limited to that appropriate to the purposes of the type(s) of open space set-asides. Where appropriate, such development may include, but is not limited to, walking, jogging, and biking paths or trails; benches or other seating areas; meeting areas; tables, shelters, grills, and other picnicking facilities; docks and other facilities for fishing; environmental education guides and exhibits; gazebos and other decorative structures; fountains or other water features; play structures for children; gardens or seasonal planting areas; pools; athletic fields and courts; and associated clubhouses.
5.4.9. OWNERSHIP, MANAGEMENT, AND MAINTENANCE OF OPEN SPACE SET-ASIDES
A. Open space set-asides shall be managed and maintained as permanent open space through one or more of the following options:
1.
Conveyance of open space set-aside areas to a property owners’ or homeowners’ association that holds the land in common ownership and will be responsible for managing and maintaining the land for its intended open space purposes, in perpetuity;
2.
Conveyance of open space set-aside areas to a third party beneficiary such as an environmental or civic organization that is organized for, capable of, and willing to
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 69
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.4 Open Space Set-Aside Standards
5.4.9 Ownership, Management, and Maintenance of Open Space Set-Asides
accept responsibility for managing and maintaining the land for its intended open space purposes, in perpetuity; or
3. Establishment of easements on those parts of individually-owned lots including open space set-aside areas that require the areas to be managed consistent with the land’s intended open space purposes and prohibit any inconsistent future development, in perpetuity.
B. All options involving private ownership of open space set-aside areas shall include deed restrictions, covenants, or other legal instruments that ensure continued use of the land for its intended open space purposes, in perpetuity, and provide for the continued and effective management, operation, and maintenance of the land and facilities.
C. Responsibility for managing and maintaining open space set-asides rests with the owner of the land of the open space set-asides. Failure to maintain open space set-asides in accordance with this section and the development approval or permit shall be a violation of this LDC.
Land Development Code Page 5 70 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.5 Fences and Walls
5.5.1 Purpose
Section 5.5. FENCES AND WALLS
5.5.1. PURPOSE
The purpose of this section is to establish standards for the location, height, and appearance of fences and walls in the City, and ensure the safety, security, and privacy of properties.
5.5.2. APPLICABILITY
A. General
Unless exempted in accordance with Sec. 5.5.2.B, Exemptions, the standards in this section apply to all construction, substantial reconstruction, or replacement of fences or walls in the City.
B. Exemptions
The following fences and walls are exempt from the standards in this section:
1.
Fences and walls required for support of a principal or accessory structure;
2.
Fences or barricades around construction sites;
3.
Fences for tree protection;
4.
Fences customarily provided for athletic fields and recreational facilities;
5.
Landscaping berms installed without fences; and
6.
Fences at parks and schools, where such uses are owned by public agencies.
5.5.3. TIMING OF REVIEW
Review for compliance with these standards shall occur during review of a planned development (2.5.1.F, Planned Development), development plan (major or minor) (Sec. 2.5.2.A, Development Plan (Major and Minor)), or plat (subdivision), (Sec. 2.5.2.B, Plat (Subdivision), or building permit (Code of Ordinances Art.VI, Sec. 6.08.00), whichever occurs first.
5.5.4. GENERAL STANDARDS
A. General
1.
Fences and walls shall be located outside of the public right-of-way.
2.
Fences and walls are allowed on the property line between two or more parcels of land held in private ownership.
3.
Fences and walls may be located within any required yard
4.
Fences and Walls shall not be located within two feet of a sidewalk.
B. In Utility Easements
Fences located within utility easements shall receive written authorization from the easement holder or the City, as applicable. The City shall not be responsible for damage
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 71
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.5 Fences and Walls
5.5.5 Height Standards
to, or the repair or replacement of, fences that must be removed to access utility easements or facilities.
C. Blocking Natural Drainage Flow
Fences and walls shall not be located where they would block or divert a natural drainage flow onto or off of any land. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent the installation of temporary fencing to protect existing trees, limit sedimentation, or control erosion.
D. Blocking Access to Fire Hydrants
Fences and walls shall not be located where they would prevent immediate view of, or access to, fire hydrants or other fire-fighting water supply devices, in accordance with the Fire Code.
E. Within Required Landscaping Areas
Fences and walls may be installed within required landscaping areas, subject to an approved landscaping plan. They shall be configured so as not to disturb or damage existing vegetation or installed plant material, to the maximum extent practicable.
F. Within Sight Triangle
Fences and walls located within a required site triangle shall not be located in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight distance of motorists entering or leaving the intersection as established in the last edition of the Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design, Construction, and Maintenance for Streets and Highways, FDOT.
G. Obstructing Windows or Doors
Fences and walls shall not block access from a window or door.
H. Avoidance of Traffic Hazards
Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, fences and walls shall not be allowed in a location the Director determines will create a traffic hazard.
I. Maintenance
Fences and walls and associated landscaping shall be maintained in good repair and in a safe and attractive condition. Maintenance of fences and walls shall include, but not be limited to:
1.
The replacement of missing, decayed, or broken structural or decorative elements;
2.
The repair of deteriorated or damaged fence materials; and
3.
The preservation or repair of weathered surfaces visible from the public right-of-way, sagging, and leaning of any fence or wall post more than 10 degrees from vertical.
5.5.5. HEIGHT STANDARDS
A. General Height Standards
The height of fences and walls except for residential developments on corner lots shall comply with Table 5.5.5.A: Fence and Wall Height
Land Development Code Page 5 72 Apopka, FL
-
- -
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.5 Fences and Walls
5.5.5 Height Standards TABLE 5.5.5.A: FENCE AND WALL HEIGHT LOCATION MAXIMUM HEIGHT (FEET)1 RESIDENTIAL BASE ZONING DISTRICTS COMMERCIAL BASE ZONING DISTRICTS INDUSTRIAL BASE ZONING DISTRICTS MU D, MU ES, MU KPI DISTRICTS INST, PR, AIR DISTRICTS Front Yard 42 42 6 42 6 Rear Yard (interior) 6 6 8 6 6 Rear yard (adjacent to a street) 42 42 8 42 6 Side Yard 6 6 8 6 6 Notes:: 1. Any fence or wall taller than eight shall be approved as part of the review of a development plan. 2. Where contiguous with Industrial districts, up to eight feet along the common property line.
B. Residential Development on Corner Lot Standards
A fence or wall for a residential unit on a corner lot shall comply with one of the following standards:
1. Option 1 (See Figure 5.5.5.B.1):
a.
A fence or wall within a front or street-side front setback:
1.
Shall have a maximum height of four feet.
2.
Shall be set back at least two feet from sidewalks, right of way (ROW), and front driveways.
b.
A fence or wall within a side or rear setback shall have a maximum height of six feet, up to the front setback including the double front building setback line.
c.
The lot setback shall comply with the applicable zoning district.
d.
Corner clear view triangle standards shall control over other setback standards.
e.
No fence or wall shall be permitted on a local road lot within 30 feet of an intersecting street right-of-way (ROW) and 50 feet on collector and arterial roads, measured from the ROW line
f.
No fence or wall shall be erected within a landscape or utility easement that is within a side-street front setback.
Figure 5.5.5.B.1: Residential Development on Corner Lot Option 1
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 73
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.5 Fences and Walls
5.5.5 Height Standards
2. Option 2 (See Figure 5.5.5.B.2):
a. A fence or wall in the street-side front setback on a residential lot that is double-fronted (roadway on front and side of a building, regardless of intersection), shall have a maximum height of six feet if it complies with the following additional standards:
1.
The fence or wall is a maximum of one-half the front setback distance from the building (rounding down to the whole foot).
2.
The fence or wall is setback at least 20 feet from the front of the building.
3.
No fence or wall shall be erected within a landscape or utility easement that is within a side-street front setback.
Land Development Code Page 5 74 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.5 Fences and Walls
5.5.6 Materials Standards
Figure 5.5.5.B.2: Residential Development on Corner Lot Option 2
5.5.6. MATERIALS STANDARDS
A. General
Unless otherwise specified in Sec. 5.5.6.B, Prohibited Materials, fences and walls shall be constructed of any one or more of the following materials:
1.
Masonry or stone;
2.
Ornamental iron, except that fencing shall not incorporate spiked tops within a Residential district without approval of a security exemption plan in accordance with Sec. 5.5.12, Security Exemption Plan;
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 75
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.5 Fences and Walls
5.5.7 Perimeter Fences and Walls Abutting Street Right-of-Way
3.
Painted wood, pressure treated wood, or rot-resistant wood such as cedar, cypress, or teak;
4.
Composite materials designed to appear as wood, metal, or masonry;
5.
Chain link only in I-H or AIR districts, or as a customary part of a sports field. Where chain link fencing is permitted, all chain link fences shall be vinyl coated and installed with the pointed ends to the ground;
6.
Walls clad with substrate material intended to support living vegetation
B. Prohibited Materials
The following fence types or materials are prohibited:
1.
Barbed and/or razor wire, unless approved as part of a security exemption plan in accordance with Sec. 5.5.12, Security Exemption Plan, except on land that is assessed for agricultural use, or on land used for installation and operation of high-voltage equipment at substations for electrical generation, transmission, and distribution in connection with providing public utility service in the City by a regulated public utility. In no event shall barbed wire be placed so as to project outward over any sidewalk, street, or public way, or over property of an adjacent owner. Where barbed wire is allowed, it shall be a minimum of six feet above the ground, held by vinyl-coated brackets matching the color of the fence, and limited to three strands;
2.
Fences and walls erected in any Residential, Commercial, or the MU-D, MU-ES, or MUKPI districts that contain any substance such as broken glass, spikes, nails, razor edges or similar materials designed to inflict pain or injury to any person or animal;
3.
Fences constructed of chicken wire, corrugated metal, fabric materials, fiberboard, garage door panels, plywood, rolled plastic, sheet metal, debris, junk, or waste materials, unless such materials are recycled and reprocessed, for marketing to the general public, as building materials designed to resemble new building materials (e.g., picket fencing made from recycled plastic and fiber);
4.
Chain link fences, except for in the I-H or AIR districts; and
5.
Above-ground fences that carry electrical current, except below-ground electrical fences intended for the keeping of pets.
5.5.7. PERIMETER FENCES AND WALLS ABUTTING STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY
Except in the I-H and AIR districts, fences or walls that are located within 15 feet of a street right-of-way shall:
1.
Be of a uniform style;
2.
Be constructed of brick, stone, concrete (when covered with stucco or similar finish), vinyl, or vertical wooden boards; and
3.
Include breaks, offsets, access points, or other design details in the fence or wall plane at least every 200 feet (see Figure 5.5.7.3: Fence and Wall Offsets).
Land Development Code Page 5 76 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.5 Fences and Walls
5.5.8 Appearance Figure5.5.7.3: Fence and Wall Offsets
5.5.8. APPEARANCE
A. Finished Side to Outside
Wherever a fence or wall is installed, if one side of the fence or wall appears more “finished” than the other (e.g., one side of a fence has visible support framing and the other does not, or one side of a wall has a textured surface and the other does not), the more “finished” side of the fence shall face the exterior of the lot rather than the interior of the lot (see Figure 5.5.8.A: Fence with Finished Side Out). Figure 5.5.8.A: Fence with Finished Side Out
B. Compatibility of Materials Along a Single Lot Side
All fencing or wall segments located along a single lot side shall be composed of a uniform style and color.
C. Fence and Wall Landscaping
Except in the I-H and AIR districts, all fences and walls exceeding four feet in height, if located within 15 feet of a street right-of-way, shall be supplemented with landscape screening in accordance with the standards in 1 and 2 below, to soften the visual impact of the fence or wall. These standards shall apply to fences in Residential single-family districts (RSF-1A, RSF-1B) only if they are located within 15 feet of the right-of-way of a
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 77
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.5 Fences and Walls
5.5.8 Appearance
principal arterial street or minor arterial street. (See Figure 5.5.8.C.2: Fence and Wall Landscaping.)
1. Shrubs Required
One evergreen shrub shall be installed for every five linear feet of fence or wall, on the side of the fence or wall facing the public street right-of-way. Shrubs may be installed in a staggered, clustered, grouped, or linear fashion.
2. Substitution of Understory Trees
One understory or ornamental tree may be substituted for every three shrubs provided that the tree meets the size standards of Sec. 5.2, Landscaping and Buffer Standards. Figure 5.5.8.C.2: Fence and Wall Landscaping Land Development Code Page 5 78 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.5 Fences and Walls
5.5.9 Fence and Wall Construction
Landscaping and Buffer Standards
5.5.9. FENCE AND WALL CONSTRUCTION
Fences and walls shall comply with the Florida Building Code, shall require the proper permits prior to construction, and shall be constructed in accordance with the proposed finished grade elevation.
5.5.10. GATES
Gates shall comply with the following standards:
A. All gates shall have hardware to secure the gate in a closed position.
B. All unattended gates and gates opening onto a public sidewalk area shall be self-closing, self-latching, and locked when not in use.
5.5.11. RETAINING WALLS
All retaining walls over 30 inches in height shall be supported by a professional engineering report that provides full structural design of the wall including structural engineering, geotechnical engineering, and civil engineering. Retaining walls over 30 inches in height shall have safety railings engineered on top of the walls. Retaining walls shall be a maximum of six feet in height. Retaining wall access and maintenance easements shall be provided both above and below all retaining walls. Easements shall be at least five feet wide and have a maximum slope of ten to one
5.5.12. SECURITY EXEMPTION PLAN
A landowner, or a representative of a public agency responsible for a government facility or other use in need of heightened security may submit to the Director a security exemption plan proposing a fence or wall taller than those permitted by this section or proposing the use of barbed and/or razor wire or electric wire atop a fence or wall for security reasons. The Director may approve or approve with conditions, the security exemption plan, upon finding all of the following:
A. Need for Safety or Security Reasons
The condition, location, or use of the land, or the history of activity in the area, indicates the land or any materials stored or used on it are in significantly greater danger of theft or damage than surrounding land, or represent a significant hazard to public safety without:
1.
A taller fence or wall;
2.
An electric fence; or
3.
Use of barbed and/or razor wire atop a fence or wall.
B. No Adverse Effect
The proposed fence or wall will not have a significant adverse effect on the security,
functioning, appearance, or value of adjacent lands, or the surrounding area as a whole
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 79
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.6 Exterior Lighting
5.6.1 Purpose and Intent
C. Denial of Security Exemption Plan
If the Director finds the applicant fails to demonstrate compliance with Sec. 5.5.12.A and B, above, the security plan shall be denied.
Section 5.6. EXTERIOR LIGHTING
5.6.1. PURPOSE AND INTENT
The purpose and intent of this section is to regulate exterior lighting to:
A. Ensure all exterior lighting is designed and installed to maintain adequate lighting levels on site;
B. Assure that excessive light spillage and glare are not directed at adjacent lands, neighboring areas, and motorists;
C. Curtail light pollution, reduce skyglow, and preserve the nighttime environment for the enjoyment of residents and visitors;
D. Conserve energy and resources to the greatest extent possible; and
E. Provide security for persons and land.
5.6.2. APPLICABILITY
A. General
Unless exempted in accordance with Sec. 5.6.2.A.2, below, the standards of this section apply to:
1.
All new development in the City; and
2.
Any individual expansion or alteration of a building existing prior to March 6, 2019 if the expansion increases the building’s floor area by 50 percent or more, or the alteration involves 50 percent or more of the building’s floor area (including interior alterations).
B. Exemptions
The following types of lighting are exempted from the standards of this section:
1.
Lighting exempt under State or federal law;
2.
FAA-mandated lighting associated with a utility tower or airport;
3.
Lighting for public monuments and statuary;
4.
Lighting solely for signage (see Section 5.10, Signs)
5.
Lighting for outdoor recreational uses such as ball diamonds, football fields, soccer fields, other playing fields, tennis courts, and similar uses, provided that:
a. Light poles are not more than 30 feet in height, except at ball diamonds, football fields, and other playing fields, where they can be taller;
Land Development Code Page 5 80 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.6 Exterior Lighting
5.6.3 Timing of Review
b.
Maximum illumination at the property line is not brighter than two foot-candles; and
c.
Exterior lighting is extinguished no later than 11:00 p.m., except to complete an activity that is in progress prior to 11:00 p.m.
6.
Temporary lighting for circuses, fairs, carnivals, theatrical, and other performance areas-provided such lighting is discontinued upon completion of the performance;
7.
Temporary lighting of construction sites, provided such lighting is discontinued upon completion of the construction activity;
8.
Temporary lighting for emergency situations, provided such lighting is discontinued upon abatement of the emergency situation;
9.
Security lighting controlled and activated by motion sensor devices for a duration of 15 minutes or less;
10.
Underwater lighting in swimming pools, fountains, and other water features;
11.
Holiday or festive lighting-provided such lighting does not create unsafe glare on street rights-of-way;
12.
Outdoor lighting fixtures that do not comply with provisions of this section on March 6, 2019, provided they are brought into compliance with this section when they become unrepairable.
5.6.3. TIMING OF REVIEW
Review for compliance with these standards shall occur during review of a planned development (2.5.1.F, Planned Development), development plan (major or minor) (Sec. 2.5.2.A, Development Plan (Major and Minor)), plat (subdivision), (Sec. 2.5.2.B, Plat (Subdivision), or building permit (Code of Ordinances Art.VI, Sec. 6.08.00), whichever occurs first.
5.6.4. LIGHTING PLAN
To ensure compliance with the standards of this section, a lighting plan demonstrating how exterior lighting will comply with the standards of this section shall be included as part of a development application.
5.6.5. PROHIBITED LIGHTING
The following exterior lighting is prohibited:
A. Light fixtures that imitate an official highway or traffic control light or sign;
B. Light fixtures in the direct line of vision with any traffic control light or sign;
C. Privately-owned light fixtures located in the public right-of-way;
D. Searchlights, except when used by State, Federal, or local authorities, or where they are used to illuminate alleys, parking garages and working (maintenance) areas, if they are shielded and aimed so that they do not result in lighting on any adjacent lot or public right-of-way exceeding two footcandles; and
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 81
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.6 Exterior Lighting
5.6.6 Street Lighting
E. Light types of limited spectral emission, such as low pressure sodium or mercury vapor lights. (Light sources shall be color-correct types such as Halogen, LED, or metal halide).
5.6.6. STREET LIGHTING
A. All street lights shall be located inside full cut-off fixtures mounted on non-corrosive poles served by underground wiring
B. The light structure and light color of street lights in an individual subdivision or development shall be consistent throughout the subdivision or development.
5.6.7. GENERAL STANDARDS FOR EXTERIOR LIGHTING
Development subject to this section shall comply with the following standards:
A. Hours of Illumination
Public, civic, and institutional uses, commercial uses, and industrial uses that are adjacent to existing residential development shall extinguish all exterior lighting—except lighting necessary for security or emergency purposes—by 10:00 P.M. or within one hour of closing, whichever occurs first. For the purposes of this paragraph, lighting “necessary for security or emergency purposes” shall be construed to mean the minimum amount of exterior lighting necessary to illuminate possible points of entry or exit into a structure, to illuminate exterior walkways, or to illuminate outdoor storage areas. Lighting activated by motion sensor devices is strongly encouraged.
B. Shielding with Full Cut-off Fixtures
All exterior luminaries, including security lighting, shall be full cut-off fixtures that are directed downward, consistent with Figure 5.7.7.B-1: Full Cut-off Fixtures. In no case shall lighting be directed above a horizontal plane through the lighting fixture. See Figure 5.7.7.B-2: Examples of Fully Shielded Light Fixtures. Figure 5.6.7.B-1: Full Cut-off Fixtures Land Development Code Page 5 82 Apopka, FL
-
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.6 Exterior Lighting
5.6.7 General Standards for Exterior Lighting Figure 5.6.7.B-2: Examples of Fully Shielded Light Fixtures
C. Maximum Illumination Levels
1. All exterior lighting shall be designed and located so that the maximum illumination measured in foot-candles at ground level at a lot line shall not exceed the standards in Table 5.6.7.C: Maximum Illumination Levels, and Figure 5.6.7.C Maximum Illumination Levels.
TABLE 5.6.7.C : MAXIMUM ILLUMINATION LEVELS
TYPE OF USE ABUTTING THE LOT LINE
MAXIMUM ILLUMINATION LEVEL AT LOT LINE (FOOT CANDLES)
Residential Uses (except multifamily, townhome, and all uses in the Group Living Use Category), and Rural and Agricultural Uses
0.5
Multifamily and townhome uses, uses in the Group Living Category, and Public, Civic, and Institutional Uses
1.0
Commercial or mixed-uses, and land in any Commercial and the MU-D: Downtown Mixed-Use, MU-ES: Mixed-Use East Shore, and MU-KPI: Mixed-Use Kelly Park Interchange districts
1.5
Industrial uses
2.0
Parking facilities (when a stand alone use)
2.5
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 83
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.6 Exterior Lighting
5.6.8 Lighting Design Standards for Specific Uses and Site Features Figure 5.6.7.C: Maximum Illumination Levels
2. All exterior light fixtures shall generate at least 80 lumens per watt of energy consumed, as shown on the manufacturers specifications for the fixture.
D. Maximum Height
Except for athletic fields, where poles shall not exceed 95 feet in height, and street lighting (see Sec. 5.6.6), the height of exterior light fixtures, whether mounted on poles, walls, or by other means, shall comply with the standards in Table 5.6.7.D: Maximum Height for Exterior Lighting.
TABLE 5.6.7.D: MAXIMUM HEIGHT FOR EXTERIOR LIGHTING
ZONE
MAXIMUM HEIGHT (FEET)
Residential and Agricultural and Transitional Districts
15
Commercial, Industrial, and Special Purpose Districts
25
Within 100 feet of a Residential District
15
5.6.8. LIGHTING DESIGN STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC USES AND SITE FEATURES
In addition to complying with all applicable standards in Sec. 5.6.7, General Standards for Exterior Lighting, the specific uses and site features identified in this subsection shall comply with the standards established for that type of use or site feature.
Land Development Code Page 5 84 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.6 Exterior Lighting
5.6.8 Lighting Design Standards for Specific Uses and Site Features
A. Awnings
Awnings or canopies used for building accents over doors and windows shall not be internally illuminated (i.e., from underneath or behind the awning) unless the awning material is entirely opaque.
B. Canopies
Areas under a canopy shall be designed so as not to create glare off-site. Acceptable methods include one or both of the following:
1.
A recessed fixture incorporating a lens cover that is either recessed or flush with the bottom surface (ceiling) of the canopy that provides a full cutoff or fully-shielded light distribution.
2.
A surface mounted fixture incorporating a flat glass that provides a full cutoff or fully-shielded light distribution.
C. Sports and Performance Venues
Lighting fixtures for outdoor sports areas, athletic fields, and performance areas shall be equipped with an existing glare control package (e.g., louvers, shields, or similar devices) and aimed so that their beams are directed and fall within the primary playing or performance area.
D. Wall Pack Lights
1.
Wall packs on the exterior of the building shall be fully shielded (e.g., true cut-off type bulb or light source not visible from off-site) to direct the light vertically downward and be of low wattage (100 watts or lower).
2.
Wall pack light sources visible from any location off the site are prohibited.
E. Pedestrian Lighting
Pedestrian light fixtures shall comply with the following:
1.
Light fixtures for sidewalks, walkways, trails, and bicycle paths, shall provide at least
1.2 foot candles of illumination, but not exceed 2.0 foot candles.
2.
Light poles shall not be higher than 15 feet above grade and shall be placed a maximum of 100 feet apart.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 85
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.6 Exterior Lighting
5.6.9 Measurement
3. Pedestrian bollard lamps shall be mounted no higher than four feet above grade and shall not exceed 900 lumens for any single lamp. See Figure 5.6.8.E.3: Examples of Pedestrian Bollard Lamps Figure 5.6.8.E.3: Examples of Pedestrian Bollard Lamps
F. Decorative and Landscape Lighting
Outdoor light fixtures used for decorative effects shall comply with the following standards:
1.
Decorative lighting intended to enhance the appearance of a building and/or landscaping shall cast all light downward (rather than upward) against the building surface or onto a landscape feature.
2.
Decorative lighting shall not exceed 100 watts of incandescent illuminance or the equivalent.
5.6.9. MEASUREMENT
A. General
Light level measurements shall be made at the lot line of the land upon which light to be measured is being generated. If measurement on private property is not possible or practical, light level measurements may be made at the boundary of the public street right-of-way that adjoins the land. Measurements shall be made at finished grade (ground level), with the light-registering portion of the meter held parallel to the ground
Land Development Code Page 5 86 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.7 Development Design Guidelines
5.6.10 Exemptions for a Security Plan
pointing up. The meter shall have cosine and color correction and have an accuracy tolerance of no greater than plus or minus five percent.
B. Light Meter Calibrated within Two Years
Measurements shall be taken with a light meter that has been calibrated within two years.
5.6.10. EXEMPTIONS FOR A SECURITY PLAN
A. Government facilities, parks, public safety, and other development may submit a security plan to the Director proposing exterior lighting that deviates from the standards in this section. The Director shall approve or approve with conditions the security plan and its proposed deviation from the standards, upon finding that:
1.
The proposed deviation from the standards is necessary for the adequate protection of the subject land, development, or the public;
2.
The condition, location, or use of the land, or the history of activity in the area, indicates the land or any materials stored or used on it are in significantly greater danger of theft or damage, or members of the public are at greater risk for harm than on surrounding land without the additional lighting; and
3.
The proposed deviation from the standards is the minimum required, and will not have a significant adverse effect on neighboring lands.
B. If the Director finds the applicant fails to demonstrate compliance Sec. 5.6.10.A, above, the security plan shall be denied.
Section 5.7. DEVELOPMENT DESIGN GUIDELINES
The City of Apopka Development Design Guidelines are included in this LDC as Appendix D and incorporated herein by reference.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 87
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.8 Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
5.8.1 Purpose and Intent
Section 5.8. NEIGHBORHOOD COMPATIBILITY STANDARDS
5.8.1. PURPOSE AND INTENT
The purpose of these neighborhood compatibility standards is to provide a proper transition and ensure compatibility between single-family detached or two-family (duplex)dwellings, vacant lands in the residential single-family zoning districts (RSF-1A, RSF-1B) or residential two family zoning district (RTF), and other more intense forms of development. More specifically, it is the intent of these standards to:
A. Protect the character of existing neighborhoods consisting of primarily single-family detached or two-family (duplex) dwellings from potentially-adverse impacts resulting from more intense and incompatible adjacent forms of development;
B. Limit the excessive consumption of available land though the utilization of large vegetated buffers in favor of development form and design treatments; and
C. Establish and maintain vibrant pedestrian-oriented areas where differing uses can operate in close proximity to one another.
5.8.2. APPLICABILITY
A. General
1.
Except as otherwise provided in Sec. 5.8.2.B, Exemptions, these standards apply to new multifamily and nonresidential development when located on land adjacent to, or across a street or alley from protected development.
2.
Except as otherwise provided in Sec. 5.8.2.B, Exemptions, these standards apply to expansions and alterations to multifamily and nonresidential development when located on land adjacent to, or across a street or alley from protected development or parcels, if the expansion increases the building’s floor area by 50 percent or more, or the alteration involves 50 percent or more of the building’s floor area (including interior alterations).
3.
For the purposes of this section, “protected development” shall mean existing single-family detached or two-family (duplex) dwellings, vacant lands in the residential single-family districts (RSF-1A, RSF-1B), and vacant lands in the residential two-family zoning district (RTF).
4.
For the purposes of this section, “multifamily and nonresidential development” shall include the following:
a.
Mixed-use development;
b.
Live-work dwellings;
c.
Multifamily dwellings;
d.
Townhome dwellings;
e.
Uses in the Group Living uses category;
f.
Uses in the Public, Civic, and Institutional use classification;
Land Development Code Page 5 88 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.8 Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
5.8.3 Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
g.
Uses in the Commercial use classification; and
h.
Uses in the Industrial use classification.
B. Exemptions
Uses exempt from these standards include the following:
1.
Multifamily and nonresidential development when the adjacent protected development is located on a lot within a nonresidential district;
2.
Multifamily and nonresidential development when separated from the adjacent protected development or parcel by a street with four or more lanes or a right-of-way greater than 75 feet;
3.
Development in the MU-D, MU-ES, and MU-KPI districts;
4.
Uses in the Educational uses category; and
5.
Places of worship.
C. Timing of Review
Review for compliance with these standards shall occur during review of a planned development (2.5.1.F, Planned Development), development plan (major or minor) (Sec. 2.5.2.A, Development Plan (Major and Minor)), plat (subdivision), (Sec. 2.5.2.B, Plat (Subdivision), or building permit (Code of Ordinances Art.VI, Sec. 6.08.00), whichever occurs first.
D. Conflict
In the case of conflict between these standards and other standards in this LDC, these
standards shall control unless expressly stated to the contrary.
5.8.3. NEIGHBORHOOD COMPATIBILITY STANDARDS
Development subject to this section shall comply with the following standards.
A. Off-Street Parking
1. When required, off-street parking shall be established in one or more of the following locations, listed in priority order:
a.
Adjacent to off-street parking lots serving nonresidential uses on abutting lots;
b.
Adjacent to lot lines abutting nonresidential development;
c.
Adjacent to lot lines abutting mixed-use development; or
d.
Adjacent to lot lines abutting protected development or parcels.
2.
Parking structure facades adjacent to protected development or parcels shall be configured to appear as articulated or landscaped building walls, to soften their visual impact.
3.
Off-street surface parking areas located adjacent to protected development shall be screened by a Type D buffer (see Sec. 5.2.5.B.3, Bufferyards).
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 89
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.8 Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
5.8.3 Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
4. The total amount of off-street parking shall not exceed 1.1 times the required minimum specified Table 5.1.6.A: Minimum Number of Off-Street Vehicular Parking Spaces, and may be reduced through an alternative parking plan (see Sec. 5.1.8.A, Alternative Parking Plan) it will not have an adverse impact on the adjacent protected development.
B. Building Orientation
Multifamily and nonresidential development shall be oriented to face similar forms of development on adjacent or opposing lots rather than protected development, to the maximum extent practicable.
C. Building Height
1.
Building height shall not exceed the height established in Table 5.8.3.C: Maximum Height Where Neighborhood Compatibility Standards are Applicable. This section does not allow greater height than would otherwise be allowed on the parcel by the other provisions of this LDC. Distance from protected development is measured from the lot line of the protected development to the building line or the point of height change of the building subject to the standard.
TABLE 5.8.3.C: MAXIMUM HEIGHT WHERE NEIGHBORHOOD COMPATIBILITY STANDARDS ARE APPLICABLE
DISTANCE FROM PROTECTED DEVELOPMENT1,2
MAXIMUM HEIGHT
Less than 75 feet
Lesser of : 3 stories or 35 feet
75 to 150 feet
Lesser of : 4 stories or 45 feet
More than 150 feet
Applicable zoning district maximum
Notes: 1. All required minimum zoning district setbacks shall apply
2.
Buildings over three stories in height within 150 feet of the protected development shall be broken up into modules or wings with the smaller and shorter portions of the structure located adjacent to the protected development (see Figure 5.8.3.C, Building Height Modulation). Figure 5.8.3.C: Building Height Modulation Land Development Code Page 5 90 Apopka, FL 75 feet 35 feet Building Height “stepped back” from the single family use Building over three stories broken-up into modules or wings
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.8 Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
5.8.3 Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
D. Building Massing
1. Building facades facing protected development shall be configured to appear as a series of distinct building modules, storefronts, wings, projections, or recesses that comply with the following standards:
a.
Each individual module, storefront, wing, projection, or recess shall maintain a minimum width of at least 20 feet and a maximum width of 50 feet (see Figure
5.8.3.D: Building Massing). Figure 5.8.3.D: Building Massing Buildings facing protected development or parcels configured to appear as a series of distinct modules Use of architectural features similar to the adjacent protected development. Pitched roof within 100 feet of protected development
b.
Projections or recesses shall maintain a minimum offset of two feet from the primary building facade wall plane.
2. Exterior, open corridors facing a protected development are prohibited on multifamily and visitor accommodation building facades.
E. Architectural Features
Buildings subject to these standards shall use similarly-sized and patterned architectural features such as windows, doors, awnings, arcades, pilasters, cornices, and other building features found on adjacent protected development (see Figure 0: Building Massing).
F. Building Roof Form
1.
Buildings subject to these standards shall include roof forms that incorporate changes in roof plane or slope with at least a two-foot projection, recess, ridge or valley no less than every 40 feet, overhanging eaves at least five feet wide, or parapet walls with three-dimensional cornices.
2.
Structures on lots abutting a protected development shall maintain a pitched roof within 150 feet of the lot line shared with such development (see Figure 0: Building Massing).
3.
All roof-mounted equipment shall be configured so as to avoid or minimize its view from adjacent streets and protected developments and parcels, to the maximum extent practicable.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 91
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.8 Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
5.8.3 Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
G. Building Materials
1. Transparency
Building facades within 150 feet of a protected development or parcel shall comply with the standards in Table 5.8.3.G.1: Transparency Standards
TABLE 5.8.3.G.1 : TRANSPARENCY STANDARDS
BUILDING STORY
MINIMUM FACADE AREA PERCENTAGE TO BE TRANSPARENT (PERCENT)1
1st Floor
502
2nd Floor
35
3rd Floor
25
Notes: 1. The facade area shall be measured from the grade to the underside of the eaves, or from story line to story line on upper building stories. 2. The first two feet of facade area closest to the grade are not required to be transparent and shall be excluded from the facade area calculation.
2. Exterior Materials
Facades facing a protected development or parcel shall comply with the following exterior materials standards:
a.
Materials and material configurations shall be consistent with those commonly used on single-family detached or two-family (duplex) dwellings.
b.
Plywood, concrete block, and corrugated metal are prohibited as exterior materials.
c.
Split-face masonry unit and vinyl siding shall not exceed 25 percent of a building facade.
H. Site Features
1. Loading, Service, and Refuse Collection Areas
Loading, service, and refuse collection areas shall be:
a.
Screened from view of protected development, using materials that are the same as, or of equal quality to, the materials used for the principal building; or
b.
Incorporated into the overall design of the site so that the visual and acoustic impacts of these functions are fully contained within an enclosure or otherwise out of view from adjacent properties and public streets.
2. Drive-Through Service Facilities
a.
In no instance shall a drive-through or pick-up window be located on a building facade that faces a protected development.
b.
Order boxes associated with a drive-through or pick-up window shall be at least 200 feet from a lot containing a protected development or a protected parcel.
Land Development Code Page 5 92 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.8 Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
5.8.3 Neighborhood Compatibility Standards
3. Exterior Lighting
Exterior lighting shall:
a.
Have a maximum height of 15 feet if within 150 feet of the lot line of a protected development; and
b.
Be configured so that the source of illumination is not visible from a public street right-of-way or an adjacent protected development.
4. Signage Standards
a.
To the maximum extent practicable, signage shall be located a minimum of 150 feet from lot lines shared with a protected development.
b.
The maximum sign copy area for freestanding, ground, and wall signs shall be reduced by 25 percent within 50 feet of lot lines shared with a protected development.
c.
Signage within 100 feet of a lot line shared with a protected development shall be limited to directional or incidental signage.
5. Open Space Set-Asides
a.
Required open space set-asides shall be located between a proposed development and an adjacent protected development, to the maximum extent practicable.
b.
Outdoor recreation features such as swimming pools, tennis courts, playgrounds, and similar features shall be at least 100 feet from any lot line shared with a protected development.
6. Utilities
All utilities serving individual buildings or developments shall be located underground.
I. Perimeter Fence or Wall
1. Where a development subject to these standards abuts a protected development, an opaque fence six feet high shall be provided along the shared boundary to help screen the development from view of the protected development, in addition to the bufferyard standards of Sec. 5.2.5.B.3, Bufferyard.
J. Operational Standards
Development subject to these standards shall:
1.
Prohibit outdoor dining or other outdoor activities within 150 feet of protected development;
2.
Limit trash collection or other service functions to only between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m.; and
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 93
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.9 Agricultural Compatibility Standards
5.9.1 Purpose and Intent
Section 5.9. AGRICULTURAL COMPATIBILITY STANDARDS
5.9.1. PURPOSE AND INTENT
The purpose and intent of these agricultural compatibility standards is to promote development that is compatible with existing agricultural uses and activities in the City. More specifically, these standards are intended to:
A. Ensure new non-agricultural development does not negatively impact the continuation of existing adjacent agricultural uses and activities in the Agricultural (AG) zoning district;
B. Maintain and promote rural character in the Agricultural (AG) zoning district;
C. Allow landowners and residents conducting agricultural uses and activities to capture the monetary value of their land through limited development while continuing agricultural uses and activities; and
D. Ensure greater compatibility between existing agricultural uses and activities and new non-agricultural development.
5.9.2. APPLICABILITY
A. General
Except where exempted in paragraph B. below, the standards in this section shall apply to all new residential and nonresidential uses that are proposed to be located adjacent to an ongoing agricultural use or activity in the AG zoning district.
B. Timing of Review
Review for compliance with these standards shall occur during review of a planned development (2.5.1.F, Planned Development), development plan (major or minor) (Sec. 2.5.2.A, Development Plan (Major and Minor)), plat (subdivision), (Sec. 2.5.2.B, Plat (Subdivision), or building permit (Code of Ordinances Art.VI, Sec. 6.08.00), whichever occurs first.
5.9.3. AGRICULTURAL COMPATIBILITY STANDARDS
Development subject to this section shall comply with the following standards.
A. Agricultural Buffer
1. Buffer Required
Development shall provide and maintain a vegetative buffer and fencing (or walls) along all property lines abutting land that accommodates an agricultural use or activity in accordance with the standards of this subsection, for as long as the agricultural use or activity continues (see Figure 5.9.3.A.1: Agricultural Compatibility Features).
Land Development Code Page 5 94 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.9 Agricultural Compatibility Standards
5.9.3 Agricultural Compatibility Standards Figure 5.9.3.A.1: Agricultural Compatibility Features
2. Buffer Width
a.
The agricultural buffer shall be at least 75 feet wide.
b.
The Director may allow the buffer width to be reduced by up to 25 feet upon determining the reduced buffer width is justified by the type or intensity of the adjacent agricultural use or activity, an intervening topographic change, an intervening riparian buffer, or the existence or provision of vegetation in addition to that required in Sec. 5.9.3.A.3, Buffer Materials.
3. Buffer Materials
a.
Agricultural buffers shall consist of a mix of trees, shrubs, berms, and natural features sufficient to reduce noise, spray drift, and dust, diffuse light; and act as a physical separation between non-agricultural and agricultural uses and activities. All buffers shall incorporate a vegetative screening component to reduce conflict potential between residential/nonresidential and agricultural uses and activities.
b.
A buffer shall incorporate a wall or fence to provide additional screening and/or limit access between the development and the abutting agricultural uses or activities.
c.
Where the agricultural buffer is directly adjacent to a residential dwelling or residential lot, the length of the buffer running parallel to the dwelling along the property line shall be landscaped as follows, in addition to the buffer and fence:
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 95
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.9 Agricultural Compatibility Standards
5.9.3 Agricultural Compatibility Standards
1.
The buffer shall be planted with a minimum of two offset rows of trees that provides an average spacing between the canopies of trees of ten feet or less, at maturity.
2.
Each tree shall be a minimum height of eight feet and minimum caliper of two inches when planted.
3.
Each tree shall be a native species that can be expected to attain a minimum height of 35 feet and have a crown width of 25 feet or greater, at maturity.
4. Development Allowed in Buffer
Development allowed within a buffer is limited to:
a.
Landscaping with native plants, trees, or hedgerows;
b.
Crossings by roadways, driveways, railroad tracks, and utility lines (and associated maintenance corridors), where the crossing is aligned to minimize any reduction of the buffer’s effectiveness;
c.
Trails that involve minimal removal or disturbance of buffer vegetation;
d.
Stormwater management facilities, to the extent they are determined to be necessary by the Director;
e.
Vegetation management, including the planting of vegetation or pruning of vegetation, removal of individual trees that pose a danger to human life or nearby buildings, removal of individual trees to preserve other vegetation from extensive pest infestation, removal of understory nuisance or invasive vegetation, or removal or disturbance of vegetation as part of emergency fire control measures; and
f.
Any other development determined by the Director to be consistent with the use of the property as an agricultural buffer.
5. Maintenance
a.
Landowner(s) are responsible for all aspects of continuous maintenance of buffer areas.
b.
Landowner(s) shall be responsible for maintaining landscape plants in a healthy and attractive condition. Dead or dying plants shall be replaced with materials of equal size and similar variety within six months, weather permitting.
c.
If the development consists of multiple parcels that may be held under separate ownership, a homeowners’ association, property owners’ association, or similar entity shall be required to maintain the buffer.
d.
Buffer maintenance requirements shall be stipulated through inclusion in covenants, conditions, and restrictions, as appropriate.
B. Location and Configuration of Open Space Set-Asides
In cases where new development subject to these standards includes open space set-asides, they shall be located, to the maximum extent practicable, between the abutting existing agricultural uses or activities and the buildings in the new development, and be
Land Development Code Page 5 96 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.9 Agricultural Compatibility Standards
5.9.3 Agricultural Compatibility Standards
configured to accommodate the agricultural buffer required in this section. (see Figure
5.9.3.A.1: Agricultural Compatibility Features)
C. Lot Size Configuration
Except for lots platted prior to March 6, 2019 lots bordering the vegetated buffer shall maintain a minimum lot area twice the minimum lot area otherwise required by the base zoning district where the development is located. (see Figure 5.9.3.A.1: Agricultural Compatibility Features)
D. Preservation of Direct Access for Agricultural Uses and Activities
Development subject to these standards shall be configured to ensure agricultural uses and activities retain direct access to adjacent streets.
E. Notification on Planned Development, Development Plan (Major and Minor), and Plat (Subdivision)
Planned developments, development plans (major and minor), and plats (subdivisions) subject to these standards shall bear a notation on each individual development approval indicating the development is adjacent to an existing agricultural use or activity that is anticipated to generate noise, light, dust, odor, or vibration as part of its normal operations.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 97
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.10 Signs
5.10.1 Purpose and Intent
Section 5.10. SIGNS
5.10.1. PURPOSE AND INTENT
The purpose and intent of this section is to:
A. Preserve, protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare and general esthetic quality of the City;
B. Enhance the economy and the business and industry of the City by promoting the reasonable, orderly, and effective display of signs and encouraging better communication with the public;
C. Enhance the physical appearance of the City by preserving the scenic and natural beauty;
D. Protect the general public from damage and injury caused by the faulty and uncontrolled construction and use of signs;
E. Reduce sign or advertising distractions in order to protect pedestrians and motorists from damage or injury caused by the distractions, obstructions, and hazards that may increase traffic accidents;
F. Protect the physical and mental well-being of the general public by recognizing and encouraging a sense of esthetic appreciation for the visual environment;
G. Preserve the value of private property by assuring the compatibility of signs with surrounding land uses;
H. Restrict the proliferation of signs; and
I. Encourage the use of architecturally compatible signs as much as possible.
5.10.2. NO DEFENSE OF NUISANCE ACTION
Compliance with the requirements of this subsection shall not constitute a defense to an action brought to abate a nuisance under the common law.
5.10.3. MAINTENANCE
A. All signs and all sign components shall be maintained in a state of good repair and present a neat and clean appearance.
B. When the message portion of any sign ceases to be operated, offered, or conducted, the sign shall be removed within 30 days. The sign structure may remain so long as it is properly maintained. This subsection shall not be construed to alter the effect of the LDC which prohibits the replacement of a nonconforming sign, nor shall this subsection be construed to prevent the changing of the message of a sign.
C. The vegetation around, in front of, behind and underneath the base of freestanding signs for a distance of ten feet shall be neatly trimmed, free of unsightly weeds, and free of rubbish or debris that would constitute a fire or health hazard.
Land Development Code Page 5 98 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.10 Signs
5.10.4 Permitting Requirements
5.10.4. PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS
A. No sign or sign structure shall be erected, substantially altered, displayed, or changed, except for signs as provided herein, until after a sign permit is issued. Repainting or changing the message of a sign shall not, in and of itself, be considered a substantial alteration, unless indicated otherwise in this section.
B. A sign erected, altered, displayed or substantially changed without a permit is an illegal sign and shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Article 9: Enforcement.
C. Development plan applications for single-occupancy developments and for multiple-occupancy developments under 10,000 square feet of gross building area shall identify the location of all freestanding signs and provide a sketch of the monument structure and sign, including a description of materials used for the monument construction.
5.10.5. DEVELOPMENT PLAN APPLICATION CONTENTS
A. Development plan applications for single or multiple-occupancy developments with 10,000 square feet of gross building area or greater shall include a master sign plan submitted in accordance with the following:
1. Signs for multiple-occupancy development shall conform to an approved master sign plan submitted in conjunction with the development application. The master sign plan shall be included as part of a development plan which shall be maintained on file by the City. As a minimum, the sign format of a master sign plan shall specify and include the following:
a. Freestanding Signs
The development plan shall include a sketch of all freestanding signs, materials for the monument construction, sign location, setbacks to property lines and distance to sidewalks, distance to other freestanding signs located on or off-site, sign height, sign face dimensions and area calculations, total allowable sign area calculations, information regarding the electronic reader board, if applicable, landscape plan for the area around the sign; and any other information necessary to determine compliance with this section.
b. Wall and other Signs
Provide the types of signs and dimensions (not to exceed the size limits contained in this section) which will be permitted each occupant within the complex. The sign format shall also contain common design elements, such as placement, color, shape or style of lettering, which lend a unified appearance to the signs of the occupants within the complex.
2. Substantial modification of the master sign plan may only be modified with the approval of the board which approved the initial master sign plan upon submission of a revised master sign plan and specifications detailing the revised format. Modifications determined to be minor or insignificant by the City may be approved by the Director.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 99
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.10 Signs
5.10.6 Prohibited Signs
5.10.6. PROHIBITED SIGNS
A. Generally
It shall be unlawful to erect, cause to be erected, maintain or cause to be maintained any sign not expressly authorized by this section.
B. Specific Prohibited Signs
Unless expressly authorized elsewhere in this LDC, the following signs are prohibited:
1.
Signs that are in violation of the building code or electrical code;
2.
Signs that do or will constitute a safety hazard;
3.
Blank temporary signs;
4.
Signs with visible flashing, moving, revolving, or rotating parts or visible mechanical movements of any description or other apparent visible movement achieved by electrical, electronic or mechanical means, except for traditional barber poles and as may be permitted for off-premise signs;
5.
Signs with the optical illusion of movement by means of a design that presents a pattern capable of giving the illusion of motion or changing of copy;
6.
Signs with lights or illuminations that flash, move, rotate, scintillate, blink, flicker or vary in intensity or color except for time-temperature-date signs;
7.
Strings of light bulbs used on commercially developed parcels for commercial purposes, unless:
a.
Used as traditional holiday decoration;
b.
They are completely attached to the primary structure; or
c.
Are used for landscaping or outdoor seating enhancement;
8.
Signs commonly referred to as wind signs, consisting of flags, pennants, ribbons, spinners, streamers or captive balloons, or other objects or material fastened in such a manner as to move upon being subjected to pressure by wind;
9.
Signs that are attention-getting devices which incorporate projected images, emit any sound, odor, or visible matter, such as smoke or steam that is intended to attract attention, or involve the use of live animals;
10.
Signs attached to the roof of any building or attached to the building which projects above the roof or is suspended above the roof;
11.
Signs or sign structures that interfere in any way with free use of any fire escape, emergency exit or standpipe, or that obstruct any window so that security visibility is hampered;
12.
Signs that resemble any official sign or marker erected by any governmental agency or that by reason of position, shape or color would conflict with the proper functioning of any traffic sign or signal, or be of a size, location, movement, content, color or illumination that may be confused with or construed as a traffic-control device, including any sign within ten feet of a public right-of-way or within 100 feet of
Land Development Code Page 5 100 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.10 Signs
5.10.7 General Standards for Permanent Signs
traffic-control lights that contain red or green lights that might be confused with traffic-control lights.
13.
Signs that obstruct the vision of pedestrians, cyclists, or motorists traveling on or entering public streets;
14.
Signs that are of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or impair the vision of any motorist, cyclist, or pedestrian using or entering a public way;
15.
Signs that are a hazard or a nuisance to occupants of any property because of glare or other characteristics;
16.
Nongovernmental signs that use the words "stop," "look," "danger, or any similar word, phrase, or symbol;
17.
Signs that contain any lighting or control mechanism that causes unreasonable interference with radio, television, or other communication signals;
18.
Searchlights used to advertise or promote a business or to attract customers to a property;
19.
Signs that are painted, pasted or printed on any curbstone, flagstone, pavement, or any portion of any sidewalk or street, except house numbers and traffic-control signs;
20.
Signs placed upon benches, bus shelters, or waste receptacles, except as may be authorized in writing pursuant to Ch. 337, Fla. Stat.;
21.
Signs erected on public property, or on private property (such as private utility poles) located on public property, other than signs erected by public authority for public purposes and signs authorized in writing in accordance with Ch. 337, Fla. Stat.
22.
Signs erected over or across any public street (i.e., street banner), except governmental signs authorized by the City;
23.
Parked vehicles with advertising signs. Any vehicle or trailer with a sign or signs placed or painted thereon, which sign or signs are intended to be viewed from a main vehicular public right-of-way, subject to the following exceptions:
a.
Any vehicle or trailer which is actively engaged in making deliveries, pickups, or otherwise actively in use. Such vehicle or trailer, when not in use, shall be parked so as to not be viewed from any main vehicular public right-of-way.
b.
Any alternate location for parking shall be approved by the City or as located on an approved development plan, where no allowable location is reasonably available. Such alternate location shall be as inconspicuous from the public rightof-way as reasonably possible.
24.
Signs placed in the public right-of-way without authorization from the City and the associated jurisdictional governmental agency;
25.
Pole signs; and
26.
Immoral, indecent, or obscene signs.
5.10.7. GENERAL STANDARDS FOR PERMANENT SIGNS
The following standards are applicable for all permanent signs:
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 101
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.10 Signs
5.10.7 General Standards for Permanent Signs
A. Total Allowable Sign Area
1. The combined sign area for all permanent signs appearing or placed at any development or parcel shall not exceed the total allowable sign area as determined by standards of this section.
a.
Total allowable sign area calculation. A summation of the maximum sign area achievable at any development or parcel according to Sec. 5.10.8.A, Freestanding Signs for Single-and Multiple-Occupancy Development for Freestanding Signs; according to Sec. 5.10.8.B, Development for wall signs, and according to Sec. 5.10.8.E, Electronic Reader Board Signs for an electronic reader board. (Example: if Sec 5.10.8.A allows a maximum freestanding sign area of 60 square feet, Sec.
5.10.8.B allows a maximum wall sign area of 100 square feet; and Sec. 5.10.8.E allows a maximum of 24 square feet for an electronic reader board, the total allowable sign area (TASA) is 184 square feet.)
b.
The total allowable sign area for a development or parcel may be shared among those permanent sign types at a development or parcel, but the sign area for any permanent sign type cannot exceed the maximum allowed by applicable standards established for that permanent sign type. (Example: if the total allowable sign area for a development is 184 square feet, but Sec. 5.10.8.E limits the maximum area for a freestanding sign to 60 square feet, then the freestanding sign shall not exceed 60 square feet.)
c.
Any total allowable sign area not applied to a freestanding, wall, or electronic reader board may be applied to other allowed permanent signs such as a window sign, human sign, or sandwich board. Other restrictions in this section may further restrict the use of these permanent sign types.
B. Permitted Areas
Except where otherwise specifically provided in Sec. 5.10.9.G, Residential Development for residential zoning districts, permanent signs shall be permitted only on land zoned AG, T, C-N, C-C, C-R, O, C-COR, I-L, I-H,MU-D, MU-ES, MU-KPI, INST, PR, and AIR. Land zoned PD shall also comply with Sec. 5.10.7, General Standards for Permanent Signs unless other standards are established within a PD master sign plan and/or PD Agreement.
C. Measurement Determinations
1. Distance Between Signs
Unless otherwise provided in this section, the minimum required distance between signs shall be one-half the width of the lot measured along the street right-of-way from the closest parts of any two signs.
2. Facade Area
The facade area shall be measured by determining the area within a two-dimensional geometric figure coinciding with the edges of the walls, windows, doors, parapets, marquees, and mansards of greater than 45 degrees that form a side of a building or unit.
Land Development Code Page 5 102 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.10 Signs
5.10.7 General Standards for Permanent Signs
3. Sign Area
a. Generally
The area of a sign shall be the area within the smallest square, rectangle, parallelogram, triangle, circle or semicircle, the sides of which touch the extreme points or edges of the sign face.
b. Special Situations
1.
Where a sign is composed of letters or pictures attached directly to a facade, window, door, or marquee and the letters or pictures are not enclosed by a border or trimming, the sign area shall be the area within the smallest rectangle, parallelogram, triangle, circle or semicircle, the sides of which touch the extreme points of the letters or pictures.
2.
Where four sign faces are arranged in a square, rectangle, or diamond, the area of the sign shall be the area of the two largest faces.
3.
Where a sign is in the form of a three-dimensional object, the area shall be determined by drawing a square, rectangle, parallelogram, triangle, circle or semicircle, the sides of which touch the extreme points or edges of the projected image of the sign and multiplying that area by two. The "projected image" is that created by tracing the largest possible two dimensional outline of the sign.
D. Design, Construction, and Location Standards
1. General
All permanent signs must comply with the following design, construction, and location standards.
2. Illumination Standards
a.
Sign lighting may not be designed or located to cause confusion with traffic lights.
b.
Illumination by floodlights or spotlights is permissible if no emitted light shines directly onto an adjoining property or into the eyes of motorists or pedestrians using or entering public streets.
c.
Lighting mechanisms for illuminated signs shall project a maximum of 18 inches perpendicularly from any surface of the sign over public space.
3. Placement Standards
a. Near Street and Driveway Intersections
1.
Signs greater than two square feet shall not be located within a sight triangle.
2.
Monument signs and portable signs shall not be located closer than 50 feet from the intersection of two streets.
3.
Where two monument signs are allowed for a corner lot, the two signs shall be at least 50 feet apart, and no more than one sign shall be placed along a single street frontage.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 103
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.10 Signs
5.10.7 General Standards for Permanent Signs
b. Over Right-of-Way
No sign shall project over, into, or on a public right-of-way except as expressly allowed in other sections of this LDC.
c. Blocking Exits, Fire Escapes, Standpipes
No sign or sign structure shall be erected that impedes use of any fire escape, emergency exit, or standpipe.
d. Sign Visibility
Monument signs should be placed in a manner and location that promotes their visibility from public roads, sidewalks, and trails, with consideration to compliance with requirements of this section. Landscape design and selected plants will establish a view corridor or triangle to promote sign visibility, taking into consideration effects of plant growth and maturity to avoid screening the monument sign and its base.
4. Clearance Standards
a.
All signs over pedestrian ways shall be a minimum of eight feet above a pedestrian way.
b.
All signs shall provide 13 feet six inches of vehicular clearance.
5. Relationship to Building Features and Landscaping
a. Building Signs
A building sign shall not extend beyond any edge of the surface to which it is attached, nor shall any portion of the sign extend above the roof line.
b. Freestanding Signs
1. Freestanding signs and the sign base and structure shall be designed and placed in a manner which will be architecturally compatible with the building and in harmony with the character of surrounding development.
(a)
All freestanding signs shall be designed as a monument sign type. The sign face, including the message and text displayed, for all freestanding signs shall be static and cannot contain any changeable copy or variable electronic message or reader board.
(b)
Monument sign base and structure design and materials for a monument sign shall be architecturally compatible with the character of the building and shall comply with the following:
i. The sign base shall be at least 18 inches high, measured from the ground surface of the general grade of the parcel. The base shall be as wide as the sign.
ii. The street number shall be placed at the top upper edge or at the top upper corner nearest the street. Street numbers shall be at least three inches high.
iii. Sign base material shall consist of brick or stone material only.
Land Development Code Page 5 104 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.10 Signs
5.10.8 Standards for Specific Sign Types
iv. Plastic or vinyl slip-over signs shall not be used to cover existing signs.
c. Pole Signs
A pole sign, if allowed because of a site hardship precluding use of a monument sign, should also include a sign base at the ground similar to the design of a monument sign, to the greatest extent practical. The stanchion (pole) and structure supporting the sign will also be architecturally compatible within the building and designed as a column.
E. Number of Signs
1. Generally
In general, the number of signs shall be the number of noncontiguous sign faces. Multiple noncontiguous sign faces may be counted as a single sign if all the sign faces are included in the geometric figure used for determining the sign area.
2. Special Situations—Multiple Sign Faces Counted as One Sign
a.
Where two sign faces are placed back-to-back and are at no point more than two feet apart, it shall be counted as one sign.
b.
If a sign has four faces arranged in a square, rectangle, or diamond, it shall be counted as two signs and, therefore, prohibited.
F. Size Limitations
No signs of any type shall exceed the requirements of this section, unless a variance is granted by the Planning Commission. A variance may be granted only if the Planning Commission finds a need in accordance with variance criteria of Sec. 2.5.5.A, Zoning Variance, and the variance will have no adverse effect on adjacent properties
5.10.8. STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC SIGN TYPES
A. Freestanding Signs for Single-and Multiple-Occupancy Development
1.
No freestanding sign is allowed on a parcel or development where a building is located within 15 feet from a right-of-way.
2.
Each multiple-occupancy development and each single-occupancy development may have one freestanding sign. Two freestanding signs may be allowed in accordance with Sec. 5.10.8.A.5.
3.
All freestanding signs shall be monument signs unless it is determined by the Planning Commission that hardships created by existing site conditions cause construction of a monument sign to be impractical or create a potential hazard. Freestanding signs shall comply with the standards in Table 5.10.8.A.3: Freestanding / Monument Signs: Sign Face Size and Distance From Other Signs.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 105
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.10 Signs
5.10.8 Standards for Specific Sign Types
TABLE 5.10.8.A.3: FREESTANDING / MONUMENT SIGNS: SIGN FACE SIZE AND DISTANCE FROM OTHER SIGNS
STREET FRONTAGE (FEET)
MAXIMUM SIGN FACE FOR FREESTANDING MONUMENT SIGNS (SQUARE FEET)1,2,3
MINIMUM DISTANCE FROM OTHER FREESTANDING SIGNS (FEET)4
ARTERIAL STREET
OTHER STREET
Less than 50
36
30
20
50 to less than 100
60
40
25
100 to less than 200
80
60
50
200 to less than 300
100
80
100
300 or greater
100
100
150
Notes: 1. The maximum sign area allowed for a sign face is subject to compliance with the total allowable sign area for a parcel or development. Based on the sign types and associated sign area selected by a property owner or business, the maximum sign face area allowed may be reduced to comply with the calculation for the total allowable sign area. 2. The maximum monument signface area is 20 additional square feet for multi-use centers with floor area greater than 100,000 square feet. 3. For maximum allowable pole sign face area, reduce maximum monument sign face area by 20 percent. 4. Distance from other signs is only calculated along the same side of the right-of-way
4.
Height of freestanding signs, as measured from the ground surface area beneath the sign shall comply with the standards in Table 5.10.8.A.4: Maximum Height of Freestanding / Monument Signs.
TABLE 5.10.8.A.4: MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF FREESTANDING / MONUMENT SIGNS
LOCATION
MAXIMUM HEIGHT (FEET)1
Along Arterial Frontage (other than MU-D: Mixed Use Downtown Development district)
8
MU-D: Mixed Use Downtown Development district
6
Other Street Frontage
6
Community Information Panel Sign on City Property
8
Notes: 1. The height of the structure for the monument sign is limited to one additional foot above the maximum height of the sign face when the sign base and structure are architecturally compatible with the building
5.
Development with frontage on more than one public right-of-way shall comply with the following standards:
a. In addition to signs allowed in accordance with Sec. 5.10.8.A.2, each multiple-occupancy development and each single-occupancy development with frontage on more than one public right-of-way may have one secondary freestanding sign,
Land Development Code Page 5 106 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.10 Signs
5.10.8 Standards for Specific Sign Types
except a freestanding sign on a secondary street frontage is not allowed where its location is within 200 feet of a Residential district.
b.
A sign located along a secondary street frontage shall display only the name of the business or development. All secondary freestanding signs shall be monument signs and shall not include an electronic reader board.
c.
Size of secondary freestanding sign:
1.
The size of the secondary freestanding sign shall be no more than 30 square feet in area for a single-occupancy or multiple-occupancy development where street frontage is less than 300 feet. Where street frontage is 300 feet or greater, the sign area shall not exceed 60 square feet in area for multiple-occupancy development.
2.
The property owner shall designate which frontage will contain the primary or secondary sign, but single street frontage cannot contain both.
3.
The maximum height of a sign on a secondary frontage street shall not exceed six feet except where the secondary street frontage is 300 feet or greater. The height may be the same as that for the primary frontage sign.
6. In addition to signage authorized in accordance with this section, a freestanding sign may be permitted on developed outparcels with an area of 22,500 square feet or more, and with a minimum street frontage of 125 feet. Freestanding and wall signs for outparcels for such development shall comply with the following:
a.
One freestanding sign per outparcel may be installed if the size does not exceed a total of 50 square feet.
b.
The sign shall not exceed six feet in height.
c.
The sign shall be a monument sign.
d.
Freestanding signs for outparcels may be placed at the property line but shall be located at least two feet from a sidewalk, unless it would create a hazard to public safety (in which case the sign must be set back a greater distance to abate the hazard).
e.
Electronic reader board or changeable copy signs are not allowed on outparcels.
B. Wall and Projecting Signs for Single-and Multiple-Occupancy Development
Wall signs shall be permitted in all areas other than residential districts if they comply with the following:
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 107
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.10 Signs
5.10.8 Standards for Specific Sign Types
1. Primary and Secondary Wall Sign Sizing
a.
One primary wall sign is permitted on each wall of a building, parallel or perpendicular to a road or street, not exceeding an area equal to 15 percent of the front wall face height (interior roof) multiplied by the building width, not exceeding 200 square feet. A secondary wall sign may be permitted on up to two walls provided it is a maximum 50 percent of the primary wall sign's square footage, and both signs square footage shall be counted separately toward the maximum total square footage as allowed by this code for wall signage.
b.
The front wall face shall be calculated by multiplying the roof height multiplied by the building width.
c.
A secondary wall sign may be permitted on up to two walls provided it is no larger than 50 percent of the area of the primary wall sign on that face.
d.
The area all primary and secondary wall signs shall be counted toward the maximum total square footage allowed by this code for wall signage.
2. High-rise Signs
a.
High-rise, multiunit office, retail, industrial or medical centers; that are at least four stories or 50 feet tall; that have a common primary entrance may be allowed one wall sign on each wall parallel or perpendicular to a road or street, for a maximum of four signs.
b.
Wall signs for each individual business within such a center are not permitted.
c.
Signs shall be placed upon the wall or parapet of a building.
d.
Signs shall not extend above the roofline of any building except when placed upon a parapet, in which case the sign shall not extend above the parapet wall.
e.
High-rise signs must be on-site signs. Should circumstances change so that a high-rise sign is no longer on-site, the sign shall be deemed illegal and be removed.
f.
Where a high rise sign would be within 1,000 feet of residential districts, the sign shall not be lit.
g.
The maximum allowable copy area for signs below 30 feet above ground level shall not be more than one square foot for each lineal foot of building frontage along the primary street frontage of the building.
h.
The maximum allowable copy area for signs higher than 30 feet above ground level shall be five square feet for every 1,000 square feet of gross floor area;
i.
The total sign area shall not exceed 800 square feet.
j.
High rise buildings over five stories may be permitted a maximum 200 square foot sign on each top area, with a maximum of four signs, one per street frontage. Any logo shall be considered part of the allowed sign area.
3. Tenant Wall Signs for Multiple-Occupancy Development
Land Development Code Page 5 108 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.10 Signs
5.10.8 Standards for Specific Sign Types
a. Each tenant of a multiple-occupancy development may display a tenant wall sign on the principal building in which the occupant is located, subject to the following limitations:
1. The sign shall be placed only on the exterior surface of the principal building, or portion thereof, which is included as part of the tenant's individually leased or owned, premises in accordance with the following:
(a)
The occupant may display, in the leased or owned area, as many as two tenant signs on the side which is the primary entrance/exit to that portion of the premises. A tenant wall sign shall not exceed 18 inches in height, measured from the bottom of the copy area to the top, and shall not be wider than 75 percent of the horizontal frontage of the tenant space. The total combined area of the tenant wall signs shall not exceed 100 square feet.
(b)
Only one building side will be considered as being an occupant's primary entrance/exit.
(c)
If the occupant has an entrance/exit on a corner or on more than one side, the occupant may choose which building side counts as having the primary entrance/exit.
(d)
One additional sign may be placed on the secondary entrance/exit side of the occupant's leased or owned area. The maximum area of the additional sign shall not exceed 16 square feet and shall not exceed 18 inches in height.
(e)
A tenant sign should not cover architectural detailing, windows, or building ornamentation.
4. Projecting signs
a.
Within the MU-D: Mixed Use-Downtown district, projecting signs are a type of wall sign and may be permitted to extend over walkways, provided they are at least eight feet above ground level and shall not project more than 48 inches from the wall of a building. No sign or supporting structure shall extend above the top of a parapet wall. Any projecting sign shall count towards the maximum wall sign area allowed for a building.
b.
Projecting signs may be placed on any building in any Commercial district, Industrial district, or AG district in accordance with the above and shall be counted as part of the allowable wall signage.
C. Window Signs
Window signs may be placed within building windows of all Commercial, Industrial, and Special Purpose districts except the C-N district development. They shall comply with the following:
1. Multiple-occupancy development and a single-occupancy development may select to have an electronic reader board or may select window signs in accordance with this section, but cannot use both. A window sign is only allowed if an electronic reader board sign, whether or not operational, has not been installed.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 109
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.10 Signs
5.10.8 Standards for Specific Sign Types
2.
Window signs are not allowed within any window facing a Residential district if the window is within 200 feet of the Residential district.
3.
Window signs may cover up to 25 percent of the window area of any single wall. Sign coverage within windows may be limited and may not achieve 25 percent based on the total allowable sign area achievable for the development. Coverage of any single window panel shall not exceed 60 percent of its area. Placement of signs on windows of an entrance door is not allowed except for hours of operation.
4.
Exact duplicate or repetitive signs shall not appear on windows located on the same wall.
5.
Any product, good, or service for which a local, state, or federal law restricts sales to adult-aged persons shall not appear in a window sign except for fireworks during dates such sale activities are allowed under Florida law.
6.
Promotional posters for civic events may be placed within windows of any zoning district, including the C-N district, and do not apply to the window space limitation set forth in 3. above.
D. Changeable Copy Signs
1. General
Only one changeable copy sign is allowed per single-occupancy or multiple occupancy development. It must be integrated and designed as a component of the monument sign and comply with the following standards:
a.
A changeable copy sign is not allowed if an electronic message board is installed.
b.
A changeable copy sign is not allowed for outparcels and nonresidential development with a street frontage less than 50 feet.
c.
The sign area of the changeable copy sign shall not exceed 24 square feet, except the sign area shall not exceed 32 square feet in multi-unit centers with a floor area greater than 100,000 square feet.
2. Location and Placement
a.
A changeable copy sign shall be located beneath the sign face of a monument sign.
b.
A changeable copy sign shall not be allowed on a pole sign.
c.
A changeable copy sign cannot be installed where a development is already using a portable sign, human sign, or window sign.
d.
A changeable copy sign shall not be illuminated and shall not contain any electronic component.
3. Operational Standards
a.
Only letters, punctuation marks, and numbers can appear in a changeable copy sign, and shall be at least three inches in height. Graphics, art, or illustrations are not allowed. Letters and numbers appearing in a changeable copy sign shall be displayed in a single, uniform color.
b.
Background of a changeable copy sign shall be white in color only.
Land Development Code Page 5 110 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.10 Signs
5.10.8 Standards for Specific Sign Types
c.
Messages shall only address products, goods, promotions, events, and services offered or available at that property location.
d.
All changeable copy signs shall be maintained in a clean appearance, including the backboard. The backboard shall be replaced or repaired within 30 days notification from the City if it is determined that the sign cannot be maintained in a clean appearance because of damage caused by exposure to sun or weather, or damage caused by the effects of mold, oxidation, or other environmental elements.
e.
Only complete words or messages can be displayed. Missing letters or numbers shall be promptly replaced.
f.
The sign face of a changeable copy sign shall be contained in a cabinet with a transparent cover.
g.
It is recommended that text appearing in a changeable copy sign should be limited to ten words to allow passing motorists to read the entire changeable copy.
E. Electronic Reader Board Signs
1. General
Only one electronic reader board sign is allowed per single-occupancy or multiple occupancy development. It must be integrated and designed as a component of the monument sign in accordance to the following standards:
a.
An electronic reader board is not allowed if a changeable copy sign is installed.
b.
An electronic reader board is not allowed for nonresidential development with a street frontage less than 50 feet, and for outparcels within a multiple-occupancy development.
c.
The sign area of the electronic reader board portion of the sign shall not exceed 50 percent of the total sign face.
2. Location and Placement
a.
Electronic reader boards shall not be located above the top edge of the sign face of a monument sign, and should be placed beneath the sign face. It may be placed at the side of the sign face.
b.
Pole signs are not allowed to hold or contain an electronic reader board.
c.
An electronic reader board cannot be installed where a development is already using a portable sign, human sign, or window sign.
d.
Electronic reader boards are prohibited within 1,000 feet from the clear zone of an airfield.
3. Operational Standards
a. The copy on an electronic reader board sign shall not change more than once in a 120 second period unless otherwise allowed by law or except as necessary on a sign for the public health and safety, including traffic control, that is owned and/or operated by the City, Orange County, the State of Florida, or the federal
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 111
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.10 Signs
5.10.8 Standards for Specific Sign Types
government. (This subsection does not apply to electronic reader board signs with time, date, and temperature information.)
b. An electronic reader board sign shall comply with the following standards.
1.
Static display time for each message shall be a minimum of 120 seconds; for community information panel signs, the static display time for each message shall be a minimum of eight seconds;
2.
The maximum amount of time to completely change from one message to the next shall be two seconds;
3.
The change of message shall occur simultaneously for the entire sign face;
4.
The sign shall contain a default design that will hold the face of the sign at one position if a malfunction occurs;
5.
No flashing lights, traveling messages, animation, or other movements are permitted on an electronic reader board;
6.
Messages shall only address products, goods, promotions, events, and services offered or that are available at that property location. Community-wide events occurring in the Apopka area may also be displayed;
7.
The minimum size of any letter or number appearing in a message shall be two inches;
8.
Brightness or glare shall be controlled to avoid distractions to vehicular traffic, pedestrian, and adjoining properties. Adjustments shall be made upon written request from the City;
9.
All electronic reader signs shall be installed with an ambient light monitor;
10.
Dimmer control electronic graphic display signs shall have an automatic dimmer control to produce a distinct illumination change from a higher illumination level to a lower level for the time period between one half-hour before sunset and one-half hour after sunrise;
11.
The sign shall not exceed a maximum illumination of 5,000 nits (candelas per square meter) during daylight hours and a maximum illumination of 500 nits (candelas per square meter) between dusk to dawn, as measured from the sign's face at maximum brightness;
12.
Audio speakers or any form of pyrotechnics are prohibited in association with an electronic reader board sign; and
13.
It is recommended that the text of the electronic reader board should be limited to ten words to allow passing motorists to read the entire changeable copy.
4.
An electronic reader board sign with copy that moves continuously or appears to be moving, flashing, changing color, pulsing, or alternating shall be considered an animated sign and is prohibited as provided in Sec. 5.11.2, No Defense of Nuisance Action.
5.
When an electronic reader board is proposed in a sign permit, development plan, or master sign plan, the City may require a traffic safety study prepared by a professional
Land Development Code Page 5 112 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.10 Signs
5.10.8 Standards for Specific Sign Types
engineer if such sign is near traffic conflict points such as intersections, merge points, exit ramps, traffic control signals or curved roadways. The study shall contain, but is not limited to, an analysis of possible traffic safety impacts, including impacts on motor vehicle drivers, pedestrians, cyclists, and visibility of traffic control devices or traffic control signals
F. Aerial View Signage
Signage that is flat on a roof and can only be viewed from the sky or from aerial photography is prohibited except for standard signage associated with a lawful helicopter landing pad.
G. Flags
1. Number
There shall be no more than three flags displayed on any one parcel of land. Only one may be a corporate flag. Government flags must conform to the U.S. Flag Code, Public Law, 344; 36 U.S.C., Secs. 171—178.
2. Size and Placement
The size of the flag, whether on flagpole or flagstaff, shall not be greater than one-third the height of the pole or extension of the flagstaff. Flags shall be set back at least five feet from all property lines and only be displayed from a flagpole or flagstaff (the placement of the flag on or attached to fences, other signs, etc., shall not be permitted). Government flags conform to the U.S. Flag Code, Public Law, 344; 36 U.S.C., Secs. 171—178.
3. Flagpole Height
The maximum height of any flagpole shall not exceed ten feet above the height of any primary structure.
H. Portable (Trailer) Signs
1. Permit Required; Removal of Signs Upon Expiration of Permit; Penalty
A portable sign shall be required to obtain a sign permit which shall not be valid for longer than a period of 30 days, after which time the portable sign shall be removed from the property. A sign permit shall not be renewed nor shall a permit be obtained for the same parcel of property within a period of 30 days after the removal of a portable sign from the property. Signs which remain on the property after the permit has expired will be subject to removal by the City and a penalty fee of $25.00, in addition to actual costs incurred by the City for the removal.
2. Number and Space Requirements
There shall be no more than one portable sign per parcel of property, with a minimum spacing of 300 feet between any two portable signs. In no instance shall a portable sign be placed on a parcel or located at a multiple-occupancy development if an electronic reader board sign, whether operational or not, is already installed or permitted for that same parcel or multiple-occupancy development.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 113
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.10 Signs
5.10.8 Standards for Specific Sign Types
3. Placement in Relation to Property Line
Portable signs may be placed at the property line, but if the property line is located at the curb or sidewalk, the sign must set back a minimum of five feet.
4. Dimensions
Portable signs, exclusive of the transportation mechanism, shall not exceed the exterior measurement of four feet in height or eight feet in length.
5. Placement in Parking Spaces Prohibited
The placement of a portable sign in a parking space which is required to meet the minimum parking requirements of the City is prohibited.
6. For Businesses Not a Part of Shopping Center; Minimum Spacing Requirements
A portable sign shall be permitted for businesses determined not to be a part of a shopping center, if they are located a minimum of 300 feet from another portable sign.
7. Limitation to Commercial and Industrial Districts
All portable signs shall only be located in Commercial and Industrial districts.
8. Lighting Requirements
All incandescent bulbs in, on, or attached to any portable sign shall be rated at not more than 75 watts. Flashing or distracting lights, including spotlights if directed so they cause a possible hazard to the public, are prohibited.
9. Use as Permanent Sign Prohibited
Portable signs are prohibited from being used or constructed as a permanent sign.
10. Identification of Owner
Each portable sign shall have permanently displayed the name, business address, and/or phone number of the owner of the sign.
11. Off-Premise Portable Signs
A tenant of a single-occupancy or a multiple-occupancy development that has an installed electronic reader board, whether operational or not, may not use an off-site portable sign. A business can elect to use either an electronic reader board or an off-site portable sign, but cannot use both sign types. An off-premise portable sign will count towards the total allowable sign area for the host property receiving the sign.
a.
An off-premise portable sign shall be located within 300 feet of the advertised business.
b.
Off-premise portable signs shall be permitted on Main Street in the central downtown area of the City, defined geographically as from Central Avenue east to Forest Avenue at Main Street and from Third Street South to Fifth Street at Central Avenue.
c.
Off-premise portable signs shall be permitted to advertise more than one business as long as the businesses are located within 300 feet of the sign.
Land Development Code Page 5 114 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.10 Signs
5.10.8 Standards for Specific Sign Types
12. Shopping Center Portable Signs
a. Shopping center portable signs shall obtain a permit which shall not be valid for longer than a period of 30 days. The portable signs shall be removed, and a permit shall not be for the same parcel of property within a period of 15 days after the removal of a portable sign from the property.
I. Off-Premise (Billboards, Etc.) Signs
1. General
a. Applicable Location
Off-premise signs are allowed in the C-C, C-R, I-L, and I-H districts only. Off-premise signs are prohibited in the MU-D Mixed-Use Downtown district.
b. Supporting Structure
Only a single supporting structure (monopole) shall be allowed for off-premises signs. No portion of the supporting structure shall be visible above any advertising display area.
c. Single and Double-Faced Billboards
An off-premises sign structure may be single-or double-faced. Any double-faced structure shall have advertising surfaces of equal size and shape. For the purposes of this LDC, the following types of off-premise signs shall be considered double-faced:
1.
An off-premises sign structure where the signs are placed back-to-back, as long as the backs of the signs are not separated by more than 48 inches.
2.
An off-premises sign structure when constructed in the form of a "V" when viewed from above, provided the internal angle at the apex is not greater than 45 degrees and the off-premises sign structure is not separated by more than 36 inches at the apex of the "V."
d. Multi-Faced Off-Premises Signs
An off-premises sign structure may have a maximum of two advertising surfaces facing one direction, if both surfaces are the same size and shape.
e. Trivision or electronic reader board, light emitting diode (LED), or similar types of illuminated or off-premises signs.
Computerized messages will be permitted if the sign does not function in a manner that is distracting to vehicular traffic or adjoining properties, and meets the sign standards for off-premises signs.
f. Number of Surfaces
No more than two advertising surfaces shall be allowed per sign.
g. Limited Access Highways (Also Known as "Limited Access Principal Arterials")
Off-premise signs will not be allowed to be constructed, erected, altered, or relocated within one mile of the outside curb (the nearest curb to the proposed
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 115
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.10 Signs
5.10.8 Standards for Specific Sign Types
sign) of the main traffic route of any limited access highway. It is intended that such setback shall not be measured from the curb line of ramps or other facilities used exclusively for access to or exit from such highway or street.
2. Permissible Number, Area, Spacing, and Height of Permanent Off-Premises Signs
a. Maximum Size
No permanent off-premises sign may exceed 310 square feet in size, per face.
b. Maximum Height
No permanent off-premises sign, or combination of signs, may exceed 35 feet in height from ground level. An open space of not less than eight feet from ground level to the bottom of the billboard shall be maintained should there be a traffic, pedestrian, or safety hazard created by the presence of the sign.
c. Maximum Width
No permanent off-premises sign, or combination of signs, may exceed 50 feet in width.
d. Spacing
1.
No off-premises sign may be closer than 2,500 feet from any other off-premises sign on either side of the thoroughfare or thoroughfares to which the off-premises sign is directed.
2.
As of March 6, 2019, an electronic reader board, LED or electronic variable message off-premise sign is not allowed unless it replaces two other off-premise signs located within the City. The replacement electronic reader board , LED, or electronic variable message off-premise signs shall comply with the requirements of this section . The minimum spacing between trivision and electronic reader board off-premise signs shall be 4,000 feet from any other tri-vision or electronic reader board off-premise sign on either side of the thoroughfare or thoroughfares. Spacing shall be determined based on signs that have received the necessary City or County permits (Signs that have received prior authorization shall have priority over a later applicant in determining compliance with the spacing restrictions.)
3. Setbacks
a.
All off-premises signs shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from the front property line.
b.
All off-premises signs shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from the side property line when located at an intersection.
c.
No off-premises sign shall be allowed within 250 feet of the nearest property line of any Residential district, public park, municipal, county, state or federal public building, place of worship or any public or private school.
d.
An off-premise sign using electronic reader board or other similar electronic variable or LED technology shall not be placed within one mile of an airfield clear zone.
Land Development Code Page 5 116 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.10 Signs
5.10.9 Standards for Special Purpose Signs
4. Special Requirements for Off-Premises Signs
No off-premises sign shall be permitted on a developed site. An off-premises sign shall be permitted only as a principal use. An on-premise sign using as electronic reader board shall comply with the operational standards in Sec. 5.10.8.E, Electronic Reader Board Signs.
5. Landscaping
a.
Evergreen shrubbery and trees natural to the area, resistant to frost damage and drought, shall be provided to enhance the appearance of an off-premises sign to shield the sign where it may be within 100 feet of a residential dwelling; and
b.
A landscape island shall be provided around the base of an off-premises sign, at least ten feet in width, that includes shrubs three feet on center and at least 36 inches tall at time of planting. In addition, coniferous and approved native trees sufficient to screen the off-premises pole shall be planted in accordance with Sec. 5.2, Landscaping and Buffer Standards.
c.
Maintenance shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property on which the sign is located to provide landscaping in a healthy condition so as to present a neat, healthy, and orderly appearance free of refuse and debris.
d.
Failure to provide proper maintenance shall incur a penalty or other appropriate enforcement.
5.10.9. STANDARDS FOR SPECIAL PURPOSE SIGNS
A. Automobile Service Station Signs
Signs for an automobile service station shall comply with the following:
1. Freestanding and Wall Signs
a.
Freestanding and wall signs shall comply with the standards for these respective sign types based on the zoning district in which they are located, or the lot, unless stated otherwise in this LDC. Product or service advertising shall be an integral part of the freestanding sign.
b.
Only one electronic reader board is allowed for an automobile service station and the price of fuel for up to two fuel types must appear in the sign at all times. The electronic reader board may be placed either within a monument sign or on a fuel station canopy sign, but not both.
2. Automobile Service Station Canopy Signs
Two standard logo or electronic reader board signs may be attached to the side of an automobile service station canopy. The canopy sign shall not exceed an area greater than five percent of the square footage of the canopy sidewall area for the longest side and one of the short sides, multiplied by two. Only that portion of the canopy covering the service station shall apply to the canopy sign area calculation. Only fuel prices can appear in an electronic reader board placed on a canopy. Only one business name can appear on the service station canopy if a logo sign is selected instead of an electronic reader board. The canopy electronic reader board will not count towards the total allowable sign area. However, if an electronic reader board is
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 117
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.10 Signs
5.10.9 Standards for Special Purpose Signs
not placed on the canopy, the sign area of the electronic reader board sign may only be transferred to window signs up to the total allowable sign area. Any sign or color placed on a service station canopy shall comply with the intent and purpose of the City's Development Design Guidelines. (See Section 5.7, Development Design Guidelines)
3. Gasoline Pump Sign
A sign on a gasoline pump must be an integral part of the pump structure.
4. Rack or Cabinet Signs
A rack or cabinet sign is a sign which is an integral part of a rack or cabinet, such as a
display of oil, wiper blades, etc.
5. Signs on Buffer Walls
No sign for an automobile service station shall be placed, painted, or otherwise
erected on any buffer wall.
B. Place of Worship Sign
A place of worship sign shall be permitted in all districts in accordance with the following standards:
1.
One monument sign may be located at the place of worship that does not exceed six feet in height, except it may extend to a maximum height of eight feet with embellishments.
2.
The sign area for the monument sign shall not exceed 32 square feet per face. An electronic reader board that does not exceed 24 square feet in area may be included in addition, on the primary sign structure.
3.
For places of worship located on property in a Residential district, an electronic reader board is only allowed as a special exception. (See Sec. 2.5.1.G, Special Exception Permit)
4.
Two wall signs may be allowed, calculated at one square foot per linear frontage of building, that do not to exceed 150 square feet, in total.
C. Community Information Signs
1.
Community information panel signs for public community information messages may be permitted in any Commercial, Industrial, or Special Purpose district, provided they do not exceed 32 square feet in area and is an electronic reader board.
2.
Patron advertising signs are allowed at ball fields, if the signs are attached to a fence surrounding the field, and placed only on the inside of fence with the sign copy area facing inward.
D. Menu Board Signs
A menu board sign shall not exceed six feet in height or 30 square feet in area. A menu board sign shall be supported from the grade to the bottom of the sign having or appearing to have a solid base similar to and complementary to a development's monument sign. The design, materials, and finish of a menu board sign shall match those of the buildings on the same lot. One menu board sign is permitted per drive-through
Land Development Code Page 5 118 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.10 Signs
5.10.9 Standards for Special Purpose Signs
lane or drive-in station. No other commercial or promotional signs, including snipe-type signs, shall be located along drive-through lanes.
E. Directional Signs
1. On-site Directional Signs
One on-site directional sign at each access drive is permitted in multifamily and nonresidential development if it is limited in area to four square feet, including embellishments; an on-site directional sign shall be permitted as a permanent sign on all parcels, and shall not be counted as part of allowable sign area. The maximum height shall not exceed three feet.
2. Off-site Directional Signs
Off-site directional signs are permitted in all Commercial, Industrial, and Special
Purpose districts, if they comply with the following standards:
a.
Only one off-site directional sign is permitted per (host) parcel, with two off-site directional signs permitted for each establishment.
b.
An off-site directional sign shall be located within 2,000 feet of the subject being advertised, measured from property line to property line. Off-site directional signs shall only be allowed for commercial, public, civic, and institutional uses located on parcels that do not have frontage on an arterial street.
c.
Off-site directional signs may stand alone as a monument sign or wall sign, provided the following requirements are met for each sign-type:
1. Monument off-site directional signs shall comply with the following:
(a)
Maximum sign copy area shall not exceed 16 square feet, and shall count towards the total allowable sign area for the host parcel or development;
(b)
Maximum height shall not exceed six feet;
(c)
The sign shall be setback at least five feet from any right-of-way line. Should a hazard to public safety be created, the City may establish a greater required setback in order to abate the hazard;
(d)
A landscape island shall be provided around the length of the sign and not be less than two feet in width. Shrubs planted shall be 18 inches in height, and be spaced two feet on center.
2. An off-site directional sign placed within or on the monument sign or wall sign shall comply with the following:
(a)
The maximum sign copy area allowed shall comply with the host sign requirements for the district in which the sign is located (see Sec. 5.10.7, General Standards for Permanent Signs), provided the total copy area of the off-site directional sign does not exceed 16 square feet;
(b)
The height shall be in accordance with the standards in Sec. 5.10.7, General Standards for Permanent Signs;
(c)
In cases where an off-site directional sign is proposed to be placed on a nonconforming sign, the nonconforming sign shall comply with the
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 119
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.10 Signs
5.10.9 Standards for Special Purpose Signs
requirements of this section. (This provision applies even when a change of copy area is needed to accommodate the off-site directional sign);
(d)
The design of an off-site directional sign shall be compatible with the architecture, style, color theme, etc., of the host's sign; and
(e)
An off-site directional wall sign shall not exceed the maximum number of signs and square feet allowed in Sec. 5.10.7, General Standards for Permanent Signs.
F. Time-Temperature-Date Signs
Time-temperature-date signs are permitted on nonresidential parcels. The signs may only display numerical information in an easily readable manner and shall be kept accurate. They may be freestanding or wall signs and are subject to the regulations applicable to such signs. They shall be counted as part of an allowable sign area.
G. Residential Development
Signs are allowed in residential developments if they comply with the following standards:
1.
One residential subdivision entrance sign is allowed on each side of an entrance or one in the median. The sign shall be a wall sign or monument sign and shall not truncate the corner of a residential lot;
2.
One ground sign per entrance to multifamily development is allowed if it does not exceed 36 square feet in sign area and eight feet in height;
3.
Community residential home living facilities may install one wall sign if it does not exceed six square feet in area;
4.
One garage sale sign is allowed if it is placed in the yard of the residence where the sale is to be held. In addition, up to two directional signs (located elsewhere) are allowed, which shall be removed within 24 hours following the end of sale. (Such signs shall not be subject to the permit requirements of Sec. 2.5.4.B, Sign Permit.)
5.
One real estate sign, not to exceed six square feet per face, shall be allowed on parcels less than two acres. For parcels two acres or greater, the real estate sign may be expanded up to 32 square feet per face.
a.
One real estate sign is allowed on each street frontage with a maximum of two signs per site.
b.
Real estate signs are not subject to the permit requirements of Sec. 2.5.4.B, Sign Permit.
H. Real Estate Signs in Nonresidential Districts
1.
One real estate sign not to exceed 16 square feet per face is allowed on parcels less than two acres in a nonresidential district, on parcels two acres or greater, the real estate sign shall not exceed 32 square feet per face.
2.
A corner lot may have one real estate sign on each street frontage with a maximum of two signs per site.
Land Development Code Page 5 120 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.10 Signs
5.10.10 Temporary Signs
3.
Real estate signs shall not be subject to the permit requirements of Sec. 2.5.4.B, Sign Permit.
4.
Real estate signs used for leasing offices or space shall be removed when all offices and units are occupied.
5.10.10. TEMPORARY SIGNS
Temporary signs are those that are used for a limited time and are not permanently mounted, such as but not limited to, political signs, sales and special event signs, and signs indicating the development of property. Temporary signs are allowed throughout the City, subject to a temporary sign permit in accordance with Sec. 2.5.4.B, Sign Permit, and the standards of this section and this LDC.
A. Sign Types Allowed
A temporary sign may be a freestanding or wall sign, but shall not be an electric sign.
B. Allowable Temporary Sign Uses
A temporary sign may display advertising if it complies with the following:
1. Announcement of Temporary Uses
The temporary sign is an announcement for temporary uses such as fairs, carnivals, circuses, revivals, sporting events, anniversaries, or any public, charitable, educational, or religious events or functions. The signs are allowed for a period not to exceed 30 days and shall be removed within 24 hours after the special event.
2. Development Sign
a.
One approved notification sign, not to exceed 32 square feet with a maximum height of eight feet, shall be allowed until a construction sign is installed. The sign may be installed after City approval of a development plan. Approval of notification signs shall not be subject to the permit requirements of Sec. 2.5.4.B, Sign Permit.
b.
One construction sign is allowed if it is not displayed more than 60 days prior to the beginning of actual construction of the project and is removed when construction is completed. If a sign is displayed in accordance with this section, but construction is not initiated within 60 days after the sign is displayed, or if construction is discontinued for a period of more than 60 days, the sign shall be removed, unless an approved extension is granted by the Director. The sign shall not exceed 64 square feet in area, nor exceed eight feet in height.
3. New Business or Grand Opening
If a business has no permanent signs, a maximum of two temporary signs not to exceed allowable square footage of the permanent signs shall be securely attached to the building in the general location of the permanent sign. The message may be displayed for a period of not more than 60 days or until installation of the permanent sign(s), whichever occurs first.
4. Political Signs
Political signs may be placed on private property provided:
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 121
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.10 Signs
5.10.10 Temporary Signs
a.
The signs are not placed on the site until after the candidate has qualified for an election, and the signs are removed within seven days after the general election or after the primary election if the candidate is no longer a viable candidate.
b.
The signs are located in Residential districts and do not exceed six square feet per face, or are located in Commercial, Industrial, and Special Purpose districts and do not exceed 32 square feet per face.
c.
The signs are not located on any public property or right-of-way or on any private property without the express permission of the owner, or as may be allowed at public polls.
d.
Political signs are not subject to the permit requirements of Sec. 2.5.4.B, Sign Permit.
5. Weekend Directional Sign
A weekend directional signs is permitted throughout the City in accordance with Table 5.10.10.B.5.d: Weekend Directional Sign Standards, except in the MU-D Mixed-Use Downtown district. Each applicant is responsible for obtaining permission from the property owner where the sign is to be located prior to erecting the sign.
a.
Each sign shall include the name of the business or event. Either the address of the business or event location, or a directional arrow must be included in the sign. The arrow or address must comprise at least 20 percent of the sign area. General written directions may be included in the sign such as "at Kit Land Park." Phone numbers and sale prices shall not be included within any directional sign.
b.
The business or event for which the directional sign promotes or provides guidance must be located within the City. Special events held at a county or state park which is located within two miles from the City limits are eligible to request a weekend directional sign permit. Each weekend directional sign permit application shall list the weekends when the event or business promotion will occur.
c.
The duration of the weekend directional sign may be determined by the City but shall not exceed one calendar year. Signs shall only be posted on weekends on which the event or business promotion actually occurs.
d.
Weekend directional signs shall comply with the standards in Table 5.10.10.B.5.d: Weekend Directional Sign Standards
TABLE 5.10.10.B.5.D: WEEKEND DIRECTIONAL SIGN STANDARDS
Maximum Area (square feet)
4
Maximum Overall Height (feet)
4
Maximum Distance
2 miles from event or business being promoted
Number of Signs Allowed per Application
10 signs; an additional 10 signs may be requested but subject to an additional fee.
Minimum Separation
100 feet except at opposing sides of intersections; no more than three signs may be placed on the property where the event or
Land Development Code Page 5 122 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.10 Signs
5.10.10 Temporary Signs
TA
BLE 5.10.10.B.5.D: WEEKEND DIRECTIONAL SIGN STANDARDS
D
istance
p
romotion occurs.
P
ermit Fee1
$120.
00 per year for 10 signs; any signs over 10 at $15.00 per sign,
n
ot to exceed a maximum of 20 total signs.
P
ermit Time Limit2
P
lacement
Co
nstruction Standards
A
nnual permit: Renewable on the first working day of October of each year. Weekends only: After 5:00 p.m. Friday; removed by 6:00
a
.m. Monday (or 6:00 a.m. Tuesday for city holidays
M
ay be placed at property line. Prohibited in road rights-of-way. Corner visibility cannot be obstructed.
S
hall be mounted on an independent single or double pole device and shall not be affixed in any manner to trees, utility poles, and other signs. Shall be made of metal plastic, laminated cardboard or some durable and waterproof material. Paper signs are prohibited.
Not
es:
1.
For licensed real estate agents sponsoring a residential open house, the number of weekend directional signs shall be limited to a maximum of five signs, and the annual fee shall be $50.00.
2.
When weekend directional sign permits are issued after the first working day of October, the permit fee will be prorated based on the days remaining until September 31 of the following calendar year
6. Human Signs
a.
Human signs shall only be persons who stand or walk on the ground on private property. Human signs shall be located on private property where a sale, event, promotion, or the like is taking place which is recognized on the sign. Human signs may not be off-premises from where a promotion, sale, event, or the like takes place, except human signs may be allowed off-premise if authorized by the City through a Temporary Use Permit for a special event.
b.
The maximum time duration for a human sign permit is two consecutive weeks. Only three human sign permits shall be issued to the same business or business address within a calendar year (i.e., January 1 to December 31 of each year).
c.
The sign shall not exceed ten square feet in area and must be continuously held by or attached to a person. Human signs shall not hold or carry wind devices, flags, or balloons. Podiums, risers, stilts, vehicles, roofs, or other structures or devices shall not support a human sign. Spinning, visible flashing, moving, revolving, or rotating parts or visible mechanical movement of any description or other apparent visible movement achieved by electrical or mechanical means is prohibited.
d.
Location of human signs on private property may not interfere with the direct path of pedestrians using walkways or sidewalks and shall not use drive aisles or parking spaces in parking lots.
e.
Human signs cannot occur on private property already having in place an electronic reader board sign, whether operational or not, portable sign, or
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 123
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.10 Signs
5.10.10 Temporary Signs
window signs (other than promotional posters for civic events) unless a
Temporary Use Permit for a special event is approved.
f.
A Sign Permit shall be approved prior to use of a human sign for commercial advertising and promotion. A permit is not required for non-profit or charitable organizations if the human sign is located on that organization's premises or authorization is obtained from the owner of the property.
g.
Failure to comply with this subsection may result in immediate revocation of the Sign Permit. A repeat violation of these standards will cause a business to permanently forfeit the use of a human sign.
7. Pedestrian-Oriented Signs
Pedestrian-oriented signs, such as A-frame or pedestal type signs, shall be allowed for businesses to attract pedestrian traffic. A pedestrian-oriented sign may be used to advertise changing specials such as food items, menus or other promotions; and shall only be used to advertise products or services available or for sale at the site where the sign is located. The allowable sign area for pedestrian-oriented signs shall not be counted against the total allowable sign area for a development or business.
a.
Pedestrian-oriented signs are only allowed for businesses and establishments located in the MU-D: Mixed Use Downtown district or those with frontage on the West Orange Trail. A parcel must directly abut West Orange Trail or internally contain a portion of the trail within an easement to qualify as having frontage to the trail.
b.
One A-frame type sign is allowed per primary entrance to a commercial structure or to a tenant space. A sandwich board sign must provide an unobstructed pedestrian clearance of at least four feet in width.
c.
Pedestrian-oriented signs are only allowed to be displayed during the hours a business is open. Outside of these hours the sign shall be removed and stored inside a building.
d.
The maximum height for a pedestrian-oriented sign is four feet. The maximum width is two and one-half feet. The maximum copy area is six square feet per side. Pedestrian-oriented signs shall be constructed of wood or metal materials. Plastic signs are not allowed.
e.
The base of the sign shall contain sufficient weight to prevent displacement from wind.
f.
Location of the sign shall allow a four-foot clearance for pedestrians and shall be located no further than 15 feet from the primary building or tenant entrance. Such signs shall be placed in a well-lit area.
g.
Pedestrian-oriented signs shall not be placed within a public sidewalk or right-ofway unless authorized by a Sign Permit and submittal of insurance which covers the City from liability (as determined by the City).
h.
A sign permit and fee is required for a pedestrian-oriented sign.
Land Development Code Page 5 124 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.10 Signs
5.10.11 Illegal Signs
5.10.11. ILLEGAL SIGNS
Existing illegal signs shall, upon adoption of this LDC, be subject to code enforcement proceedings.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 125
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.11 Green Building Standards
5.11.1 Purpose and Intent
Section 5.11. GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS
5.11.1. PURPOSE AND INTENT
The purpose of this section is to ensure development in the City includes a minimum degree of green building features as a means of protecting and conserving resources, making development more resilient, supporting a healthy lifestyle for citizens, and ensuring a high quality of life for residents. Specifically, this section is intended to ensure development practices:
A. Conserve energy;
B. Promote the use of alternative energy;
C. Conserve water resources;
D. Protect water quality;
E. Promote resiliency;
F. Support walkable, mixed-use development in appropriate places;
G. Support multiple modes of mobility;
H. Promote a healthy landscape;
I. Support urban agriculture; and
J. Promote healthy and safe lifestyles.
5.11.2. APPLICABILITY
A. Unless exempted in accordance with Sec. 5.11.2.B, below, all development shall comply with the green building standards of this section.
B. The following development is exempt from the standards of this section;
1.
New residential development of less than five dwelling units;
2.
New nonresidential development with a gross floor area of less than 7,500 square feet;
3.
New buildings that have achieved LEED requirements necessary to receive certification from the U.S. Green Building Council at the gold level or above, or comparable certifications from the International Code Council Green Construction Code, the National Green Building Standards, or similar certification programs as determined by the Director;
4.
Remodel of a building constructed prior to March 6, 2019 whose remodel cost is 50 percent or less of the appraised value of the development prior to the remodel; and
5.
Expansion of a building constructed prior to March 6, 2019 whose expansion is less than 50 percent of the gross floor area of the building.
Land Development Code Page 5 126 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.11 Green Building Standards
5.11.3 Timing of Review
5.11.3. TIMING OF REVIEW
Review for compliance with these standards shall take place during review of a planned development (2.5.1.F, Planned Development), development plan (major or minor) (Sec. 2.5.2.A, Development Plan (Major and Minor)), plat (subdivision), (Sec. 2.5.2.B, Plat (Subdivision), arbor permit (Sec. 2.5.4.A, Arbor Permit), or building permit (Code of Ordinances Art.VI, Sec. 6.08.00), whichever occurs first.
5.11.4. GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS
A. Minimum Amount of Points Required
Development subject to the standards of this section shall achieve the following minimum number of points from the menu of options shown in Table 5.11.4.B: Green Building Point System.
1. Minimum Requirements for Residential Development
a.
5 to 29 units: 3 points.
b.
30 or more units: 4 points.
2. Minimum Requirements for Nonresidential Development
a.
7,500 to 25,000 square feet: 3 points.
b.
More than 25,000 square feet: 4 points.
B. Green Building Point System
Development subject to the standards of this section shall use Table 5.11.4.B: Green Building Point System, to determine compliance with this section.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 127
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.11 Green Building Standards
5.11.4 Green Building Standards TABLE 5.11.4.B: GREEN BUILDING POINT SYSTEM POINTS EARNED Location Development on previously used or developed land that is contaminated with waste or pollution (brownfield site) 1.00 Development in the MU-D: Downtown-Mixed-Use or MU-ES: Mixed-Use-East Shore Districts 1.00 Vertical mixed use in a building of at least 50,000 square feet of gross ground floor area devoted to retail/commercial use on ground level and upper floors devoted to residential uses 1.00 Development as a Traditional Neighborhood Planned Development (TN-PD) District 0.75 Development on previously used or developed land that is not contaminated (site re-use) 0.50 Energy Conservation Install a “cool roof” on a minimum of 50 percent of the dwelling units in a subdivision. The cool roof shall cover the entire roof of the building. Install a “cool roof” on a minimum of 50 percent of the buildings in a multi-building development. The cool roof shall cover the entire roof of the building 1.50 Provide skylights in an amount necessary to ensure natural lighting is provided to at least 25 percent of the habitable rooms in the structure 0.50 Use central air conditioners that are Energy Star qualified 0.50 Use of only solar or tank-less water heating systems throughout the structure 0.50 Provide shade, open-grid pervious pavement, or solar-reflective paving on 50% of total area of roads, sidewalks, and parking areas in development 0.50 Use vegetation or vegetated structures to shade HVAC units 0.25 Alternative Energy Generate or acquire a minimum of 50 percent of the electricity needed by the development from alternative energy sources (e.g., solar, wind, geothermal) 2.00 Generate or acquire a minimum of 25 percent of the electricity needed by the development from alternative energy sources (e.g., solar, wind, geothermal) 1.00 Pre-wire a minimum of 75 percent of residential dwelling units in the development for solar panels 1.50 Pre-wire a minimum of 50 percent of residential dwelling units in the development for solar panels 0.75 Pre-wire a minimum of 25 percent of residential dwelling units for solar panels 0.50 Install solar panels on a minimum of 25 percent of dwelling units contained in single-family detached, single-family semi-detached, two-family, or townhouse development, that provides a minimum of 75 percent of electricity needed for each unit 2.00 Passive Solar Orient a minimum of 50 percent of residential dwellings or lots in the development within 20 percent of east-west axis for maximum passive solar exposure 1.50 Orient a minimum of 25 percent of residential dwelling units or lots in the development within 20 percent of east-west axis for maximum passive solar exposure 1.00 Orient at least 50 percent of nonresidential buildings within 20 percent of east-west axis for maximum solar exposure 1.50 Orient at least 25 percent of nonresidential buildings within 20 percent of east-west axis for maximum solar exposure 1.00 Water Conservation and Water Quality Install a green or vegetated roof on the primary structure, or on at least 50 percent of primary buildings in a multi-building development. Green or vegetated roofs shall include vegetation on at least 50 percent of the roof area (25 percent for renovated buildings) and shall use only plant materials permitted by the landscaping standards in Sec. 5.2, Landscaping and Buffer Standards. 2.00 Provide rain gardens, street-side swales, or other appropriate storm water infiltration system(s) that captures a minimum of 25 percent of site stormwater runoff 1.00 Use pervious pavement on at least 50 percent of parking lot and driveway area in 1.00 Land Development Code Page 5 128 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.11 Green Building Standards
5.11.4 Green Building Standards TABLE 5.11.4.B: GREEN BUILDING POINT SYSTEM POINTS EARNED development Create a soil management plan for development site that promotes stormwater infiltration through improved organic matter content, reduced compaction levels, and increased infiltration capacity 0.50 Include rain water capture and re-use devices such as cisterns, rain filters, and underground storage basins for residential development with a minimum storage capacity of 500 gallons for every two residential units 0.50 Provide rain gardens or other appropriate storm water infiltration system(s) that accommodate a minimum of 25 percent of the runoff 1.00 Vegetation Retain at least 20 percent of existing pre-development natural vegetation 0.75 Preserve large, non-exotic trees on site (Large tree defined as 20 feet or greater in height and 24 inches or greater DBH) 0.50 for1-5 preserved trees; 1.0 for 5+ preserved trees Remove all lawn or turf in favor of ground cover consisting of plant material or mulch 0.75 Limit turf grass to 40 percent of the landscaped area. 0.50 Urban Agriculture Provide a fenced, centrally located community garden space (which may be located as a rooftop garden) for residents and for urban gardening purposes, at a ratio of 50 square feet. per residential dwelling unit 1.00 Provide a minimum of one on-site composting station for every 25 residential dwelling units 0.25 Building Materials Source a minimum of 25 percent, by cost, of construction materials from recycled products or products manufactured, extracted, harvested, or recovered within 250 miles of the site 1.50 Transportation Provide a minimum of five percent of required automobile parking spaces that are signed and reserved for hybrid/electric/low energy vehicles in preferred locations near the primary building entrance 0.25 Provide more bicycle parking than required by Sec. 5.1.11, Bicycle Parking Standards , while ensuring that all other bicycle parking standards in Section 5.1, Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards are met 0.50 per additional 5 percent bicycle parking spaces Provide a minimum of two electric vehicle (EV) level 2 charging stations that are made available in a parking structure or off-street parking lot to those using the building 0.50 Provide a minimum of two electric vehicle (EV) level 3 charging stations that are made available in a parking structure or off-street parking lot to those using the building 0.75 Include showering and dressing facilities in nonresidential developments for employees using alternative forms of transportation 0.50 Resiliency to Natural Hazards Establish operating procedures for how the project will handle loss of off-site or grid power, transition to a backup source of power, and transition back to normal operation 0.50 Equip the project with at least one alternative, independent source of electricity supply so that the project is capable of operating if a primary source of power experiences an interruption 1.00 If the project involves a critical facility that is intended to remain operational in the event of a flood, or whose function is critical for post-flood recovery, design the facility to be protected and operable at the water levels represented by a 0.2% annual chance (500-year) flood 1.00 Elevate new and/or existing structures more than 3 feet above base flood elevation (BFE) 0.50 per foot above BFE Install operable windows to allow for natural ventilation in the event of power failures 0.25 Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 129
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.11 Green Building Standards
5.11.5 Failure to Install or Maintain Green Building Elements for Compliance
C. Documentation Required
Applicants shall provide documentation of techniques that will be used to satisfy the green building standards of this section at the time of submittal of a development application. Documentation for items that may not be visually verified as part of an inspection may be provided in the form of invoices, receipts, or delivery confirmation for the items in question.
5.11.5. FAILURE TO INSTALL OR MAINTAIN GREEN BUILDING ELEMENTS FOR COMPLIANCE
Failure to install or maintain approved green building elements that are to be provided to comply with this section is a violation of this LDC, and may result in revocation of the development approval or permit, and revocation of the authorization for use of green building incentives in accordance with Section 5.12, Green Building Incentives.
Land Development Code Page 5 130 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.12 Green Building Incentives
5.12.1 Purpose and Intent
Section 5.12. GREEN BUILDING INCENTIVES
5.12.1. PURPOSE AND INTENT
The purpose of this section is to add further support to green building practices in the City by providing incentives for developments that incorporate specific types of green building features above the minimum required in Section 5.11, Green Building Standards. Specifically, this section is intended to provide incentives for developments that incorporate green building features that support:
A. Energy conservation;
B. Alternative energy use;
C. Water conservation;
D. Water conservation and water quality;
E. Resilient development practices;
F. Healthy landscaping;
G. Alternate forms of transportation; and
H. Urban agriculture.
5.12.2. INCENTIVES
A. Development integrating green building features in accordance with this section shall be eligible for the following incentives. They shall be integrated into a development in addition to those included in accordance with Sec. 5.12, Green Building Standards.
1.
An increase in the maximum allowable height by up to one story or 14 feet beyond the maximum allowed in the base zoning district;
2.
An increase in the maximum allowable lot coverage by 15 percent beyond the maximum allowed in the base zoning district; and
3.
A modification to the off-street parking requirements resulting in a reduction from the minimum requirements by 15 percent, or an increase to the maximum allowable number of spaces provided by 15 percent (without an alternative parking plan).
B. Development may include a sufficient number of green building features to take advantage of more than one type of incentive, but in no instance shall the amount of an incentive be increased or decreased (as appropriate) beyond the maximum listed in this Subsection.
5.12.3. APPLICABILITY
The incentives in this section are available to development and redevelopment in all base zoning districts, except the Agricultural and Transitional districts.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 131
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.12 Green Building Incentives
5.12.4 Conflict with Neighborhood Compatibility
5.12.4. CONFLICT WITH NEIGHBORHOOD COMPATIBILITY
In cases where the incentives in this section conflict with the neighborhood protection standards in Sec. 5.9, Neighborhood Compatibility Standards, the neighborhood compatibility standards shall control.
5.12.5. PROCEDURE
A. Development seeking to use green building incentives in accordance with this section shall include a written request with the development application that demonstrates how compliance with the standards in this section will be achieved.
B. Review for compliance and granting of requests for incentives in accordance with this section shall occur during review of a development plan (major or minor) (see Sec. 2.5.2.A), or subdivision (see Sec. 2.5.2.B), whichever occurs first.
C. The decision-making body or person responsible for review of the development application shall also be responsible for the review of the green building incentive request.
D. The incentive(s) shall be based on the number of green building features provided, in accordance with Table 5.12.5: Green Building Incentives, and Table 5.12.6: Green Building Features. To obtain the right to a particular incentive identified in the left column of Table
5.12.5: Green Building Incentives (for example, a density bonus of up to one additional dwelling unit per acre beyond the maximum allowed in the base zoning district), the development proposed is required to provide the minimum number of green building features associated with the green building features from both schedule A and schedule B in Table 5.12.5: Green Building Incentives (for example, for a density bonus of up to two additional dwelling unit per acre beyond the maximum allowed in the base zoning district, the proposed development is required to include two green building features from Schedule A and four green building features from Schedule B). The green building features used to obtain the individual type of incentive shall only be counted for that incentive. If an applicant wants to achieve a second type of incentive (for example, both the density bonus incentive and the lot coverage incentive), the proposed development shall include the minimum number of green building features in Schedule A and Schedule B required for both incentives (two from Schedule A and four from Schedule B for the density bonus incentive, and two from Schedule A and three from Schedule B for the lot coverage incentive).
TABLE 5.12.5: GREEN BUILDING INCENTIVES
TYPE OF INCENTIVE
MINIMUM NUMBER OF GREEN BUILDING PRACTICES PROVIDED
FROM SCHEDULE A
FROM SCHEDULE B
An increase in the maximum allowable height by up to one story or 14 feet beyond the maximum allowed in the base zoning district
2
3
An increase in the maximum allowable lot coverage by 15 percent beyond the maximum allowed in the base zoning district
2
3
A reduction from the minimum parking space requirements by 15 percent.
2
2
Land Development Code Page 5 132 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.12 Green Building Incentives
5.12.6 Menu of Green Building Features
5.12.6. MENU OF GREEN BUILDING FEATURES
One or more of the green building features in Table 5.12.6: Green Building Features, may be offered by an applicant for proposed development in accordance with Table 5.12.5: Green Building Incentives.
TABLE 5.12.6 : GREEN BUILDING FEATURES
SCHEDULE1
TYPE OF GREEN BUILDING FEATURE
Energy Conservation
A
Install a “cool roof” for at least 50 percent of the total roof area of the primary buildings in a multi-building development. Cool roofs shall have a Solar Reflectance Index of 78 for flat roofs or 29 for roofs with a slope greater than 2:12
A
Use central air conditioners that are Energy Star qualified
A
Use only solar or tank-less water heating systems throughout the structure
B
Provide skylights in an amount necessary to ensure natural lighting is provided to at least 20 percent of the habitable rooms in the structure
B
Construct roof eaves or overhangs of three feet or more on southern or western elevations
B
Provide shade, open-grid pervious pavement, or solar-reflective paving on 50% of total area of roads, sidewalks, and parking areas in development
B
Use a structure design that can accommodate the installation and operation of solar photovoltaic panels or solar thermal heating devices (including appropriate wiring and water transport systems)
B
Use vegetation or vegetated structures to shade HVAC units
Alternative Energy
AA
Generate 50 percent or more of energy on-site by alternative energy (e.g., solar wind, geothermal)
A
Generate 25 percent or more of energy on-site by alternative energy (e.g., solar wind, geothermal)
A
Pre-wire a minimum of 75 percent of residential dwelling units in the development for solar panels
B
Pre-wire a minimum of 25 percent of residential dwelling units in the development for solar panels
Green Building Certification Standards 2
AAA
Construct the principal building(s) to meet or exceed LEED ® Platinum or comparable certification standards
AA
Construct the principal building(s) to meet or exceed LEED ® Gold or comparable certification standards
BB
Construct the principal building(s) to meet or exceed LEED ® Silver or comparable certification standards
Passive Solar
AAA
Construct the principal building(s) to meet or exceed LEED ® Platinum or comparable certification standards
AA
Construct the principal building(s) to meet or exceed LEED ® Gold or comparable certification standards
BB
Construct the principal building(s) to meet or exceed LEED ® Silver or comparable certification standards
AAA
Construct the principal building(s) to meet or exceed LEED ® Platinum or comparable certification standards
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 133
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.12 Green Building Incentives
5.12.6 Menu of Green Building Features TABLE 5.12.6 : GREEN BUILDING FEATURES SCHEDULE1 TYPE OF GREEN BUILDING FEATURE Water Conservation and Water Quality AAA Install a green vegetated roof on the primary building(s), or at least 50 percent of primary buildings in a multi-building complex – green or vegetated roofs shall include vegetation on at least 50 percent of the roof area (25 percent for renovated buildings) and shall use only plant materials permitted by this LDC. A Provide rain gardens, street-side swales, or other appropriate storm water infiltration system(s) that captures a minimum of 25 percent of site stormwater runoff A Use pervious pavement on at least 50 percent of parking lot and driveway area in development A Include rain water capture and re-use devices such as cisterns, rain filters, and underground storage basins with a minimum storage capacity of 500 gallons for every two residential units A Provide rain gardens or other appropriate storm water infiltration system(s) that accommodate a minimum of 25 percent of the runoff Vegetation A Retain at least 25 percent of existing pre-development natural vegetation A Remove all lawn or turf in favor of ground cover consisting of plant material or mulch B Limit turf grass to 40 percent of the landscaped area. Urban Agriculture A Provide a fenced, centrally located community garden space (which may be located as a rooftop garden) for residents and for urban gardening purposes at a ratio of 50 square feet. per dwelling unit B Provide a fenced, community garden space for employees at an office, for gardening purposes at a ratio of 15 square feet. per employee B Provide a minimum of one on-site composting station for every 25 residential dwelling units Building Materials AA Source a minimum of 25 percent, by cost, of construction materials from recycled products or products manufactured, extracted, harvested, or recovered within 250 miles of the site Transportation A Provide a minimum of two electric vehicle (EV) level 3 charging stations that are made available in a parking structure or off-street parking lot to those using the building B Provide a minimum of two electric vehicle (EV) level 2 charging stations that are made available in a parking structure or off-street parking lot to those using the building B Provide a minimum of five percent of required automobile parking spaces that are signed and reserved for hybrid/electric/low energy vehicles in preferred locations near the primary building entrance B Provide more bicycle parking than required by Sec. 5.1.11, Bicycle Parking Standards , while ensuring that all other bicycle parking standards in Section 5.1, Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading Standards are met B Include showering and dressing facilities in nonresidential developments for employees using alternative forms of transportation Resiliency to Natural Hazards A Equip the project with at least one alternative, independent source of electricity supply so that the project is capable of operating if a primary source of power experiences an interruption A If the project involves a critical facility that is intended to remain operational in the event of a flood, or whose function is critical for post-flood recovery, design the facility to be protected and operable at the water levels represented by a 0.2% annual chance (500-year) flood A Elevate new and/or existing structures more than 3 feet above base flood elevation (BFE) B Install operable windows to allow for natural ventilation in the event of power failures Land Development Code Page 5 134 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.12 Green Building Incentives
5.12.7 Failure to Install or Maintain Green Building Practices
TA
BLE 5.12.6 : GREEN BUILDING FEATURES SCHEDULE1 TYPE OF GREEN BUILDING FEATURE
N
ot
es:
1 “AA” means credited as provision of two schedule “A” features. “AAA” means credited as provision of three schedule “A” features. “BB” means credited as provision of two schedule “B” features.
2 .LEED Certification from the U.S. Green Building Council, or equivalent criteria from the International Code Council Green Construction Code, the National Green Building Standards, or similar certification programs as determined by the Director.
5.12.7. FAILURE TO INSTALL OR MAINTAIN GREEN BUILDING PRACTICES
Failure to install or maintain approved green building features that are to be provided to comply with this section is a violation of this LDC, and may result in revocation of the development approval or permit.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 135
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.1 Mobility, Circulation, and Connectivity Standards
Section 5.13. ROADS, STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND BIKEWAYS
5.13.1. MOBILITY, CIRCULATION, AND CONNECTIVITY STANDARDS
A. Purpose
The purpose of this section is to ensure that development is served by a coordinated multimodal transportation system that permits the safe and efficient movement of motor vehicles, emergency vehicles, transit, bicyclists, and pedestrians within the development and between the development and external transportation systems, neighboring development, and local destination points such as places of employment, schools, parks, and shopping areas. Such a multimodal transportation system is intended to:
1.
Provide mobility options;
2.
Increase the effectiveness of local service delivery;
3.
Reduce emergency response times;
4.
Promote healthy walking and bicycling;
5.
Facilitate use of public transportation;
6.
Contribute to the attractiveness of the development and community;
7.
Connect neighborhoods and increase opportunities for interaction between neighbors;
8.
Reduce vehicle miles of travel and travel times;
9.
Reduce greenhouse gas emissions;
10.
Improve air quality;
11.
Minimize congestion and traffic conflicts; and
12.
Preserve the safety and capacity of the City's transportation systems.
B. Applicability
1. General
The standards in this section apply to all new development in the City.
2. Timing of Review
Review for compliance with the standards in this section shall occur during review of a development application for a planned development (2.5.1.F, Planned Development), development plan (major or minor) (Sec. 2.5.2.A, Development Plan (Major and Minor)), or plat (subdivision), (Sec. 2.5.2.B, Plat (Subdivision), or building permit (Code of Ordinances Art.VI, Sec. 6.08.00), whichever occurs first.
3. Developer Responsible for Access and Circulation Improvements
The developer shall provide road, street, bikeway, sidewalk, and other access and circulation improvements in accordance with the standards for design and construction in this section.
Land Development Code Page 5 136 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.1 Mobility, Circulation, and Connectivity Standards
C. Access, Mobility, and Circulation Standards
Development subject to the requirements of this section shall comply with the following standards.
1. Multimodal Access and Circulation System
All new development shall be served by a system of sidewalks, paths, roadways, accessways, and other facilities designed to provide for multiple travel modes (vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle), as appropriate to the development’s size, character, and relationship to surrounding development and development patterns, and existing and planned community transportation systems. Vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian access and circulation systems shall be coordinated and integrated so as to provide transportation choices within and to and from the proposed development, as appropriate.
2. Vehicular Access
a. Required Vehicular Access and Circulation
A new development shall be served by a system of vehicular accessways and internal circulation (including driveway and alleys connecting from public or private streets, as well as fire lanes, parking lot drive aisles, and any circulation associated with parking, loading, or drive-through service windows) that are designed to accommodate appropriate circulation of firefighting and other emergency vehicles, school buses, garbage trucks, delivery vehicles, service vehicles, and passenger motor vehicles within the development.
b. Vehicular Access Management
1. Limitation on Direct Access Along Arterial and Collector Streets
Direct driveway access to a development’s principal origin or destination points (including individual lots in a subdivision) may be provided directly from an arterial or collector street only if:
(a)
No alternative direct vehicular access from a lower-classified accessway (e.g., local street, driveway, or alley) is available or feasible to provide;
(b)
Only one two-way driveway, or one pair of one-way driveways, is allowed onto lots with 200 or less feet of lot frontage on the arterial or collector street, and no more than one additional two-way driveway or pair of one-way driveways is allowed per additional 200 feet of frontage; and
(c)
The development(s) served by the driveway is expected to generate an average daily traffic (ADT) count of 1,000 trips or less, or it is determined that the origin or destination points accessed by the driveway will generate sufficiently low traffic volumes, and the adjacent arterial or collector street has sufficiently low travel speeds and traffic volumes to allow safe driveway access while preserving the safety and efficiency of travel on the arterial or collector street.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 137
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.1 Mobility, Circulation, and Connectivity Standards
c. Vehicular Connectivity
1. Purpose
The purpose of the following vehicular connectivity standards is to enhance safe and convenient mobility within and between neighborhoods and developments that helps integrate and connect neighborhoods, allow residents to conveniently visit neighbors and nearby commercial and mixed-use places without compromising the capacity of the City’s streets to accommodate through-traffic, improve opportunities for comprehensive and convenient services, enhance efficient provision of public services, and improve the speed and effectiveness with which emergency services and police and fire protection can be provided to City residents.
2. Cross Access Between Adjoining Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Developments
(a) Vehicular Parking Areas
i. An internal vehicular circulation system in new nonresidential and mixed-use development shall be designed and constructed to provide vehicular cross-access between any vehicular parking areas within the development and any vehicular parking areas (parking lots) on adjoining parcels containing nonresidential or mixed-use development, and to the boundary of adjoining vacant land if it is in a Commercial, MU-D, or MU-ES district (see Figure 5.13.1.C.2.c.2(a) : Example of Vehicular Parking Area Cross-Access). The cross-access shall consist of a driveway or drive aisle that is at least 22 feet wide or two, one-way driveways or aisles that are each at least 14 feet wide. Figure5.13.1.C.2.c.2(a) : Example of Vehicular Parking Area Cross Access Land Development Code Page 5 138 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.1 Mobility, Circulation, and Connectivity Standards
3.
4.
ii. Easements allowing cross-access to and from lands served by a vehicular cross-access in accordance with paragraph 1 above, along with agreements defining maintenance responsibilities of land owners pertaining to the vehicular cross-access, shall be recorded in the public records of Orange County.
iii. The Director may waive or modify the requirement for vehicular cross-access established in paragraph 1 on determining that such cross–access is impractical or undesirable due to the presence of topographic conditions, natural features, or vehicular safety factors.
Pedestrian Cross-Access
(a)
An internal pedestrian circulation system in new multifamily, nonresidential, or mixed-use development shall be designed to allow for pedestrian cross access between the development's buildings and parking areas and those on adjoining lots containing multifamily, nonresidential, or mixed-use development.
(b)
Easements allowing cross-access to and from properties served by a pedestrian cross-access in accordance with paragraph 1, along with agreements defining maintenance responsibilities of land owners, shall be recorded in the public records of Orange County.
(c)
The Director may waive or modify the requirement for pedestrian cross-access established in paragraph 1 on determining that such cross–access is impractical or infeasible due to the presence of topographic conditions or natural features.
Bicycle Cross-Access
(a)
An internal bicycle circulation system in the MU-D or MU-ES districts shall be designed and constructed to provide bicycle cross-access between it and any internal bicycle circulation system on adjoining parcels containing a multifamily, nonresidential, or mixed-use development, and to vacant lands in the MU-D or MU-ES districts.
(b)
Easements allowing cross-access to and from properties served by a bicycle cross-access in accordance with paragraph 1, along with agreements defining maintenance responsibilities of land owners, shall be recorded in the public records of Orange County.
(c)
The Director may waive or modify the requirement for bicycle cross-access established in paragraph 1 above, on determining that such cross– access is impractical or undesirable for typical bicyclists’ use due to the presence of topographic conditions, natural features, or safety factors. Undesirable conditions shall be defined as those limiting mobility for bicycles as a form of transportation, such as narrow connections bounded on both sides by walls or embankments, or limited visibility when straight-line connections are not achievable.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 139
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.1 Mobility, Circulation, and Connectivity Standards
5. Pedestrian Connections
A right-of-way at least eight feet wide shall be provided in a single-family or two-family residential subdivision for pedestrian and bicycle access between a cul-de-sac head or street turnaround and the sidewalk system of the closest street or pedestrian path (as shown in Figure 5.13.1.C.2.c.5: Pedestrian Connections), if it:
(a)
Is in close proximity (defined generally as within a half-mile) to significant pedestrian generators or destinations such as schools, parks, trails, greenways, employment centers, mixed use development, retail centers, or similar features; or
(b)
Creates an unreasonable impediment to pedestrian circulation (defined generally as walking distance between uses on the cul-de-sac and uses on the closest street that is at least four times the actual physical distance between these two uses); and
(c)
Can be reasonably achieved and connected to an existing or proposed sidewalk, trail, greenway, or other type of pedestrian connection.
(d)
This pedestrian connection shall count as a link for the purpose of calculating the connectivity index. Figure 5.13.1.C.2.c.5: Pedestrian Connections
6. External Street Connectivity
(a)
The arrangement of streets in a residential subdivision shall provide for the alignment and continuation of existing or proposed streets into adjoining lands where the adjoining lands are undeveloped and deemed appropriate for future development, or are developed and include opportunities for such connections.
(b)
Street rights-of-way shall be extended to or along adjoining property boundaries such that a street connection or street stub shall be provided
Land Development Code Page 5 140 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.1 Mobility, Circulation, and Connectivity Standards
for development where practicable and feasible in each direction (north, south, east, and west) for development that abuts vacant lands.
(c)
At all locations where streets terminate with no street connection, but a future connection is planned or accommodated, a sign shall be installed with the words "FUTURE STREET CONNECTION," to inform land owners.
(d)
The final plat shall identify all stub streets and include a notation that all street stubs are intended for connection with future streets on adjoining undeveloped or underdeveloped lands.
(e)
Stub streets that exceed 150 feet in length shall include a turn-around that shall be replaced when the stub street is connected.
7. Continuation of Adjacent Streets
Proposed street layouts shall be coordinated with the existing street system in surrounding areas. Existing streets shall, to the maximum extent practicable, be extended to provide access to adjacent developments and subdivisions and to provide for additional points of ingress and egress.
8. Traffic-Calming Measures
(a)
In residential subdivisions, street widths not in excess of basic design standards, short block lengths, on-street parking, controlled intersections, roundabouts, and other traffic-calming measures are encouraged on all local streets that connect between two nodes in the connectivity index system, provided they do not interfere with emergency vehicle access.
(b)
Residential development shall employ measures to interrupt direct vehicle flow on linear street segments over 800 linear feet long, to the maximum extent practicable (see Figure 5.13.1.C.2.c.8: Traffic Calming Measures). Such measures may include, but shall not be limited to:
i. Stop signs at street intersections;
ii. Mini-roundabouts at intersections;
iii. Curvilinear street segments to slow traffic and interrupt monotonous streetscapes;
iv.
Traffic-diverting physical devices such as neckdowns, chicanes, and diverter islands;
v.
Roadway striping to limit vehicular cartway widths or accommodate bike lanes; and
vi. Raised intersections or elevated pedestrian street crossings. Figure 5.13.1.C.2.c.8: Traffic Calming Measures Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 141
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.1 Mobility, Circulation, and Connectivity Standards
(c) Any physical installations that narrow the roadway and extend curbs toward the street centerline, such as bulbouts and chicanes, are discouraged on streets less than 24 feet wide, but are encouraged on wider streets as a traffic calming device and to reduce crossing distance for pedestrians, where practicable.
9. Sidewalks Required
(a)
In all districts except the I-H district, sidewalks a minimum of five feet in width, and that comply with Sec. 5.13.6, Sidewalks and Bikeways, are required on both sides of all streets within a new development, redevelopment, and subdivision, along the entire frontage with a street (unless an existing sidewalk is already in place).
(b)
The Director, as appropriate, may waive or modify the requirement for sidewalks on determining that such sidewalks are impractical or infeasible due to the presence of topographic conditions or natural features that do not allow connections to be realistically made.
10. Pedestrian Walkways through Large Vehicular Parking Areas
(a) General
All vehicular parking areas and parking structures containing more than 200 parking spaces shall provide a clearly identified pedestrian path between parking areas and the primary pedestrian entrance(s) to the building(s) served by the parking areas, or to a pedestrian walkway providing direct access from the furthest extent of the parking area to the primary building entrance(s).
(b) Pedestrian Walkways
Vehicular parking areas containing more than 200 parking spaces shall, at a minimum, include one pedestrian walkway every six parallel parking rows (every three double-row parking bays) or every 200 feet, whichever is the lesser dimension (see Figure 5.13.1.C.2.c.10(b) : Pedestrian Walkways Through Vehicular Parking Area). The pedestrian walkway shall be constructed of a paved surface with concrete similar to that used for sidewalk standards for public streets. Other hardscape materials, such as brick pavers, may be used provided if they allow smooth surfaces along pedestrian paths and at vehicle crossings.
Land Development Code Page 5 142 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.2 Minimum Street Design and Construction Standards Figure 5.13.1.C.2.c.10(b) : Pedestrian Walkways Through Vehicular Parking Area
11. Extension of Pedestrian Walkways
Pedestrian walkways providing access between vehicular parking areas and associated buildings may be extended to provide the connections to abutting street sidewalks or to adjoining development.
12. Bicycle Facilities
In the MU-D and MU-ES districts, new developments and redevelopments are encouraged to include bike lanes, bike paths, or other bicycle facilities sufficient to allow safe and efficient bicycle access and circulation within the development.
5.13.2. MINIMUM STREET DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
A. Compliance with Technical Construction Standards
Unless modified by the standards in this section the guidelines of the Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design, Construction and Maintenance for Streets and Highways, State of Florida, current edition (Green Book), the standards of the American Association of State Highways and Transportation Officials and the latest edition of the Orange County Road Construction Specifications shall be the minimum acceptable standards for street design.
B. Design Standards
1. General
Streets shall be classified based on the definitions, and with consideration of vehicle trip generation ratios as provided in this section. Where the City Council has adopted a higher classification than the classification based on projected traffic volumes, the
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 143
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.2 Minimum Street Design and Construction Standards
higher classification shall be used. All streets shall be designed in accordance with the latest standards of the American Association of State Highways and Transportation Officials, Orange County road construction specifications, and the FDOT Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design, Construction, and Maintenance for Streets and Highways (Green Book), and the following minimum standards, except that greater requirements shall be met when imposed by an agency having jurisdiction of a particular road.
a. Minimum Right-of-way Width
Minimum right-of-way width shall be as specified in Sec. 5.13.7, Rights-of-way.
b. Percent Grade
The percent grade of roadway centerline (closed drainage) shall comply with
Table 5.13.2.B.1.b: Percent Grade of Roadway Centerline (Closed Drainage)
TABLE 5.13.2.B.1.B: PERCENT GRADE OF ROADWAY CENTERLINE (CLOSED DRAINAGE)
STREET TYPE
MAXIMUM (PERCENT)
MINIMUM (PERCENT)
Arterial street
6
0.24
Collector street
8
0.24
Local street
10
0.24
Frontage road
10
0.24
2. Culs-de-sac
a.
A Cul-de-sac shall be provided with a paved turnaround with a minimum radius (exclusive of curb) of 35 feet. The radius of the right-of-way shall be a minimum of 50 feet. The cul-de-sac radius may be increased at the discretion of the Fire Chief, to accommodate emergency vehicle apparatus.
b.
The length of a cul-de-sac shall be evaluated and approved based on roadway intersection level of service, emergency vehicle access, project layout, and general site planning standards.
c.
Whenever an island is proposed in the center of a cul-de-sac turnaround, the pavement shall be 24 feet, exclusive of curbs.
3. Continuation of Existing Street Pattern
The proposed street layout shall be coordinated with the street system of the surrounding area. Streets on the proposed site shall be connected to streets in adjacent areas where required to provide for proper traffic circulation.
4. Street Access to Adjoining Property
Street stubs to adjoining unplatted areas or future development phases shall be provided unless an amount equal to construction cost is paid to the City for completion of a road when adjoining development occurs. Street stubs in excess of 250 feet shall be provided with a temporary cul-de-sac turnaround. The developer of the adjoining area shall pay the cost of restoring the street to its original design cross
Land Development Code Page 5 144 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.2 Minimum Street Design and Construction Standards
section, and extending the street. A secured secondary access for emergency vehicles shall be provided when subdivision adjoins a development with a private street.
5. Intersection Design
a.
Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. Multiple intersections involving the juncture of more than two streets are prohibited. In order to provide a clear view of intersecting streets to the motorist, there shall be a triangular area of clear visibility formed by two intersecting streets or the intersection of a driveway and a street.
b.
Nothing shall be erected, placed, parked, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially impede vision (sight distance), as measured and determined in accordance with the FDOT Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design, Construction and Maintenance for Streets and Highways (Green Book).
6. Intersection Separation
Intersection separation shall comply with Sec. 5.13.3.B.2, Intersection Separation.
7. Subdivision on arterial or collector streets
Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed street that is designated in the traffic element of the comprehensive plan to be improved or constructed and is shown on the Official Street Map, the developer shall be required to reserve or dedicate rights-of-way, and may be required to construct improvements, as determined by City Council.
8. Half Streets
Half streets shall be prohibited except where a previously platted half street abuts land to be subdivided. The second half of the street shall be platted within the land being subdivided and the entire street shall be improved.
9. Additional Right-of-Way
A proposed subdivision that includes a dedicated street which does not conform to the minimum right-of-way requirements of this LDC, or other applicable City or state requirements, shall provide for the dedication of additional right-of-way along either one or both sides of the street so that the minimum required right-of-way can be established. If the proposed subdivision abuts only one side of the street, then a minimum of one-half of the required additional right-of-way shall be dedicated.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 145
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.2 Minimum Street Design and Construction Standards
10. Vertical Alignment
a.
Vertical curves shall be required where the algebraic difference in intersecting grades equals or exceeds the values in Table 5.13.2.B.10.a: Vertical Alignment.
TABLE 5.13.2.B.10.A : VERTICAL ALIGNMENT
STREET CLASSIFICATION
ALGEBRAIC DIFFERENCE (PERCENT)
Local
1.00
Collector
0.80
b.
All vertical curves shall be of sufficient length to provide a safe stopping sight distance compatible to the design speed of the street or road. Minimum length of all vertical curves shall be 100 feet.
c.
Minimum cross slopes and/or super-elevation rates of 0.0208 feet/foot (one quarter inch/foot) shall be utilized for the design of all streets or roads.
11. Minimum Number of Access Points
A minimum of two points for vehicular access shall be provided into each subdivision of 25 lots or more. Nonresidential developments shall also provide a minimum of two points of vehicular access, as determined by the Development Review Committee (DRC). Additional access points may be required depending upon the size of the development. Where adjoining existing development or other land development code requirements preclude the development of two public street access points, an unobstructed driveable stabilized surface for emergency vehicles (Fire/Police) may be substituted upon review and approval of the Development Review Committee (DRC).
C. Design Requirements
1. Swale drainage
Swale drainage is not permitted.
2. Compliance with state and county standards
All street construction shall comply with the latest edition of the Orange County road construction specifications and FDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.
3. Clearing and grading of rights-of-way
The owner or developer shall clear all rights-of-way according to minimum standards in the latest edition of the FDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction. All grades, including grades for streets, alleys, and drainage, shall be consistent with all grades approved for the subdivision. All debris shall be removed from the project site.
4. Subgrade
All unstable materials such as muck, peat, or plastic clays shall be removed from the right-of-way. The areas then shall be backfilled with suitable material and compacted to 95 percent of the maximum density as determined by AASHTO T-180 test method.
a. Subgrade Requirements for Limerock Base
Subgrade for limerock base shall comply with the following:
Land Development Code Page 5 146 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.2 Minimum Street Design and Construction Standards
1.
Stabilize top six inches to 50 psi FBV.
2.
Compact to 95 percent of AASHTO T-180 for top 12 inches minimum.
3.
Subgrade shall extend 12 inches beyond back of curb.
b. Subgrade Requirements for Soil Cement Base
Subgrade for soil cement base shall comply with the following:
1.
Compact to 95 percent of AASHTO T-180 for top 12 inches minimum.
2.
Subgrade shall extend 12 inches beyond back of curb.
c. Testing Intervals
Density and bearing value tests shall be taken at intervals not to exceed 300 feet or 800 square yards, as directed by the City Engineer.
5. Base Course
a. Thickness
The base course materials may be either limerock or soil cement with a minimum thickness that complies with Table 5.13.2.C.5.a: Base Course Material Thickness.
TABLE 5.13.2.C.5.A: BASE COURSE MATERIAL THICKNESS
STREET CLASSIFICATION
LIMEROCK (INCHES)
SOIL CEMENT (INCHES)
Local
6
6
Collector
8
6
Arterial
10
8
b.
Limerock
1.
The limerock base shall be compacted to a density of not less than 98 percent maximum density as determined by AASHTO T-180.
2.
Thickness checks and density tests shall be made at intervals not to exceed 300 feet.
c.
Soil Cement
1. The soil cement base shall be constructed to conform with Table
5.13.2.C.5.c.1: Soil Cement Laboratory Design Mix Compressive Strength.
TABLE 5.13.2.C.5.C.1: SOIL CEMENT LABORATORY DESIGN MIX COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH
(DAYS)
(PSI)
7
300
14
350
28
450
2.
The laboratory mix design shall be provided to the City prior to construction.
3.
Thickness checks and compressive strength tests shall be performed at intervals not to exceed 300 feet.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 147
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.2 Minimum Street Design and Construction Standards
6. Asphalt Concrete
a.
The materials used shall conform to the following:
1.
FDOT type S-1 asphaltic concrete.
2.
FDOT type III asphaltic concrete.
b.
The asphalt concrete thickness shall conform with Table 5.13.2.C.6.b: Minimum Asphalt Concrete Thickness.
TABLE 5.13.2.C.6.B: MINIMUM ASPHALT CONCRETE THICKNESS
STREET CLASSIFICATION
ASPHALT THICKNESS (INCHES)
Local
1
Collector
1.5
Arterial
1.5
c.
A certified copy of the design mix shall be submitted to the City Engineer.
7. Roadway Underdrains
a.
All streets shall be designed to provide a minimum clearance of one foot between the bottom of the road base and the estimated seasonal high-water table, or the artificial water table induced by an underdrain system.
b.
The planned use of underdrain systems which control the seasonal high-water table to provide these minimum clearances, is allowed with the following requirements and limitations:
1.
The use of a limerock base in conjunction with underdrains is prohibited for streets constructed within City right-of-way.
2.
The underdrains shall be designed so that they flow no more than six months in an average rainfall year.
3.
The underdrain trench bottom shall not be placed below the seasonal low water table elevation.
4.
The distance between the bottom of the underdrain and the bottom of the roadway base shall not be less than 24 inches.
5.
Geotechnical engineer certification:
(a)
A Florida registered geotechnical engineer shall provide the following design certification: "This is to certify that the underdrain design for (street name), extending from station ____________ to station ____________, has been designed such that the separation between the bottom of the road base and the artificially induced wet season water table is no less than one foot for the entire width of pavement."
(b)
The installation shall be inspected by the certifying engineer who shall then certify that the underdrain installation has been constructed according to the approved plans.
Land Development Code Page 5 148 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.3 Street and Road Access
6.
The stormwater facilities shall be designed to accommodate expected flow contributed by the underdrain system.
7.
The City shall inspect the underdrain system for compliance prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Acceptance.
8.
Materials used shall be in accordance with the latest Orange County road construction specifications.
8. Curbs and Gutters
a.
All streets shall be paved and drained utilizing curb and gutter construction.
b.
The width of curb and gutter shall be a minimum of 24 inches and shall be FDOT type "F" curb and gutter. Simple vertical curbing and Miami curb are prohibited. FDOT type mountable median curb may be used around median dividers on the high side of pavement. All curbing designed to handle water shall incorporate an approved gutter design. There shall be a stabilized subgrade beneath all curbs and one foot beyond the back of the curb.
c.
No water valve boxes, meters, portions of manholes, or other appurtenances of any kind relating to any underground utilities shall be located in any portion of a curb and gutter section.
d.
The minimum allowable flow line grade of curbs and gutters shall be 0.24 percent. The tolerance for ponded water in curb construction is one-fourth inch maximum; if exceeded, the section of curb shall be removed and reconstructed to grade.
e.
Plastering shall not be permitted on the face of the curb. Joints shall be sawed at intervals of ten feet, except where shorter intervals are required for closures, but, in no case, less than four feet.
f.
After concrete has set sufficiently, but in no case later than three days after construction, the curbs shall be backfilled.
g.
All cross-street valley gutters shall be constructed of concrete.
5.13.3. STREET AND ROAD ACCESS
A. Number of Access Points
1. Paved Access Required
All development shall be required to provide paved access to a public right-of-way. Paved access to a public right-of-way may include private streets or other appropriate cross-access easements. The requirement for paved access beyond the right-of-way may be waived for agricultural development or for a single-family detached dwelling which is located on a parcel at least one acre in size, if the nearest dwelling or accessory building wall is more than 150 linear feet from the property's access point.
2. Number of Access Points
The number of access points allowed for each development shall be based on the following standards:
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 149
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.3 Street and Road Access
a.
Type of road facility being accessed;
b.
Separation standards;
c.
Engineering design standards;
d.
Internal traffic circulation;
e.
Impact on transportation system; and
f.
Emergency vehicles access.
3. Adjoining Property
Access to adjoining property shall be coordinated as required in Sec. 5.13.2.B.3, Continuation of Existing Street Pattern and Sec. 5.13.2.B.4, Street Access to Adjoining Property.
B. Separation of Access Points
1. Minimum Criteria
The design and location of urban intersections should be consistent with the terms
included in these regulations, and the most current Manual of Uniform Minimum
Standards for Design, Construction and Maintenance for Streets and Highways as
prepared by FDOT.
2. Intersection Separation
Intersections on streets or roads designated as arterials should not be less than 1,760 feet apart and intersections on streets or roads designated as collectors should not be less than 500 feet apart, centerline measurement. Intersections with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet are prohibited on local streets.
3. Curb Cuts
No person shall construct a curb cut for a driveway, walkway or any other purpose without first obtaining approval from the City Engineer. Additional permits will be required from Orange County or FDOT for roads under their jurisdiction.
C. Design Considerations
1.
The choice for the proper location of driveways must involve consideration of the amount of the conflict which can be expected to occur both within the off-street vehicular parking area and on abutting streets. One primary concept which shall be followed is to reduce the number of driveways to a practical minimum and to promote consolidated driveway usage wherever possible, thus providing fewer locations where conflicts may occur.
2.
The area to which the driveway provides access shall be of sufficient size and design to allow all necessary functions for loading, unloading, parking, and standing to be carried out on private property and completely off the street right-of-way.
a.
No design shall be permitted which requires any vehicle to back out onto a public street, except for single-family detached dwellings.
b.
Facilities with drive-in windows shall be so designed so that waiting vehicles do not extend into the street or right-of-way.
Land Development Code Page 5 150 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.3 Street and Road Access
3. The minimum spacing between adjacent driveways accessing arterial or collector streets shall comply with the following standards:
a.
Arterials:
1.
Speed limit greater than or equal to 45 mph: Nearest edge to nearest edge shall equal at least 660 feet.
2.
Speed limit less than 45 mph: Nearest edge to nearest edge shall equal at least 440 feet.
b.
Collectors:
1.
Speed limit greater than or equal to 45 mph: Nearest edge to nearest edge shall equal at least 440 feet.
2.
Speed limit less than 45 mph: Nearest edge to nearest edge shall equal at least 245 feet.
3.
Distances between adjacent one-way driveways with the inbound driveway upstream from the outbound driveway can be one-half the distance as that established in b.1 and b.2, above.
4.
Driveways on opposite sides of any undivided street classified collector or arterial shall be offset a minimum of 200 feet, measured from centerline to centerline, whenever possible.
5.
For developments that request more than one two-way driveway, based upon parcel size, projected trip generation of the site, amount of roadway frontage, and other appropriate design considerations, additional driveways may be permitted if all other provisions of this section are met.
4.
No driveway shall be permitted in the radius return of an intersection.
5.
All driveway widths shall be measured at the property or right-of-way line.
6.
All driveways shall be constructed as nearly to a right angle to the street or roadway as possible.
7.
All driveways shall cross the sidewalk area at the sidewalk grade.
8.
Concrete for the construction of driveway approaches (the portion of the driveway in the right-of-way including the sidewalk crossover) shall be at least 2,500 psi concrete and at least six inches in thickness (with six-inch by six-inch #10/#10 woven wire fabric reinforcing and with break and exposed joint at property line).
9.
No residential driveway shall be permitted within 40 feet of an intersection. This measurement shall be made from the centerline of the proposed driveway to the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting street as measured along the adjacent right-of-way line.
10.
No edge of a residential driveway shall be closer than five feet to the adjoining lot or parcel.
11.
The minimum width of a driveway serving a single-family detached dwelling shall be ten feet, and the maximum width shall not exceed 18 feet.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 151
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.3 Street and Road Access
12.
For all residential driveways, the width of the curb opening shall not exceed the width of the driveway by more than three feet on each side, except if a radius is used.
13.
Residential driveways shall have a minimum one foot six inch flare tapered back to the front of the sidewalk.
14.
Residential driveway approaches shall be designed so that the slope does not exceed the maximum as shown in the Apopka Construction Design Standards Manual in this LDC, unless approved by the City Engineer.
15.
No driveway shall be permitted which includes any municipal facility such as traffic signal standards, catchbasins, fire hydrants, or any other similar type structure, unless the facility is relocated at the property owner's expense.
16.
The minimum and maximum widths of commercial driveways shall conform with Table5.13.3.C.16: Commercial Drive Width:
TABLE 5.13.3.C.16: COMMERCIAL DRIVE WIDTH
DRIVE TYPE
MINIMUM (FEET)
MAXIMUM (FEET)
One-Way
18
201
Two-Way
24
401
Notes: 1. Or as required for multilane driveways
17.
Commercial driveways shall have a minimum 15-foot radius measured from the front of the sidewalk to the curb and gutter flow line.
18.
All nonresidential driveways shall be constructed in conformance to the plans and specifications approved by the City Engineer.
D. Frontage roads and joint-use driveways.
1. Arterial roads.
Properties fronting on arterial streets unable to meet driveway separation criteria within this LDC shall have indirect access to the arterial by means of either joint-use driveways, or frontage roads, or in the case of corner parcels, by access to the collector or other facility that intersects the arterial. The following conditions shall apply:
a. Arterial, No Existing Service Road, Incompatible Abutting Development
When a parcel is located where there is no existing service road, and the planned use of the subject parcel is incompatible for buffer yard requirements with existing uses of abutting lands (e.g., single-family detached dwelling) making a joint-use driveway undesirable, a temporary driveway with direct access from the subject parcel to the arterial, or in the case of a corner parcel, to the collector or other street or road that intersects the arterial, will be allowed provided that:
1.
Access rights to the subject parcel are dedicated to the City;
2.
The necessary cross-access easement for a planned service road is conveyed to the City; and
3.
When the use of an abutting property changes to a compatible use, a joint-use driveway is provided by the owner(s) of the subject property jointly with
Land Development Code Page 5 152 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.3 Street and Road Access
the owner(s) of the abutting property which use has changed, at a location approved by the DRC, and the temporary driveway shall be discontinued (if not used as the joint-use driveway); or
4. When the use of two or more abutting properties changes to a compatible use, a service road fronting the subject properties is provided by the owners of the subject properties and the cross-access easement conveyed to the city and access to the individual properties is from the service road only, and the service road accesses the arterial or a street or road intersecting the arterial at a location approved by the DRC.
b. Arterial, No Existing Service Road, Compatible Abutting Development
When a parcel of property is located where there is no existing service road, and the planned use of the subject property is compatible with existing uses of one or more abutting properties, a service road will be provided by the owner(s) of the subject property and the cross-access easement conveyed to the City, and access to the individual property will be from the service road only, and the service road will access the arterial or a facility intersecting the arterial at a location approved by the DRC.
c. Arterial, Existing Service Road
When a parcel of property is located where there is an existing service road to the abutting properties, an extension of the service road, fronting the subject, will be provided by the owner(s) of the subject property, and the necessary cross-access easement for the service road will be conveyed to the City, and access to the subject property shall be from the service road only, and the service road shall access the arterial or a facility intersecting the arterial at a location approved by the DRC.
2. Collector Streets
Properties fronting on collector streets unable to meet the driveway separation standards in this LDC should have indirect access to the collector street by means of either joint-use driveways, or service roads, or in the case of corner parcels, by access to the facility (if not an arterial) that intersects the collector. The following conditions shall apply:
a. Collector, No Existing Service Road, No Planned Service Road
When a parcel of property is located where there is no existing or planned service road and the planned use of the subject property is incompatible with existing uses of abutting properties (e.g., single-family detached dwelling), making a joint-use driveway undesirable, a temporary driveway with direct access to the collector street, or in the case of a corner parcel, to the street or road (if not an arterial) that intersects the collector street, will be allowed provided that:
1.
Access rights to the parcel are dedicated to the City;
2.
The necessary cross-access easement is conveyed to the City;
3.
When the use of an abutting property changes to a compatible use, a joint-use driveway is provided by the owner(s) of the subject property jointly with the owner(s) of the abutting property which use has changed, at a location
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 153
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.3 Street and Road Access
approved by the DRC, and the temporary driveway is discontinued (if not
used as the joint-use driveway); and
4. Joint-use driveways, with required cross-access easements, serve as many adjoining properties as necessary to maintain the minimum spacing of driveways as listed in this section.
b. Collector, No Existing Service Road, Planned Service Road
When a parcel of property is located where there is no existing service road, but a service road is planned, and the planned use of the subject property is incompatible with existing uses of adjoining properties, (e.g., single-family detached dwelling), making a joint-use driveway undesirable, a temporary driveway with direct access to the collector street, or in the case of a corner parcel, to the facility (if not an arterial) that intersect the collector street, will be allowed provided that:
1.
Access rights are dedicated to the City;
2.
The necessary cross-access easement of the planned service road is conveyed to the City; and
3.
When the use of an adjoining property changes to a compatible use, a joint-use driveway is provided by the owner(s) of the subject property jointly with the owner(s) of the adjoining property which use has changed, at a location approved by the DRC, and the temporary driveway discontinued (if not used as the joint-use driveway); or
4.
When the use of two or more adjoining properties changes to compatible uses, a service road, fronting the subject properties, is provided by the owners of the subject properties and the necessary cross-access easement for the service road conveyed to the City, and access to the subject properties is from the service road only, and the service road has access to the collector, or other street or road (if not an arterial) intersecting the collector, at a location approved by the DRC.
c. Collector, Existing Service Road
When a parcel of property is located where there is an existing service road to the adjoining properties, an extension of the service road, fronting the subject property, shall be provided by the owner(s) of the subject property and the necessary cross-access easement for the service road conveyed to the City, and access to the subject properties shall be from the service road only, and the service road shall access the collector, or facility (if not an arterial) intersecting the collector at a location approved by the DRC.
E. Access to Residential Lots
1.
Access to nonresidential uses shall not be through an area designed, approved, or developed for residential use.
2.
All lots in a proposed residential subdivision shall have frontage on and access to a residential street.
Land Development Code Page 5 154 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.4 Streets
5.13.4. STREETS
A. Street Classification System Established
Streets in the City are classified according to function served in order to allow for regulation of access, road and right-of-way widths, circulation patterns, design speed, and construction standards. The function of a roadway is twofold: one function is to provide access to land uses adjacent to the roadway facility; the other function is to provide mobility through an area. As access to a roadway increases, the ability of the facility to provide mobility to through traffic decreases. Roadway facilities designed for mobility generally have higher speeds and restrictive access controls. Facilities designed for mobility generally have more capacity than those designed for land access. The hierarchy of streets is established based on and in accordance with the following categories and descriptions:
1. Limited Access Roadways (Interstates, Expressways, Freeways)
Limited access roadways are devoted primarily to the movement of trips over long distances. Access from adjoining parcels is prohibited, and access is limited to exit and entrance ramps located at major roadways. This roadway is generally a multi-lane divided facility designed to serve large volumes of high-speed traffic.
2. Major Arterial
Major arterials are designed for the movement of large volumes of traffic over relatively long distances. They connect to other arterials or collectors and do not penetrate residential neighborhoods. Through traffic movement shall always take precedence over access to private property. Use of frontage roads and consolidation of access is strongly encouraged. Mobility is the primary function of this facility, consequently, access outs shall be strictly controlled.
3. Minor Arterial
Minor arterials are very similar to major arterials but are designed to serve moderate volumes of traffic as well as provide connections to the major system. This facility has a lower degree of travel mobility than a major arterial. This type of roadway allows more land access than either limited access facilities or major arterials.
4. Major Collector
Major collectors serve major community or regional facilities and carry through traffic. Collectors do not serve long, through trips, but rather short to moderate length trips. These routes also collect and distribute traffic between local roads or arterial roads and serve as linkage between land access and mobility needs.
5. Minor Collector
Minor collectors have a function similar to that of a major collector, except that they serve a more limited geographic area. Land service is generally a significant function of this facility.
6. Local
Local streets primarily exist to provide access to adjacent land uses. Average speeds and volumes are low, and trips are usually short in length. There is no emphasis on through traffic movement.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 155
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.4 Streets
7. Special Purpose Streets
Under special circumstances a new local street may be classified and designed as one of the following:
a. Alley
An alley is a special type of street which provides a secondary means of access. The alley shall be designated, intended or adopted to serve as a means of accommodation to a limited area for primarily local convenience. Alleys shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 20 feet and shall be paved to the specifications provided herein.
b. Marginal Access Street (Frontage Road)
A marginal access street is a street parallel and adjacent to a collector or higher level street which provides access to abutting properties and separation from through traffic. Marginal access streets shall meet at a minimum the same specifications as a local street.
B. Official Traffic Circulation Map
The Official Future Traffic Circulation Map as adopted in the comprehensive plan shall be the Official Street Map, and any amendments thereto, adopted by the City as a part of the comprehensive plan. It is made a part of this LDC, and incorporated herein by reference. All existing roadways and streets within the City shall be designated on the Official Street Map. Any roadway or street abutting or affecting the design of a subdivision or land development which is not already classified on the Official Street Map shall be classified according to its function, design, and use by the City at the request of the owner/developer or during development plan review. The map shall be the basis for all decisions regarding required road and street improvements, reservation, or dedication of right-of-way for required road improvements, or access of proposed uses to existing or proposed roadways or streets.
C. Additional Standards
Roads and streets shall also be arranged in accordance with the following:
1.
Conformity with the Orlando Urban Area Transportation System (OUATS) Plan or other such plan as may be determined applicable by the City;
2.
Integration with the street system of the surrounding area in a manner which is not detrimental to existing neighborhoods;
3.
Discouragement of through traffic on local streets; and
4.
Facilitation and coordination with the desirable future development of adjoining property of a similar character and provision for local circulation and convenient access to neighborhood facilities.
D. Road and Street Names
The continuation of an existing road or street shall have the same name, even when it changes direction. When road or street names are interrupted by a channel, expressway, railroad, body of water or similar obstruction, and eventual connection is not possible,
Land Development Code Page 5 156 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.4 Streets
the segments shall bear different names. The name of a new road or street shall not duplicate the name of an existing road or street within the City.
1.
No separate name shall be used for a cul-de-sac that provides street frontage for three or less lots. The name shall be the same as that of the intersecting street. Where there is a series of long and short culs-de-sac, however, each should have separate names;
2.
The developer shall be responsible for naming streets within a project. Names should be chosen that relate to the scale and location of a project, which helps establish locational identity. Before preliminary development plan approval the developer shall submit proposed street names to the Director for approval. The final development plan shall include the overall tract illustrating the proposed street layout and proposed street name;
3.
The following are unacceptable City street names:
a.
Numerical names (such as one, two, three, etc.) except numbers which continue the established grid pattern (such as First Street, Second Street, etc.);
b.
Alphabetical letters (A, B, C, etc.);
c.
Complicated or compound names (these may be used sparingly but shall be avoided on streets less than 1,000 feet in length);
d.
Directional type street names, such as east, west, north, and south; unless in reference to the adopted grid numbering system (such as 120 East Main Street).
E. Definition of Thoroughfare Designations
All road or street suffix names (as depicted in Table 5.13.4.E: Definition of Thoroughfare Designations) shall be used for street naming within the City. Street suffixes not mentioned may be used, provided the developer or property owner obtains approval by the Director.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 157
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.4 Streets TABLE 5.13.4.E: DEFINITION OF THOROUGHFARE DESIGNATIONS STREET SUFFIX DEFINITION Alley or Alleyway Located in the rear of residential or commercial lots. Used for servicing structures fronting on regularly established roadways. Avenue A roadway running in a north-south direction. Boulevard or Parkway A street divided by a landscape center island or median, used as a minor collector and serving as an internal traffic collector. Circle Streets which form a ring-like shape. All circles shall contain one name. Court Permanently closed street such as a cul-de-sac generally less than 1,000 feet. All courts shall have one name only. Drive Curving or meandering streets generally longer than 1,000 feet. Lane One-block roadway in a north-south or east-west direction, generally less than 1,000 feet long. Loop Short circular roadway which configuration is a U-shape (horseshoe-shape). Parkway (See Boulevard.) Place A cul-de-sac or permanent dead-end road. Road Thoroughfares or minor arterials that run in any direction. Street A roadway running in an east-west direction. Way Diagonal street in a northwest-southeast or northeast-southwest direction, generally less than 1,000 feet long.
F. Road and Street Name Changes
The naming or renaming of roads and streets within the City is necessary to eliminate confusion, facilitate improved emergency access by the Orange County 911 emergency system, and provide proper street identification. City Council may consider requests to
Land Development Code Page 5 158 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.5 Private Streets
name or rename a City road or street right-of-way by resolution and adopt such petition in accordance with this LDC and the following provisions:
1.
Affected property owner(s) shall mean any person owning property adjacent to a road or street right-of-way; and/or any structure or business with an assigned address which will be affected by the street name change, as identified on the latest County Tax Map.
2.
City Council is authorized to name and rename roads and streets within its jurisdiction in accordance with state and Orange County's policies and regulations. Request for duplicate street names within the City is prohibited.
3.
Any person within the City may petition to change a street name provided the following requirements are met :
a.
There is a signed petition by 75 percent of the affected property owner(s) confirming that there is no objection to the proposed road or street name ;
b.
The road or street name change request identifies the reason(s) for the proposed name change; and
c.
The City Council finds the request is consistent with the overall City plans for road and street naming, addressing, and the 911 emergency systems.
5.13.5. PRIVATE STREETS
A. Purpose and Intent
The purpose and intent of a private street shall be for the control of external traffic through a development, for establishing a neighborhood identification, for provision of a private security system unique to the neighborhood, and for accommodating special overall design concepts consistent with this LDC and the goals for development in the City.
B. Definition and Indemnification
1.
A private street or cross-access is an accessway designed for vehicular traffic and built according to City specifications for which the entry, use, and maintenance of the street vest in the private owners of the development except as provided in this section.
2.
The entity responsible for the maintenance of a private street shall indemnify and hold harmless the City for any liability, injury, damage, loss or death occurring on private streets or resulting from private streets. The indemnification shall be a condition of approval by the City of any private street or cross-access.
C. Standards for Private Streets
Private streets shall comply with the following standards:
1. All plans or proposals utilizing private streets shall be submitted and approved as a part of a planned development (Sec. 2.5.1.F, Planned Development), development plan (major or minor) (Sec. 2.5.2.A, Development Plan (Major and Minor)), or plat (subdivision), (Sec. 2.5.2.B, Plat (Subdivision), as appropriate
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 159
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.5 Private Streets
2.
Private streets shall only be permitted in a project which generates 1,500 or less average daily trips (ADTs) according to the latest edition of the ITE Trip Generation Manual.
3.
All private streets shall be built to City construction standards and specifications.
4.
Ingress and egress easements for public emergency service and maintenance vehicles shall be granted to the City for all private streets within a development.
5.
A minimum ten-foot utility easement for water, wastewater, and sidewalks shall be dedicated to the City within the right-of-way for the private street. Wastewater easements may utilize the easements for ingress and egress.
6.
Private streets shall not be used to link two or more publicly dedicated rights-of-way unless an approved security system or traffic control system is provided.
7.
Design speeds for vehicular traffic on private streets shall not exceed 30 miles per hour. Speed bumps and other physical deterrents designed to decrease vehicle speed shall not be used under any circumstance on private streets.
8.
Parking for vehicles shall be accommodated on-site. Private street access easements shall not be used or calculated to account for required parking in accordance with this LDC.
9.
Private streets and developments with private streets shall adhere to all Police Department requirements and shall be subject to City police protection and any and all law enforcement powers.
10.
A development with a private streets is strongly encouraged to utilize a security system with manned guards and/or an installed gate system.
11.
A development with private streets shall have signage indicating the street is private. Proposed street signs that vary from the standard City signs may be used subject to approval as part of the development plan or subdivision, as appropriate
12.
The name for private streets shall comply with the requirements of Sec. 5.13.4.D, Road and Street Names.
13.
All new or modified gated developments that have private streets without 24-hour staffed guard houses and with automatic opening devices, such as but not limited to, single-family developments, multi-family developments, commercial, office, institutional, and industrial developments, shall be required to install 3M Opticom Priority Control Equipment approved by the Fire Department. The equipment shall be maintained so it is capable of proper operation at all times and shall be compatible with existing emergency vehicle preemption equipment.( Existing installations may continue in use subject to the approval of the Fire Department.)
14.
All gated developments with private streets shall be subject to the right of any entity holding a City franchise to access the neighborhood to provide services and utilize the streets and easements for those purposes. (This requirement shall be noted on all plats with private streets. )
Land Development Code Page 5 160 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.5 Private Streets
D. Impact Fees and Real Property Taxes
Developments utilizing private streets shall be subject to payment for all applicable traffic impact fees and other off-site improvements required by this LDC. For the purposes of this section, private streets shall be considered private real property, and subject to any and all taxes normally charged to nonexempt taxable real property by the authorized taxing agencies, regardless of any other sections in this LDC.
E. Establishment and Maintenance Requirements
Private streets shall be established and maintained in accordance with the following:
1.
A nonprofit organization or other legal entity shall be established in accordance with state law for the ownership, care, and maintenance of the private streets.
2.
The organization shall be established by covenants and restrictions running with the land and shall be composed of all persons having ownership within the development. The organizations shall be responsible for the perpetuation, maintenance, use, and function of the private streets.
3.
All development with private streets shall be platted in accordance with the requirements of this LDC and shall have the private street easements (including utility easements) described and identified in the plat as to location, size, use, and control, in a restrictive covenant. The covenant shall set forth the method of assessment for the maintenance of private street easements. Private street easements shall include the entire access easement, including street stabilization, paving, surfacing, curbs, sidewalks, vegetative growth and complete stormwater drainage system.
4.
The covenants and restrictions established to protect and maintain private streets shall comply with the following:
a.
The covenants and restrictions for the maintenance, care, and operation of the private street easements shall include provisions for a reserve fund to be held in escrow by the nonprofit organization or other legal entity which shall be separate and apart from other assessments and funds. The reserve fund shall be assessed, collected, and held by the nonprofit organization or other legal entity on an annual basis to be used exclusively for the maintenance, care, and operation of the private street easements. Maintenance and care shall not include maintenance and care of decorative landscaping, routine landscape maintenance, or security equipment or personnel, but shall be restricted to the roadway surface itself and the adjacent storm drainage facilities. The nonprofit organization or other legal entity must notify the Public Services Director within 30 days that they intend to expend funds for the escrow reserve fund or as soon as possible, in the case of an emergency.
b.
An accounting report of the reserve fund assessed, collected, and held by the nonprofit organization or other legal entity shall be submitted to the City on an annual basis. The accounting report shall include a detailed revenue and expenditure report along with a standard balance sheet. The accounting report shall also contain a copy of the most recent bank statement for the reserve fund and a statement from the president of the organization that the accounting report is true and correct. The reserve fund to be held in escrow shall be held in
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 161
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.6 Sidewalks and Bikeways
an interest-bearing account in an approved financial institution located within the City.
5.
In the event that the City must maintain the private street easements in either an emergency or nonemergency situation, as determined by the Fire Department, Police Department, and Public Service Department, the covenants and restrictions running with the land shall provide the City the authority to utilize the reserve fund and to impose and collect an assessment from all the property owners within the development for an amount sufficient to make the necessary repairs and improvements to the easements. Such authority shall be granted to the City until such time as the organization is willing and able to resume their maintenance responsibility of the private street easements. It is not anticipated that private streets allowed under this section will ever become publicly dedicated right-of-way.
6.
Acceptable language shall be recorded on each individual deed of a development with private streets so that it is obvious to the owner and subsequent owners that such provisions for private street maintenance are contained in the covenant and restrictions of the development.
5.13.6. SIDEWALKS AND BIKEWAYS
A. Sidewalk to be Constructed
Sidewalks are required to be constructed by the owner/developer of any new development.
B. Sidewalk Design and Construction Standards
1.
Corner lots are required to have sidewalks along both streets.
2.
All subdivisions shall have four-foot-wide concrete sidewalks on both sides of all local and minor collector streets and five-foot-wide sidewalks on all arterial or major collector streets.
3.
All sidewalks shall be located within street rights-of-way or approved easements.
4.
Street trees shall be planted between the sidewalk and the street within a five-foot wide tree planting area.
5.
Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four inches in thickness, except at driveways where the thickness shall be six inches.
6.
All sidewalks intersecting with or terminating at a street shall be constructed with curb cut ramps according to the Apopka Construction Design Standards Manual in this LDC. Handicap ramps shall be installed according to FDOT specifications.
7.
All sidewalks shall be installed prior to final building inspection. Sidewalks adjacent to any common areas, including retention ponds, shall be installed prior to issuance of a Certificate of Acceptance for the subdivision.
8.
All sidewalks at driveways shall be reinforced with six-inch by six-inch WWF 10/10 mesh.
Land Development Code Page 5 162 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.7 Rights-of-way
C. Sidewalk Assessments
The City may, at its discretion, construct a sidewalk along any street or road it determines is needed and appropriate for the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens. In doing so, the City reserves the right to assess each property owner on a street frontage basis for the costs of the sidewalk.
D. Sidewalk Deferral
The owner/developer may defer sidewalk construction until such time as individual buildings are constructed.
E. Bikeways
When proposed development includes improvements or new construction of collector streets, the design of those facilities shall provide for bikeways.
1.
Onstreet bikeways shall be provided on both sides of the street with a minimum width of four feet with a white stripe separating the bikeway from the road traffic.
2.
The minimum off-street bikeway width shall be eight feet.
3.
When a bikeway is shared with normal pedestrian traffic, the minimum width shall be 12 feet.
4.
Bikeways shall be concrete and four inches thick unless otherwise approved by the DRC.
F. Inspection; Condemnation; Rebuilding
All newly constructed sidewalks or driveway approaches (in the right-of-way) shall be subject to the inspection of the City Engineer, who shall condemn any that do not meet or exceed the standard specifications, either for materials or workmanship. If deemed necessary, Portland cement concrete sidewalks shall be cut through or cored to determine if they comply with the standard specifications. If the sidewalk or driveway approach is found not to comply with the specifications, the sidewalk or driveway approach shall be condemned. The City Engineer shall require sidewalks or driveway approaches which have been condemned to be rebuilt after notice is given to the adjoining property owners. The notice shall specify the length of time the owner will have to make the repairs.
G. Replacement of Four-inch Sidewalks
Existing four-inch sidewalks shall be removed and replaced with six-inch-thick sidewalks in accordance with this LDC, when a new driveway approach is constructed.
5.13.7. RIGHTS-OF-WAY
A. Right-of-way Width
Minimum right-of-way width shall comply with the following for all streets and roads in the City.
1.
Arterial street: 100 feet (closed drainage).
2.
Major collector street: 80 feet (closed drainage).
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 163
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.7 Rights-of-way
3.
Minor collector street: 60 feet (closed drainage).
4.
Local street: 50 feet (closed drainage).
5.
Frontage road: 50 feet (closed drainage).
B. Future Rights-of-way
The future traffic circulation network is identified in the traffic circulation element of the comprehensive plan. Where roadway construction, improvement, or reconstruction is required to serve the needs of the proposed development, future rights-of-way shall be dedicated for future use.
C. Protection and Use of Right-of-way
1.
Use of the right-of-way for public or private utilities, including, but not limited to, sanitary sewer, potable water, reclaimed water, telephone facilities, cable television facilities, gas lines, or electrical facilities, shall be allowed if the installation of those facilities complies with the applicable standards in this LDC.
2.
All proposed construction within the City rights-of-way and easements requires a Right-of-Way Permit.
3.
All permit applications shall be filed with the City Engineer.
4.
A right-of-way permit fee in the amount established by City Council is required; except when work is limited to the following activities (for which alternative fees are required):
a.
Driveway construction.
b.
Sidewalk construction.
c.
Water utility connection.
d.
Sanitary sewer utility connection.
5.
A scaled and dimensioned drawing indicating the type and location of the proposed work must be submitted with the permit application.
6.
No person shall be granted a permit to cut any street or do any digging for the purpose of installing pipes or cables until the applicant executes a bond, acceptable and payable to the City. Such bond shall be in an amount sufficient to cover any damage that may be done by the work for which the permit is issued. The bond shall be conditioned so that the permittee will indemnify and protect the City against all costs and damages which may accrue in consequence of the operations covered by the permit, and conditioned further that the permittee will comply in all respects with the procedure and specifications required by the City and pay all damages for personal injuries or other damages that may be cast upon the City in such construction work and hold the City harmless from any loss or damage on account thereof, either personal injuries or property damage.
D. Vacations of Rights-of-way
Applications to vacate a right-of-way shall be subject to approval by the City Council. Recommendations by the DRC shall be based on the following requirements:
Land Development Code Page 5 164 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.8 Transit Stops
1.
The requested vacation is consistent and/or does not conflict with the traffic circulation element of the comprehensive plan and Florida Statutes.
2.
The right-of-way does not provide the sole access to any property in the case of an entire right-of-way being proposed to be vacated. Remaining access shall not be by easement.
3.
The vacation would not jeopardize the current or future location of any utility.
4.
The proposed vacation is not detrimental to the public interest.
5.13.8. TRANSIT STOPS
A. When Required
Any development with a parking requirement of more than 350 vehicles shall provide and dedicate to the City land area for a transit stop.
B. Size and Design
The land area dedicated shall be sufficient to provide a transit stop with shelter and a separate paved transit lane 100 feet from the bus stop.
C. Location
Transit stops shall be located at an appropriate site within the development project.
D. Coordination with Transit Authorities
The location and design of the transit stop shall be coordinated with the applicable transit authorities.
5.13.9. NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
A. Purpose
1.
This section is established for the purposes of providing a uniform system for the numbering of buildings and structures along public and private ways within the City, in the interest of the public health, safety and general welfare of the City’s citizens.
2.
Numbering of buildings is done in accordance with the 911 emergency system to provide efficient service in case of an emergency; also to provide building numbers for the United States post office.
B. Assignment of Building Numbers
The Director is responsible for issuing all new building numbers in conformity with the grid numbering system adopted by City Council. The Director is responsible for investigating and inspecting all existing building numbers to ensure compliance with this subsection and is also responsible for giving notice to owners and occupants whose current property addresses conflict with the adopted grid numbering system.
C. Establishment of City Grid Numbering System
A grid numbering system is used for the assignment of street addresses. The system is based on a zero base point located at Central Avenue and Orange Street within the City, proceeding outward on a horizontal and vertical axis.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 165
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.9 Numbering of Buildings
1.
The numbers increase north and south from Orange Street and east and west from Central Avenue;
2.
The numbers shall be assigned to buildings as determined by the grid system, as approved by the Director;
3.
Odd numbers will be issued to the buildings on the north and east sides of a public or private road or street. Even numbers will be issued to the buildings on the south and west sides of a public or private road or street;
4.
The assignment of numbers on corner lots shall be determined from the public or private road or street on which the building fronts; and
5.
In cases in which the public or private road or street runs both north/south and east/west, the grid direction shall be determined by the proportional length of the public or private road or street.
D. Posting of Numbers on Buildings
All buildings shall have the assigned building number properly displayed, whether or not mail is delivered to the building. The posting of the building number shall be the responsibility of both the owner and occupant of the building and shall comply with the following:
1. Building numbers for residential and nonresidential structures:
a. Residential Dwelling Units
The building number shall be affixed to the front of the building so that it is visible and legible from the public or private road or street on which the building fronts.
b. Multiple Residential Attached Units
Each assigned building number in a multifamily development such as an apartment complex shall be affixed to the front of the building so that it is visible and legible from the public or private street on which the building fronts. Individual dwelling units within the structure shall display the assigned unit number to the public in a conspicuous location which the dwelling unit occupies. Such unit numbers shall correspond to the floor level (first floor, second floor, etc.), as authorized by the Director.
c. Nonresidential Structures
1.
All nonresidential structures shall affix the assigned number to the front of the building so that it is visible and legible from the public or private road or street on which the building fronts.
2.
In cases where structure occupants include multiple businesses (shopping centers) and/or tenants, each rear or side access and/or exit door shall affix the assigned number and licensed business name. Such identification shall not be larger than five inches in height.
2. The number shall be in Arabic numerals unless otherwise approved by the Director. Decorative numbers or other numbers that are difficult to read will not be approved.
Land Development Code Page 5 166 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.9 Numbering of Buildings
3.
The numbering shall be of a weather-resistant material, permanently affixed to the front of the building or structure.
4.
The building numbers shall not be less than three inches in height and shall be of a color that will contrast with the immediate background material.
5.
The numbering of all existing buildings shall be brought into compliance with this subsection within 60 days after notice is given to the owner and occupant about the building's noncompliance.
6.
A property owner or the property owner’s agent is responsible for contacting the Director to determine the correct building number or numbers to be assigned to all buildings located or constructed on the owner’s property. The owner or the owner’s agent shall post the building number in accordance with this subsection prior to the building's occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until the Director verifies that the building is properly numbered in accordance with this subsection.
E. Change of Address
The following requirements are established for the notification of a change of address:
1.
Where the existing building number does not conform to the requirements provided by this subsection, the Director shall provide a change of address notice to the owner and occupant of the building. A building number shall be changed within 60 days if it does not conform with the grid numbering system adopted by City Council as identified by the U.S. Postmaster, if the number is out of sequence with other numbers on the street, or if an odd or even number is on the wrong side of the street;
2.
A change of address notice shall contain the following:
a.
The correct building number and a requirement that the property owner and occupant post the number in accordance with the requirements of this subsection within 60 days from the date of the notice;
b.
The name of the person notified; and
c.
The date of the notice.
3.
A copy of the change of address notice shall be kept on file by the Director.
4.
Within 60 days from the date of the notice of change of address the property owner and occupant shall conform the building number to the requirements of this subsection.
F. Existing Installations
Existing installations which essentially meet the requirements or spirit of this subsection, in that the building number is displayed in a manner and location so that it can be read with ease from the street, including numbers presently on or attached to a mailbox, shall be approved by the Director without further alteration.
G. New Buildings
A Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued for any building erected or located in the City until the Director verifies that the building number required is displayed in accordance with the requirements of this subsection.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 167
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.10 Complete Streets
H. Tampering with Building Number Displays Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, obliterate, deface or otherwise render useless for the purpose of identification any building number displayed within the City.
I. Appeals
A property owner who is aggrieved by decisions of the Director under this subsection, has the right to appeal the decision. (see Sec.2.4.12.B, Appeal)
5.13.10. COMPLETE STREETS
A. Purpose and Intent
1.
The City recognizes that planning the city transportation system involves more than just moving vehicles efficiently and safely. A transportation system needs to meet the needs of all types of users – motorists, pedestrians, bicyclists, transit users, freight haulers, emergency responders and citizens of all ages and abilities.
2.
Through implementation of this section, the City will use complete streets as a means to achieve a comprehensive and integrated transportation network that provides a broad range of benefits for residents, business owners and visitors, including multimodal transportation options, economic prosperity and growth, public health and safety improvements, and an enhanced quality of life.
3.
The City shall use this complete streets section to design, build, and maintain a safe, reliable, efficient, integrated and connected multimodal transportation network that provides access, mobility, and connectivity for all users. In addition, a complete streets network will improve economic opportunities, connect developments, and promote excellence in urban design and community character.
4.
This section addresses the changing financial, environmental, social, and economic realities to rethink the previous approach towards transportation planning and decision-making??byaddressing??themultimodalmobility,economicdevelopment,????health, and livability needs of the City. It ensures that officials, planners, engineers, developers, and other stakeholders working on projects and programs within the City, plan and design roadways with complete streets in mind.
5.
This section supports the Florida Department of Transportation’s Complete Streets Policy (September 17, 2014); MetroPlan Orlando’s Complete Streets Policy; and Orange County’s Complete Streets Policy and Manual.
B. Applicability and Scope
1. This complete streets section applies to all City-owned??transportation??facilities??in??the????public right-of-way??and??publiceasementsincluding,??but??notlimited??to,??streets,????sidewalks, parking lots and all other connecting pathways. All phases of project implementation are covered, including planning, design, right-of-way??
acquisition,????
construction, and operations and maintenance. The City also considers maintenance and operation activities as opportunities to provide safer and more accessible transportation options for all users. A determination as to whether or not a specific street is a complete street, or how many design elements are appropriate will be determined on a case-by-case basis by the DRC.
Land Development Code Page 5 168 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.10 Complete Streets
2.
The City will consider every private development project as an opportunity to evaluate the level of Complete Streets elements within the general project area and connectivity to adjacent areas with the intent to improve safety and accessibility for all users.
3.
This policy is also applicable to the installation, replacement or reconstruction of underground utilities located within a public street right-of-way; however, water and sanitary sewer enterprise funds cannot be used as a complete streets funding source.
4.
New and redeveloped privately constructed streets and parking lots shall also adhere to this section and other relevant documents, with a key focus on achieving a viable interface between private development and the City’s multimodal transportation system.
5.
To the extent practicable, this section shall also apply to State and County transportation facilities within the City, as coordinated with appropriate agencies including the Florida Department of Transportation and Orange County. The City understands that these facilities are not under the City’s purview and ultimately policy, standards, planning, design, and construction decisions rest with their respective jurisdictions.
6.
Transportation projects and maintenance activities shall be:
a.
Suitable and appropriate to the function and context of the transportation facility;
b.
Sensitive to the neighborhood context and cognizant of the neighborhood needs;
c.
Flexible in project design to ensure that all users have safe access and use; and
d.
Considered a component of a comprehensive, integrated and interconnected transportation network that allows all users to choose between different modes of travel.
C. Complete Streets Standards
The City shall work toward developing an integrated and connected multimodal transportation system of complete streets that serves all neighborhoods. Toward this end:
1.
Every transportation project, and phase of that project (including planning, scoping, funding, design, approval, implementation, and maintenance), by the City shall provide for complete streets for all categories of users.
2.
Wherever possible, the City shall strive to create a network of continuous bicycle and pedestrian-friendly routes, including routes that connect with transit and allow for convenient access to work, home, commercial areas, and schools.
3.
The City shall coordinate with adjacent jurisdictions and any other relevant public agencies, including FDOT, to ensure that, wherever possible, the network of continuous bicycle and pedestrian-friendly routes identified in subsection 2, above, that extend beyond City boundaries into adjacent jurisdictions.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 169
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.10 Complete Streets
4. The City shall rely upon the current editions of street design standards and guidelines that promote and support complete streets:
a.
City of Apopka Development Design Guidelines.
b.
FDOT Design Manuel and FDOT Context Classification Document (http://www.flcompletestreets.com).
c.
FDOT Complete Streets Handbook (most current).
d.
Smart Growth America publications (www.smartgrowthamerica.org).
e.
American Planning Association Complete Streets: Best Policy and Implementation Practices (PAS 559).
f.
Pedestrian and Bicycle Information Center (www.pedbikeinfo.org).
g.
Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG).
h.
Public Rights-of-Way??Accessibility Guidelines (PROWAG).
i.
Association of Pedestrian and Bicycle Professionals Essentials of Bicycle Parking (www.apbp.org).
j.
National Association of City Transportation Officials (NACTO) Urban Bikeway Design Guide and the Urban Street Design Guide.
k.
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) publications, including AASHTO Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities, Fourth Edition (or latest edition) and Guide for the Planning, Design, and Operation of Pedestrian Facilities July 2004 edition (or latest edition).
l.
Institute of Traffic Engineers (www.ite.org) publications and guidance, including Designing Walkable Urban Thoroughfares: A Context Sensitive Approach (2010) and Recommended Design Guidelines to Accommodate Pedestrians and Bicycles at Interchanges (2014).
m.
Federal Highway Administration Office of Safety (www.safety.fhwa.dot.gov).
n.
Transportation Research Board, Highway Safety Performance Committee (www.safetyperformance.org).
o.
U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration Pedestrian Safety Guide and Countermeasure Selection System
p.
U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration Bicycle Safety Guide and Countermeasure Selection System
q.
U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration Separated Bike Lane Planning and Design Guide
5.
The requirements of this section shall be implemented throughout the City.
6.
All complete streets shall reflect the context and character of the surrounding built and natural environments, and enhance the appearance of such. At the planning stage, the City shall work with local residents, business operators, neighboring jurisdictions, school districts, students, property owners, and other stakeholders who
Land Development Code Page 5 170 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.10 Complete Streets
will be directly affected by a complete streets project to address any concerns
regarding context and character.
7.
The City recognizes that complete streets may be achieved through elements incorporated into a single street project, or incrementally through a series of improvements, in order to create a network of facilities that promotes safety and connectivity to destinations.
8.
The City will consider all appropriate possible funding sources to plan and implement this section and shall direct staff to investigate grants that may be available to make the realization of complete streets economically feasible.
9.
It is the intent of the City to incorporate the complete streets principles into appropriate public strategic plans, standards, relevant ordinances, practices and policies, and appropriate subsequent updates. The complete streets principles, where applicable and appropriate, may also be incorporated into plans, manuals, rules, practices, policies, training, procedures, regulations, and programs.
10.
Complete streets elements should be considered within the balance of mode and context of the community, including but not limited to: environmental sensitivity; costs; budgets; demand; probable use; space and area requirements and limitations; and legal requirements and limitations. Not all complete streets elements are required to make a street complete and/or be feasible at all locations or times.
11.
It is the intent of this section that the design and construction of all street projects should include complete streets elements as feasibility and funding allows, including, but not limited to:
a.
Public plans adopted by the City, which may be independent or part of the comprehensive plan; and
b.
Development-related ordinances and resolutions, including this LDC, among others, that are adopted or passed by the City.
D. Lead Department
The Community Development Department and the Director shall lead the implementation of this section and coordinate with Orange County, MetroPlan Orlando, and FDOT when appropriate
E. Implementation
1.
City staff shall reference this section during the development review process as a guide to developers.
2.
All street design standards used in the planning, designing, and implementing phases of transportation projects shall be reviewed to ensure that they reflect the best available design guidelines for effectively implementing complete streets.
3.
The Community Development Department shall incorporate provisions of this section into relevant internal manuals, checklists, rules, and procedures.
F. Exceptions
1. The City expects full compliance with this section. An exception for a specific project may be requested and granted when:
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 171
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.13 Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways
5.13.10 Complete Streets
a.
Use of the roadway is prohibited by law for the category of user (e.g., pedestrians on an interstate freeway, vehicles on a pedestrian mall). In this case, efforts shall be made to accommodate the excluded category of user on a parallel route; or
b.
There is an absence of both a current and future need to accommodate the category of user (absence of future need may be shown via demographic, school, employment, and public transportation route data that demonstrate, for example, a low likelihood of bicycle, pedestrian, or transit activity in an area over the next 20 years). In determining future need, applicants and City staff shall consult relevant City and regional plans for land use and transportation, including the City’s Comprehensive Plan; MetroPlan Orlando’s Long Range Transportation Plan; the City’s Joint Planning Agreement with Orange County; regional trail plans; and any other type of applicable plan; or
c.
The cost would be excessively disproportionate to the current need or future need over the next 20 years.
d.
Safety projects which are funded only for specific safety improvements identified by crash data and patterns, and are limited by the funding parameters of the program.
e.
The application of complete streets principles would be contrary to public safety.
f.
Any component of this section will have an adverse impact on existing environmental resources such as wetlands, floodplains, creeks or historic structures.
2. An exception shall be granted only if:
a.
A request for exception is submitted in writing to the Director, at the earliest phase of project development a minimum of 30 days prior to any public hearing for approval to allow for public input.
b.
The request submittal includes a narrative of the reason for the request, project site map and drawings, and any other relevant supporting documentation.
c.
The DRC reviews the request, determines whether it meets the criteria for an exception, and makes a recommendation to the Director.
d.
The exception is approved or declined in writing by the Director, and the written approval is made available to the public.
Land Development Code Page 5 172 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.14 Utilities
5.14.1 General Standards
Section 5.14. UTILITIES
5.14.1. GENERAL STANDARDS
A. General
The following basic utilities are required for all development in the City:
1. Electricity
All development and every lot within a subdivision shall have a source of electric power adequate to accommodate the reasonable needs of such use and every lot within the subdivision.
2. Telephone
All development and every lot within a subdivision shall have a telephone service cable adequate to accommodate the reasonable needs of such use and every lot within the subdivision.
3. Water and Sewer
All development and every lot within a subdivision shall have central potable water and wastewater hookup as required by the comprehensive plan.
4. Illumination
All streets, driveways, sidewalks, bikeways, parking lots and other common areas and facilities in a development shall provide illumination consistent with standards established by Duke Energy (or current electric power provider).
5. Fire Hydrants
All development served by a central water system shall include a system of fire hydrants consistent with the standards contained within this LDC. (see Sec. 5.14.4.D)
6. Underground Utilities
Utility lines of all kinds, including but not limited to those of franchised utilities, electric power and light, telephone and telegraph, cable television, water, sewer and gas, shall be constructed and installed beneath the surface of the ground. It shall be the developer's responsibility to make the necessary arrangements to ensure compliance with this requirement with each utility in accordance with the utility's established policies. The underground installation of incidental appurtenances such as transformer boxes, pedestal-mounted boxes for electricity, or similar service hardware necessary for the provision of electric and communication utilities shall not be required. Major electric transmission lines are exempt from the underground installation requirement. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit any entity furnishing utility service within the City from collecting, as a condition precedent to the installation of service facilities, any fee, prepayment or construction in aid of construction.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 173
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.14 Utilities
5.14.1 General Standards
7. Construction Start
A preconstruction meeting is required for all projects. It is the developer's responsibility to schedule the meeting with the City and any other appropriate parties.
a.
Construction shall not commence until after the preconstruction meeting is held.
b.
A preconstruction meeting will not be scheduled by the City until:
1.
After a development order is issued for development of a parcel or site;
2.
The City is in receipt of certification from Florida Power Corporation and United Telephone verifying that service is available for the development ( It is the responsibility of the owner/developer to initiate and ensure the City receives the certification from both utilities); and
3.
The City is provided a copy of all permits required for construction to begin.
B. Compliance
1. The specifications set forth in this subsection are meant to provide minimum standards for the construction of utilities which:
a.
Are to be constructed within the City's corporate limits;
b.
Are to be dedicated to the City for ownership; and
c.
May become future additions to the City's utilities system.
2.
All plans submitted for review shall be in conformance with all Federal, State, and City regulations and codes. In no case shall minimum standards be less than those established by recognized governmental agencies, unless stated otherwise within these specifications.
3.
Where a certain manufacturer is specified for a particular piece of equipment, nonspecified product may be approved by the Public Services Director after submittal of a request in writing if the product is equal or better than the specific equipment or product.
C. Utility Coordination
It shall be the responsibility of the owner/developer to coordinate all utilities concerning the owner/developer’s development. All utilities shall be given a minimum two-week notice prior to commencement of construction.
D. Water and Sewer Main Extensions – Master Plan Facilities
1.
In the event there is a need to construct off-site water and sanitary sewer facilities to serve the project, all design and construction will normally be at the owner/developer's expense.
2.
If the development is located in an area where the City is expecting future growth and development, then all facilities shall be sized in accordance with the City's applicable water and/or sewer master plan. In the event the owner/developer provides oversizing of off-site water and sewer facilities, the amount expended by the owner/developer for oversizing may be credited to the owner/developer's future
Land Development Code Page 5 174 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.14 Utilities
5.14.2 Utility Easements
capital facility fee, or paid by the City in a manner agreed upon by the City and the owner/developer as defined by an Oversizing Agreement.
3.
The amount credited to the owner/developer is generally the difference in material costs between the required facility and the oversized facility.
4.
The cost and requirements for oversizing and the method of payment shall be determined by the City Engineer and approved by the City Council.
5.14.2. UTILITY EASEMENTS
A. The term "utility easement" shall allow, but not be limited to, the installation of sanitary and storm sewers, water, gas, electrical, telephone and telegraph, and cable television lines.
B. Easements will be centered on rear or side lot lines where necessary. Rear lot easements shall have a minimum width of seven feet six inches per lot (15 feet total), and side lot easements shall have a minimum width of five feet per lot (ten feet total), except that a minimum total width of 15 feet must be provided where necessary for storm or sanitary sewers. Waiver of these requirements may be authorized by the Director.
C. "Drainage easements" will be required, as necessary, for all berms, swales, and storm sewers. No modification or demolition within these easements may be done without the approval of the City Engineer.
D. No open drainage ditches shall be permitted within the boundaries of any development, or abutting any blocks, or tiers of lots, within any development.
E. Where necessary for safety and convenience, pedestrian, bicycle, and service easements of suitable width shall be required as determined by the DRC.
F. Any off-site easements that may be required shall be included in the proposal for development and made a standard for plan approval.
G. Easements for all facilities must be shown on construction drawings and plats and be approved by the City Engineer. The easements and rights-of-way must be executed, accepted by the City Council, and recorded in the public records prior to issuance of a Building Permit.
H. Easements shall be provided at no expense to the City.
I. Applications to vacate a utility easement shall be subject to approval by the City Council. Recommendations by the DRC shall be based on the following:
1.
Whether the request to vacate is consistent with and/or does not conflict with utility company requirements.
2.
A determination that no need exists for a proposed vacated easement.
3.
Submission of all supporting documentation and compliance with all requirements for vacating procedures.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 175
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.14 Utilities
5.14.3 Utility Excavation, Trenching, and Backfilling
5.14.3. UTILITY EXCAVATION, TRENCHING, AND BACKFILLING
This work shall be in accordance with the Apopka Construction Design Standards Manual which is incorporated by reference into this LDC.
5.14.4. WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS
This section establishes the following general technical standards for the design and installation of water distribution systems
A. Water distribution systems and/or water main extensions shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the insurance services office (Fire Suppression Rating Schedule Edition 6-80).
B. The following factors shall be utilized in the design of the water system:
1.
Maximum day demand (MDD): Calculated by multiplying the average daily demand by 2.5.
2.
Peak-hour demand (PHD): Calculated by multiplying the average daily demand by
4.0.
3.
Fire flow demand (FFD): Minimum 500 gpm. Fire flow demands will be subject to approval by both the Apopka Fire Department and City Engineer.
C. Water main size determination
1.
The pipe diameter shall be adequate size to provide for maximum day demand (MDD) plus fire flow requirements or peak-hour demand, whichever is greater. The allowable minimum service pressure under design conditions shall not be less than 20 pounds per square inch within residential areas.
2.
Mains providing fire flows to hydrants shall be looped and not less than six inches in diameter or a minimum of eight inches in diameter for dead-end lines.
3.
For mains within commercial, industrial, and other high-density locations the minimum water main sizes specified in Sec. 5.14.4.C.2 above shall be increased by one size.
4.
The minimum water main size shall be six inches in diameter; however, four-inchdiameter mains will be accepted when used for consumptive use only within cul-desacs.
D. Fire hydrants
1.
Fire hydrants shall be located at intervals not to exceed 250 feet from any portion of any building located on the premises for commercial, industrial, multifamily or other areas deemed necessary by the Fire Department; and 500 feet from any portion of any single-family dwelling located on the premises.
2.
Fire hydrants that are located within the distance intervals required in Sec. 5.14.4.D.1, above, but determined by the Fire Department to be inaccessible for emergency response, are prohibited.
3.
Blue reflectors shall be affixed to roadways at the center of the road adjacent to a fire hydrant.
Land Development Code Page 5 176 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.14 Utilities
5.14.5 Sanitary Sewer
4.
Fire hydrants shall be color coded in accordance with Table 5.14.4.D.4: Fire Hydrant Color Code.
TABLE 5.14.4.D.4: FIRE HYDRANT COLOR CODE
CLASS
FLOW
COLOR OF BONNETS AND NOZZLE CAPS
A
1,000 gpm or greater
Green
B
500 to 1,000 gpm
Orange
C
Less than 500 gpm
Red
5.
Valve locations
a.
Valves shall be provided for all branch connections, dead-ends, fire hydrant stubs, or other locations, as required to provide an operable, easily maintained, and repairable water distribution system.
b.
Valves are to be placed so that the maximum allowable length of a water main required to be shut down for repair work shall be 500 feet in commercial, industrial, or multifamily areas, or 1,000 feet in other areas.
c.
Two valves shall be required at tees and three at crosses, unless in-line valves are sufficiently close so as to duplicate this requirement.
6.
No water meters or flow-measuring devices shall be installed on any main serving a fire hydrant, standpipe, or sprinkler system.
7.
Main line extensions must be extended across the full property frontage to facilitate future connection and extensions.
8.
Developers must obtain and comply with the terms of DEP permits for system extensions.
5.14.5. SANITARY SEWER
A. Development within the City shall connect to the City's wastewater collection system, except for the following residential lots as long as they are not located in environmentally sensitive areas as defined within the conservation element of the comprehensive plan:
1.
A residential lot is one acre or larger in size, and wastewater collection facilities are further than one-half mile from the lot, measured from the nearest lot line where facilities are located.
2.
A residential lot is one-half acre in size and located north of Ponkan Road.
B. If the conditions of A, above, are met, a septic tank is permissible.
C. Development which is in environmentally sensitive areas, as defined within the conservation element of the comprehensive plan, shall be required to connect to the City's sanitary sewer system.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 177
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.14 Utilities
5.14.6 Reclaimed Water System
5.14.6. RECLAIMED WATER SYSTEM
A. General
New developments shall install reclaimed water lines in accordance with the Reuse Water
Master Plan in such a manner as to provide service to the entire property of the
development. The main lines shall be extended across total property frontage to facilitate
future extensions. The system shall be designed by a Florida registered engineer in
accordance with regulations of the City and the DEP.
B. Construction and Material Specifications
All construction and material specifications shall be in accordance with the Apopka Construction Design Standards Manual.
Land Development Code Page 5 178 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.15 Guarantees and Sureties
5.15.1 Applicability
Section 5.15. GUARANTEES AND SURETIES
5.15.1. APPLICABILITY
A. The provisions of this section apply to all proposed developments in the City, including private road subdivisions.
B. Nothing in this section shall be construed as relieving a developer of any requirement relating to the concurrency requirements in Article 7: Concurrency Management System (CMS)
C. This section does not modify existing agreements between a developer and the City for subdivisions platted and final development orders granted prior to March 6, 2019, providing such agreements are current as to all conditions and terms.
5.15.2. IMPROVEMENTS AGREEMENT REQUIRED.
The approval of any development plan shall be subject to the developer providing assurance through an Improvement Agreement that all required improvements, including but not limited to storm drainage facilities, streets, roads, and highways, and water and sewer lines, shall be satisfactorily constructed according to the approved development plan. At a minimum , the Improvements Agreement shall:
A. Include clear agreement that all improvements, whether required by this LDC or constructed at the developer's option, shall be constructed in accordance with the standards and provisions of this LDC.
B. The term of the agreement indicating that all required improvements shall be satisfactorily constructed within the period stipulated. The term shall not exceed five years from the recording of the plat or 30 percent occupancy of the development, whichever occurs first.
C. The projected total cost for each improvement. Cost for construction shall be determined by either of the following:
1.
Estimate prepared and provided by the applicant's engineer.
2.
A copy of an executed construction contract.
D. Specification of the public improvements to be made and dedicated together with the timetable for making improvements.
E. Agreement that upon failure of the applicant to make required improvements (or to cause them to be made) according to the schedule for making those improvements, the City shall utilize the security provided in connection with the agreement.
F. Provision of the amount and type of security provided to ensure performance.
G. Provision that the amount of the security may be reduced periodically, but not more than two times during each year, subsequent to the completion, inspection, and acceptance of improvements by the City.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 179
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.15 Guarantees and Sureties
5.15.3 Amount and Type of Security
5.15.3. AMOUNT AND TYPE OF SECURITY
A. The amount of the security identified in the Improvements Agreement shall be approved by the City Engineer and/or the official responsible for utility services.
B. Security requirements may be met by, but are not limited to the following:
1.
Cashier's check;
2.
Certified check;
3.
Developer/lender/City/County agreement;
4.
Interest-bearing certificate of deposit;
5.
Irrevocable letters of credit; and/or
6.
Surety bond.
C. The amount of security shall be 110 percent of the total construction costs for the required developer-installed improvements. The amount of security may be reduced commensurate with the completion and final acceptance of required improvements. In no case shall the amount of the bond be less than 110 percent of the cost of completing the remaining required improvements.
5.15.4. COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
A. When improvements are completed, final City acceptance is subject to the standards for City acceptance of infrastructure as established in this LDC.
B. As required improvements are completed and accepted, the developer may apply for release of all or a portion of the bond consistent with the requirement in Sec. 5.15.3, Amount and Type of Security.
5.15.5. MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS.
A. A Maintenance Agreement and security shall also be provided to assure the City that all required improvements shall be maintained by the developer according to the following requirements:
1.
The period of maintenance shall be a minimum of one year;
2.
The maintenance period shall begin with the acceptance by the City of the constructed improvements;
3.
The security shall be in the amount of ten percent of the construction cost of the improvements; and
4.
The original agreement shall be maintained by the City Engineer or the official responsible for utility services.
B. Whenever a proposed development provides for the creation of facilities or improvements which are not proposed for dedication to the City, a legal entity shall be created to be responsible for the ownership and maintenance of such facilities and/or improvements.
Land Development Code Page 5 180 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.15 Guarantees and Sureties
5.15.5 Maintenance of Improvements.
1.
When the proposed development is to be organized as a condominium under the provisions of Ch. 718 et. seq., Fla. Stat., common facilities and property shall be conveyed to the condominium's association in accordance with state law.
2.
When no condominium is to be organized, an owners' association, community development district, or other similar entity shall be created, and all common facilities and property shall be conveyed to that association or other similar entity.
3.
A development order shall not be issued for a development for which an owners' association is required until the documents establishing such association is reviewed and approved by the City Attorney.
C. An organization established for the purpose of owning and maintaining common facilities not proposed for dedication to the City shall be created by covenants running with the land. Such covenants shall be included with the final plat. Such organization shall not be dissolved nor shall it dispose of any common facilities or open space by sale or otherwise without first offering to dedicate the common facilities or open space to the City.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 181
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.16 Miscellaneous Standards
5.16.1 Noise Standards
Section 5.16. MISCELLANEOUS STANDARDS
5.16.1. NOISE STANDARDS
A. Terminology
Unless otherwise defined herein, all terminology in this section shall conform with the current edition of the Florida Building Code.
B. Instrumentation
Instrumentation used in making sound level measurements shall meet the requirements of the Florida Building Code.
C. Maximum Permissible Sound Levels by the Receiving Land Use
No person shall operate or cause to be operated any source of sound in such a manner as to create a sound level which exceeds the limits set forth for the receiving land use category in the Florida Building Code.
D. Exemptions
The following activities or sources are exempt from these noise standards:
1.
Activities covered by the following: stationary, nonemergency signaling devices, emergency signaling devices, domestic power tools, air conditioning and air handling equipment for residential purposes, operating motor vehicles, refuse collection vehicles;
2.
The unamplified human voice;
3.
Railway locomotives and cars;
4.
The lowing of cattle, the clucking of fowl, the neighing of horses, the baying of hounds, or other normal sounds of reasonably cared for agricultural or domestic animals, as well as the sounds of necessary farming equipment for a bona fide agricultural operation;
5.
Aircraft operations;
6.
Construction or routine maintenance of public service utilities;
7.
Houses of worship bells or chimes;
8.
The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency, or the emission of sound in the performance of emergency work;
9.
All devices, tools, equipment, and vehicles which are properly equipped with the appropriate muffling device; and
10.
Any bona fide event which is scheduled and sponsored by any bona fide school within the City limits or events regulated by the City Recreational Division.
Land Development Code Page 5 182 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.16 Miscellaneous Standards
5.16.2 Air Pollution Standards
E. Notice of Violation
Violation of any provision of this section shall be cause for a notice of violation to be issued for appearance before the City of Apopka Code Enforcement Board. Such violations will be punishable pursuant to Ch.162 et. seq., Fla. Stat.
F. Preexisting Uses Not in Conformance
Where an industry or commercial business has established its use away from other incompatible uses and subsequently, through the encroachment of development, now finds itself adjoining a receiving land category which would require a reduction in noise generation, that industry or commercial business shall not emit a noise which exceeds the maximum noise limitation for the receiving land use category by more than ten decibels.
5.16.2. AIR POLLUTION STANDARDS
A. To protect and enhance the air quality of the City, all sources of air pollution shall comply with rules set forth by the federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the DEP. No person shall operate a regulated source of air pollution without a valid operation permit issued by DEP.
B. Air pollution emissions shall be tested and the results reported in accordance with techniques and methods adopted by DEP and submitted to DEP. These tests shall be carried out under the supervision of DEP and at the expense of the person responsible for the source of pollution.
5.16.3. FIRE AND EXPLOSIVE HAZARDS STANDARDS
To provide regulations consistent with nationally recognized practices for the reasonable protection of life and property from the hazards of fire and explosion due to storage, use or handling of hazardous materials, substances and devices, and to minimize hazards to life and property due to fire and panic, the following standards apply to all development in the City:
A. National Fire Protection Association, applicable standards.
B. State Fire Marshal's rules and regulations.
C. Standard Fire Prevention Code, applicable standards.
D. Apopka Municipal Code.
5.16.4. ELECTROMAGNETIC INTERFERENCE STANDARDS
In all districts, no use, activity, or process shall be conducted which produces electric and/or magnetic fields which adversely affect public health, safety, and welfare including but not limited to interference with normal radio, telephone, or television reception from off the premises where the activity is conducted, excluding public utilities.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 183
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.16 Miscellaneous Standards
5.16.5 Traffic Impact Analysis(TIA)
5.16.5. TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS(TIA)
A. Purpose and Intent
1.
New development creates an impact on the City’s transportation network. In order for new development to contribute its fair share of the cost of transportation improvements, impact fees are imposed by the City in accordance with Sec. 7.5.3.B.8.
2.
The purpose of the TIA is to identify transportation-related impacts on the City’s transportation system that are likely to be generated by a specific proposed development because of the type, size, density, trip generation, or location of the development. The TIA will identify access improvements, near-site improvements, and on-site improvements that are needed to accommodate the proposed development.
B. Applicability
1.
Each new development which generates more than 400 average daily trips, or at the discretion of the Director will potentially create significant transportation-related impacts on the City’s transportation network, shall be required to submit a transportation impact analysis (TIA) with a development plan (major or minor) (Sec. 2.5.2.A, Development Plan (Major and Minor)) or plat (Subdivision)(Sec. 2.5.2.B, Plat (Subdivision)), whichever occurs first.
2.
The TIA shall be prepared by a qualified transportation planner or professional engineer, in accordance with a methodology of transportation planning and engineering accepted by the Director. The expense of preparing the TIA is the responsibility of the owner or developer. The TIA shall be reviewed for accuracy and content by Director prior to its acceptance by the City. The cost of the review by the City's consultant is also the responsibility of the owner/developer.
3.
TIA requirements shall include the following, along with a description of the methodology, practices, and principles utilized in determining the findings:
a. Existing Conditions
1. General Site and Roadway Network Description
A detailed description of the proposed development including site location, type of development, projected construction completion dates, and phasing. The section shall also include a description of the roadway network for the area under study, right-of-way and pavement widths, signal locations, and signage.
2. Discussion of Standards and Analysis Techniques
A detailed discussion of the proposed analysis methodology including intersection analysis, roadway capacities, and service volumes.
3. Analysis of Existing Conditions
For all roadways and intersections within the roadway network for the area, the existing average daily traffic and peak-hour traffic volume, and roadway link analysis and intersection analysis.
Land Development Code Page 5 184 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.16 Miscellaneous Standards
5.16.5 Traffic Impact Analysis(TIA)
4. Planned and Programmed Improvements
The planned or programmed transportation improvements targeted for the roadway network for the area. The programmed improvements are ones that have some type of funding attached to them and are contained in a work program. A planned improvement is usually found in an areawide transportation plan or comprehensive plan but does not have funding attached to the improvements. The analysis shall distinguish between programmed improvements and planned improvements.
b. Projected Traffic Characteristics
1. Statement of Project's Trip Generation Characteristics
The project's trip generation characteristics in terms of daily and peak-hour generation. Full documentation shall be provided if the rate utilized is other than the most recent ITE Trip Generation Manual.
2. Statement of Ambient Traffic
The ambient (background) traffic on the adjacent roadway network for the area. Anticipated traffic volumes generated from recently approved developments should be included in the background projections. (All growth factors require documentation and justification.)
3. Statement of Trip Distribution and Assignment
The trip distribution, with appropriate justification and documentation. Project traffic shall be assigned to the roadway network for the area according to the trip distribution. Project traffic shall be superimposed over background volumes, with totals indicated in the appropriate format.
c. Analysis of Transportation Impacts
1. Roadway Network Impact
An analysis of the impact of the proposed development on roadways and intersections within the primary impact area. The levels of service indicated in the traffic element of the comprehensive plan shall be utilized in evaluating impact and determining when parts of the network have failed.
2. Critical Intersection Impact
Analysis of the project's impact to the critical intersection(s) within the primary impact area.
d. Transportation-Related Improvements
1. Access Improvements
Access improvements needed to ensure established LOS standards are maintained. For the purpose of this section, access improvements are road improvements necessary to provide safe and adequate ingress and egress for efficient traffic operations. Access improvements include, but are not limited to, the following:
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 185
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.16 Miscellaneous Standards
5.16.5 Traffic Impact Analysis(TIA)
(a)
Rights-of-way and easements;
(b)
Left and right turn lanes;
(c)
Acceleration and deceleration lanes;
(d)
Traffic control devices, signage, and markings; and
(e)
Drainage and utilities as they relate to transportation improvements.
2. Off-site or Near-site Improvements
Off-site or near-site road improvements needed to ensure established LOS standards are maintained in addition to impact fees to satisfy concurrency requirements. However, there shall be a rebuttal presumption that a left turn lane shall be required for all residential and nonresidential developments unless waived by the City Council. A right-turn lane shall be provided at each driveway when the speed limit equals or exceeds 35 miles per hour or if the development will generate 100 or more right-turn movements during the peak hour or if required by the City Engineer, unless waived by the City Council. Increased storage and transition queue lengths (waiting vehicle storage) may be required by the City Engineer to provide for additional storage, based upon a peak hour entering volume greater than 150 vehicles in the peak hour.
3. On-site Improvements
On-site improvements needed to ensure safe and adequate ingress and egress to the site. On-site improvements are road improvements located within the boundaries of the specific parcel proposed for development, and road improvements which provide direct access (turn lane, taper, signalization, right-of-way dedication, etc.). They are the total responsibility of the developer and exclusive of the transportation impact fee.
4. Traffic Signals
Traffic signals need to maintain established LOS, and ensure the roads and streets function properly. Traffic signals are optical communications (3-M) devices that are installed at all intersections requiring signaling devices for traffic control and to accommodate emergency vehicle responses. The terms and agreement of the installation of the devices are the responsibility of the developer and/or part of the transportation network and shall be coordinated through the Fire Department.
e. Conclusions and Recommendations
Recommended improvements and mitigating measures made necessary by the proposed development ensuring the roadway network of the area does not fall below the established level of service standard. Road improvements include but are not limited to:
1.
Road widening;
2.
Provision of turning, acceleration, and deceleration lanes;
3.
Signalization;
Land Development Code Page 5 186 Apopka, FL
-
Article 5: Development Standards
Section 5.16 Miscellaneous Standards
5.16.5 Traffic Impact Analysis(TIA)
4.
Regulation of signage; and
5.
New roadway construction.
f. Use of TIA
The TIA will be utilized in the following ways:
1.
Determination of access improvement requirements;
2.
Determination of near-site improvement requirements;
3.
Determination of on-site improvement requirements; and
4.
Verification of compliance with the City's comprehensive plan.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 5 187

Environmental Standards

Article 6
: Environmental Standards
..............................................................
6-1
Section 6.1. General Provisions
.............................................................................................................
6-1
6.1.1.
Purpose
...............................................................................................................
6-1
6.1.2.
Controlling Standards
.........................................................................................
6-1
6.1.3.
Development in Protected Environmentally Sensitive Areas
.............................
6-1
Section 6.2. Wetlands
............................................................................................................................
6-2
6.2.1.
Purpose
...............................................................................................................
6-2
6.2.2.
Applicability
........................................................................................................
6-2
6.2.3.
Conservation District Determination
..................................................................
6-3
6.2.4.
Development Within Conservation District
........................................................
6-3
6.2.5.
Peat Excavation in Conservation District
............................................................
6-3
Section 6.3. Habitat for Listed Species
..................................................................................................
6-4
6.3.1.
Purpose
...............................................................................................................
6-4
6.3.2.
Development Application Requirements
...........................................................
6-5
6.3.3.
Management Plan
...............................................................................................
6-6
6.3.4.
Mitigation of Adverse Effects
.............................................................................
6-7
Section 6.4. Wekiva Protection Area
.....................................................................................................
6-8
6.4.1.
Purpose
...............................................................................................................
6-8
6.4.2.
Wekiva Protection Area Established
...................................................................
6-8
6.4.3.
Applicability
........................................................................................................
6-8
6.4.4.
Standards
............................................................................................................
6-8
Section 6.5. Groundwater for Wellheads
..............................................................................................
6-9
6.5.1.
Purpose
...............................................................................................................
6-9
6.5.2.
Applicability
........................................................................................................
6-9
6.5.3.
Wellhead Protection Zone Established
...............................................................
6-9
Section 6.6. Floodplains
......................................................................................................................
6-10
6.6.1.
General
..............................................................................................................
6-10
6.6.2.
Applicability
......................................................................................................
6-11
6.6.3.
Duties and Powers of the Floodplain Administrator
........................................
6-12
6.6.4.
Permits
..............................................................................................................
6-15
6.6.5.
Site Plans and Construction Documents
...........................................................
6-17
6.6.6.
Inspections
........................................................................................................
6-19
6.6.7.
Variances and Appeals
......................................................................................
6-20
6.6.8.
Violations
..........................................................................................................
6-23
6.6.9.
Buildings and Structures
...................................................................................
6-23
6.6.10.
Subdivisions
......................................................................................................
6-23
6.6.11.
Site Improvements, Utilities and Limitations
...................................................
6-24
6.6.12.
Manufactured Homes
.......................................................................................
6-25
6.6.13.
Recreational Vehicles and Park Trailers
............................................................
6-26
6.6.14.
Tanks
.................................................................................................................
6-26
6.6.15.
Other Development
..........................................................................................
6-27
Section 6.7. Stormwater Management Systems
.................................................................................
6-28
6.7.1.
General
..............................................................................................................
6-28
6.7.2.
Design Base
.......................................................................................................
6-28
6.7.3.
Soil Reports
.......................................................................................................
6-30
6.7.4.
Slopes
................................................................................................................
6-30
6.7.5.
Development Within Special Flood Hazard Area (100-Year Flood)
..................
6-31
-
Article 5
: Development Standards
Section 5.16 Miscellaneous Standards
5.16.5
Traffic Impact Analysis(TIA)
6.7.6.
Storm Sewer Design
..........................................................................................
6-31
6.7.7.
Hydraulic Gradient Line Computations
.............................................................
6-32
Land Development Code Page 5 2 Apopka, FL
-
Article 6: Environmental Standards
Section 6.1 General Provisions
6.1.1 Purpose
Article 6: Environmental Standards
Section 6.1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
6.1.1. PURPOSE
The purpose of this article is to identify those natural resources and areas of a development site that shall be protected from the harmful effects of development. The provisions of this article shall be applied to a proposed development site before any other development design work is done. Application of the provisions of this article divide a proposed development site into areas that may be developed and areas that must generally be left free of development. The proposed development should then be designed to fit within the areas that may be developed. It is the goal of the City to ensure the layout and design of development protects the natural features of a development site and important natural resources; create an aesthetically pleasing environment by maintaining a high standard of living for quality development within the City limits; and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the City’s residents.
6.1.2. CONTROLLING STANDARDS
In addition to complying with the following protection standards, development plans and permits shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, rules, and regulations relating to environmentally sensitive lands.
6.1.3. DEVELOPMENT IN PROTECTED ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS
A. No development shall be undertaken in any environmentally sensitive areas except as expressly provided in this article.
B. Activities within environmentally sensitive areas may not be undertaken unless it is demonstrated by competent and substantial evidence that the specific activity will not have a significant adverse effect on the environmentally sensitive area. Some activities which may have an insignificant adverse effect on environmentally sensitive areas including but not limited to scenic, historic, wildlife, or scientific preserves include the following:
a.
Minor maintenance or emergency repair to existing structures or improved areas.
b.
Cleared walking trails having no structural components, including those along lake shores.
c.
Timber catwalks, docks, and trail bridges that are less than or equal to four feet wide, provided that no filling, flooding, dredging, draining, ditching, tiling or excavating is done, except limited filling and excavating necessary for the installation of pilings.
d.
Recreational fishing or hunting, and creation and maintenance of temporary blinds.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 6 1
-
Article 6: Environmental Standards
Section 6.2 Wetlands
6.2.1 Purpose
e.
Constructing fences where no fill activity is required and where navigational access will not be impaired by construction of the fence.
f.
Developing an area that no longer functions as a wetland, except a former wetland that has been filled or altered in violation of any federal, state, or local rule, regulation, or statute, or this LDC.
1.
The developer must demonstrate that the water regime has been permanently altered, either artificially or naturally, in a manner to preclude the area from maintaining surface water or hydroperiodicity necessary to sustain wetland structure and function. If the water regime of a wetland has been artificially altered, but wetland species remain the dominant vegetation of the area, the feasibility of restoring the altered hydrology shall be determined.
2.
If the wetland may be restored at a cost that is reasonable in relation to benefits to be derived from the restored wetland, the developer shall, as a condition of development, restore the wetland and comply with the requirements of this LDC.
g.
Developing a "wetlands stormwater discharge facility" or "treatment wetland" in accordance with state permits received under Ch. 62-25, FAC.
h.
Clearing of shoreline vegetation waterward of the water's edge, so as to provide a corridor not to exceed 15 feet in width, of sufficient length from the shore to allow access for a boat or swimmer to reach open water, and landward of the water's edge so as to provide an open area not to exceed 30 feet in width. (One additional corridor may be cleared for every full 100 feet of frontage along the water's edge above and beyond the first 100 feet.) Clearing activities shall comply with all other provisions of this LDC.
Section 6.2. WETLANDS
6.2.1.
PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this section to provide standards to protect wetlands in the City in ways that are consistent with state law.
6.2.2.
APPLICABILITY
There is hereby created a "conservation district" in which special restrictions on A. development apply. The boundaries of this district shall be the most landward extent of the following: B. Areas within the dredge and fill jurisdiction of the Department of Environmental 1. Protection (DEP) as authorized by Ch. 403, Fla. Stat.
Land Development Code Page 6 2 Apopka, FL
-
Article 6: Environmental Standards
Section 6.2 Wetlands
6.2.3 Conservation District Determination
2. Areas within the jurisdiction of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) as
authorized by 33 U.S.C. Sec. 1344 (Sec. 404, Clean Water Act), or 33 U.S.C. 403 (Sec. 10,
Rivers and Harbors Act.)
3. Areas within the jurisdiction of the St. Johns River Water Management District (SJRWMD.)
6.2.3. CONSERVATION DISTRICT DETERMINATION
The line demarcating the boundary of the conservation district shall be established through the issuance of a management storage of surface water (MSSW) or isolated wetland permit through the SJRWMD utilizing the wetland indicators as outlined in Section 16.1 in the "Applicant's Handbook, Management and Storage of Surface Waters," SJRWMD.
6.2.4. DEVELOPMENT WITHIN CONSERVATION DISTRICT
Development within the conservation district shall be allowed only in accordance with the appropriate SJRWMD, DEP, or USACE permits required for development.
6.2.5. PEAT EXCAVATION IN CONSERVATION DISTRICT
A. Generally
Prior to initiating peat excavation in a conservation district, a development plan shall be submitted and approved in accordance with Sec. 2.5.2.A, Development Plan (Major and Minor). Approval shall be given for peat excavation if a complete environmental assessment indicates that the excavation will be beneficial to the lake or wetland ecosystem.
B. Reclamation Plan
A reclamation plan is required prior to approval of excavation and must meet the
following standards and guidelines:
1. Submittal Requirements
The application for a development plan shall include a reclamation proposal which
includes the following:
a.
A description of the type and functions of the conservation district to be impacted by the proposed excavation, which shall include its acreage, flora, fauna, and hydrologic regime.
b.
A list of all plant and animal species listed as endangered or threatened (in accordance with Ch. 581, Fla. Stat., and Rules 68A-27.003 and 68-27.004, FAC) which utilize the area and an evaluation of the probable significance of the area to the listed species.
c.
A design for and a description of the area proposed for restoration, which shall include its acreage, species to be planted, plant density, source of plants, soils, and hydrologic regime.
d.
A description of the monitoring and maintenance program defining specific timetables for excavation activities and reclamation procedures.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 6 3
-
Article 6: Environmental Standards
Section 6.3 Habitat for Listed Species
6.3.1 Purpose
e.
An itemized cost estimate of the implementation cost of reclamation in accordance with this LDC.
f.
Proof of financial responsibility.
g.
Additional information as may be required by the Director to evaluate the reclamation plan.
2. Evaluation Requirements
The degree of impact to wetland functions, whether the impact to these functions
can be restored, and the feasibility of cost-effective design alternatives which could
avoid impact are all factors in determining whether a proposed reclamation measure
will be acceptable. In addition, an evaluation of the anticipated postdevelopment
viability and function performance will be considered utilizing accepted scientific
methods as an alternative.
3. Monitoring and Maintenance
The applicant shall provide a monitoring and maintenance program for reclamation activities. The length and complexity of monitoring will not be less than one year with an 85 percent survival rate for all planted areas.
4. Performance Guarantees.
The applicant shall provide reasonable assurance that the entity proposing the peat excavation has the financial and institutional stability to carry out the reclamation, monitoring, and maintenance requirements. Reasonable assurance can be provided in the form of a surety bond posted by the applicant to the City prior to the disturbance of the conservation district in the amount of 110 percent of the cost estimate of the proposed reclamation, maintenance, and monitoring plan. Other forms of reasonable assurance may include a performance guarantee as part of a project construction guarantee, cash bond, or letter of credit from a financial institution, or performance prior to wetland impacts.
5. Additional Requirements
The applicant shall provide other items that may be required by the review body, as
appropriate, to provide reasonable assurance that the reclamation plan requirements
are met.
Section 6.3. HABITAT FOR LISTED SPECIES
6.3.1. PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this section to provide standards to protect the habitats of endangered, threatened, or species of special concern, both flora and fauna, in the City. It is the intent of this section to require that an appropriate amount of land be set-aside to protect habitat of such species.
Land Development Code Page 6 4 Apopka, FL
-
Article 6: Environmental Standards
Section 6.3 Habitat for Listed Species
6.3.2 Development Application Requirements
6.3.2. DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
A. A habitat survey shall accompany all applications for developments of ten acres or more. The survey shall be prepared by using the methodology for DRIs recommended by the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission The survey shall include listings of all potential listed species, population estimates, and occupied habitat boundaries. A map and narrative shall describe the methodology as applied, and the findings. The mapped information shall be at the same scale as the development plan.
B. Surveys and management plans are not required for developments of less than ten acres or less than two acres of impervious surface, or development consistent with a valid vested rights determination.
C. A habitat survey shall be evaluated and scored based on the criteria in Table 6.2.2.C: Habitat Listing Criteria. Where a listed species is present and the site achieves a total rating of 169 or higher, preservation is required through an easement of an area which will sustain a viable population of the identified species. If the site rates less than 169, and a listed species is present, mitigation measures or relocation of the identified species shall be allowed on a case-by-case basis.
TABLE 6.3.2.C: HABITAT LISTING CRITERTIA
UNIT VALUES
RANK
CATEGORY
Vegetative Communities
15
1
Community not rare, sensitive, threatened, or endangered and not contain or likely contain threatened or endangered species.
30
2
Community not rare, sensitive, threatened, or endangered but contains or likely contains listed plant species.
45
3
Community rare, sensitive, threatened, or endangered and not contain or likely contain threatened or endangered species.
60
4
Community rare, sensitive, threatened, or endangered and contains or likely contains listed plant species.
Animal Species
20
1
Habitat contains or is likely to contain no listed species.
40
2
Habitat contains or is likely to contain species of special concern.
60
3
Habitat contains or is likely to contain threatened and/or endangered species.
Manageability Feasibility / Potential
6
1
Site could be managed properly, but moderate management problems would exist.
12
2
Site would have minimal management constraints.
Ecological Viability
16
1
Low potential for viability of featured attribute(s).
32
2
Moderate potential for viability of featured attribute(s).
48
3
High potential for viability of featured attribute(s).
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 6 5
-
Article 6: Environmental Standards
Section 6.3 Habitat for Listed Species
6.3.3 Management Plan
TABLE 6.3.2.C: HABITAT LISTING CRITERTIA
UNIT VALUES
RANK
CATEGORY
Adjacency to Existing Publicly Owned Conservation Lands
0
0
Site nonadjacent.
36
1
Site adjacent.
Historical/Archaeological Value
0
0
Site contains no historic or archaeological sites.
30
1
Site contains historic or archaeological sites.
60
2
Site contains historic, archaeological sites; moderate to high significance.
Aquifer Recharge Potential
30
1
Aquifer recharge potential; moderate (soils moderately well drained).
60
2
Aquifer recharge potential; high (soils excessively well drained).
Degree of Disturbance
8
1
Site highly disturbed.
16
2
Site moderately disturbed.
24
3
Site relatively undisturbed.
Wildlife Corridor Potential
0
0
Site not within or adjacent to a wildlife corridor.
30
1
Site within or adjacent to a wildlife corridor.
60
2
Site a vital component of an identified wildlife corridor.
6.3.3. MANAGEMENT PLAN
A. A management plan shall be required prior to the issuance of a final development order if endangered, threatened, or species of special concern are found on the property, unless exempted by this LDC. The management plan shall be subject to final approval by the City Council, after receipt of recommendation from the Florida Fish and Wildlife Commission.
B. Management plans shall include the following:
1. A one inch equals 300 feet aerial map and map at the scale of the map submitted with the development application that includes the following:
a.
Habitat classifications depicted by using the Florida Land Use, Cover, and Forms Classification System (FLUCCS) administered by FDOT.
b.
The location of individual species, nest sites, dens, burrows, feeding locations, roosting and perching areas, and trails, as appropriate.
c.
Areas to be preserved, including habitat and buffers.
2.
Proposed management and monitoring activities
3.
An action plan with specific implementation activities, costs schedules, and assignment of responsibilities.
4.
Reasonable assurance that the applicant has the financial and institutional ability to carry out the management, monitoring, and maintenance plan requirements.
Land Development Code Page 6 6 Apopka, FL
-
Article 6: Environmental Standards
Section 6.3 Habitat for Listed Species
6.3.4 Mitigation of Adverse Effects
C. Habitat preservation zones shall be established which include all occupied habitat of listed species.
D. Occupied habitat preservation buffer zone boundaries shall be established parallel to all occupied habitat zones, and shall extend at a distance appropriate to protect the habitat and species.
E. The habitat preservation zone(s) and the occupied habitat preservation buffer zone(s) shall remain free of all development, except development which will not cause degradation of the species or its habitat existing on the site. The standard of review shall be no material degradation of the occupied habitat. The habitat preservation zone(s) shall be identified on all associated applications and all maps and plats. A conservation tract shall be established which dedicates development rights to the City for the preserved property as a condition of the final development order approval, unless the City Council determines it would not be logistically or economically feasible for the City to accept the tract.
F. In the event that the adjacent parcel includes conservation tracts or easements or other public interest in the land, effort shall be made to connect the areas to provide wildlife corridors.
G. In cases where guidelines have been prepared by the Florida Fish and Wildlife Commission for a listed species, those guidelines shall be utilized in the preparation of the management plan.
H. If the Florida Fish and Wildlife Commission fails to review any plan in conjunction with City staff within allotted time schedules, determinations shall be made without the benefit of the Commission’s expertise.
I. Approval of the management plan shall include conditions identifying the applicant or the applicant’s successor-in-interest as the persons responsible for all aspects of the implementation of the management plan. A monitoring report as to the conditions of the habitat and management techniques applied to the habitat shall be submitted to the Director for review on an annual basis for five consecutive years from the date that the management plan is approved by the City Council.
6.3.4. MITIGATION OF ADVERSE EFFECTS
Should preservation of an identified listed species habitat prove to be environmentally, economically, or technologically unfeasible, mitigation measures such as off-site land banking may be considered as an acceptable alternative. The appropriateness and specific requirements for land mitigation shall be evaluated on a case-by-case basis and shall require approval from City Council.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 6 7
-
Article 6: Environmental Standards
Section 6.4 Wekiva Protection Area
6.4.1 Purpose
Section 6.4. WEKIVA PROTECTION AREA
6.4.1. PURPOSE
The purpose of these standards is to ensure the protection and development of the State-established Wekiva Protection Area in conformance with State plans and standards and City goals.
6.4.2. WEKIVA PROTECTION AREA ESTABLISHED
The Wekiva Protection Area is a state-established protection area, defined as those lands within: Township 18 South Range 29 East; Township 19 South Range 28 East, less those lands lying west of a line formed by County Road 437, State Road 46, and County Road 435; Township 19 South Range 29 East; Township 20 South Range 28 East, less all lands lying west of County Road 435; and Township 20 South Range 29 East, less all those lands east of Longwood Markham Road, or as amended by the State.
6.4.3. APPLICABILITY
A. Except as exempted in B below, all development within the Wekiva Protection Area shall comply with the requirements of this section and this LDC.
B. The following is exempted from the requirements of this section:
1.
Development that has received a valid vested rights approval in accordance with Sec.2.5.5.C, Vested Rights Determination.
2.
Lawful uses of property, building and structures that existed on March 6, 2019 which shall not be required to be removed or otherwise modified. Additionally, the destruction of or temporary discontinuation of any such uses, buildings or structures shall not prohibit their renewed use or reconstruction of the building or structure, as long as they are reconstructed in their preexisting form. The burden shall be on the property owner to demonstrate that existing land uses, buildings and structures are exempted in accordance with this subsection.
6.4.4. STANDARDS
A. Buffer Zone Established
In accordance with state law and this section, a buffer zone is hereby established 550 feet from the landward limit of waters of the state as defined in Ch. 403, Fla. Stat., or the edge of the Wekiva River, or from the landward edge of the wetlands associated with the Wekiva River, whichever is greatest.
B. General Standards Within the Wekiva Protection Area
1.
The density and intensity of permitted development should be clustered or concentrated on those portions of the parcel or parcels which are furthest from the surface waters and wetlands of the Wekiva River system.
2.
Development within the 100-year Base Flood Elevation shall minimize the clearance of native vegetation. Clearing of vegetation shall only be permitted where it is
Land Development Code Page 6 8 Apopka, FL
-
Article 6: Environmental Standards
Section 6.5 Groundwater for Wellheads
6.5.1 Purpose
necessary for roads, utilities, or pedestrian access routes approved by the City as part of a development approval. Prior to construction plan submittal, a vegetation clearing plan shall be submitted to the Director for review and approval.
3.
Septic tank use is prohibited.
4.
Development which has the potential to degrade groundwater quality is prohibited.
5.
Required landscaping shall include native plant species and blend into nearby natural areas.
6.
Understory vegetation shall be preserved to the greatest extent practical, in order to preserve and maintain wildlife habitat.
Section 6.5. GROUNDWATER FOR WELLHEADS
6.5.1. PURPOSE
The purpose of these groundwater protection standards is to safeguard the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City. This is accomplished through ensuring the protection of the principal source of water for domestic, agricultural, and industrial use. The availability of adequate and dependable supplies of good quality water is of primary importance to the future of the City. Consequentially, the intent of this section to control development in and adjacent to designated wellheads to protect water supplies from potential contamination.
6.5.2. APPLICABILITY
This section is applicable to all lands in the Wellhead Protection Zone established in Sec. 6.5.3, Wellhead Protection Zone Established, below.
6.5.3. WELLHEAD PROTECTION ZONE ESTABLISHED
A. Designation
All land within a 200 foot radius of wellheads with a permitted capacity of 100,000 gpd or more (“protected wellheads”) is established as a wellhead protection zone. The wellhead protection zone may also be referred to as the “zone of exclusion.”
B. Restriction on Development
The following uses and development activities are prohibited within the wellhead
protection zone:
1.
Landfills.
2.
Facilities for the bulk storage, handling or processing of hazardous materials as defined by the State.
3.
Activities that require the storage, use, handling, production or transportation of restricted substances. This includes: agriculture chemicals, petroleum products, hazardous/toxic wastes, industrial chemicals, medical wastes, etc., including but not limited to those defined by the U.S. Resource Conservation and Recovery Act as implemented by the EPA.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 6 9
-
Article 6: Environmental Standards
Section 6.6 Floodplains
6.6.1 General
4.
Feedlots or other concentrated animal facilities.
5.
Wastewater treatment plants, percolation ponds, and similar facilities.
6.
Mines.
7.
Excavation of waterways or drainage facilities which intersect the water table.
Section 6.6. FLOODPLAINS
6.6.1. GENERAL
A. Title
These regulations under Sec. 6.6, Floodplains of the LDC shall be known as the Floodplain Management Ordinance of the City of Apopka, hereinafter referred to as “this Section.”
B. Scope
The provisions of this Section shall apply to all development that is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area, including but not limited to the subdivision of land; filling, grading, and other site improvements and utility installations; construction, alteration, remodeling, enlargement, improvement, replacement, repair, relocation or demolition of buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code; placement, installation, or replacement of manufactured homes and manufactured buildings; installation or replacement of tanks; placement of recreational vehicles; installation of swimming pools; and any other development.
C. Intent
The purposes of this Section and the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code are to establish minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flooding through regulation of development in flood hazard areas to:
1.
Minimize unnecessary disruption of commerce, access and public service during times of flooding;
2.
Require the use of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize future flood damage;
3.
Manage filling, grading, dredging, mining, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion potential;
4.
Manage the alteration of flood hazard areas, watercourses, and shorelines to minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial functions of the floodplain;
5.
Minimize damage to public and private facilities and utilities;
6.
Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood hazard areas;
Land Development Code Page 6 10 Apopka, FL
-
Article 6: Environmental Standards
Section 6.6 Floodplains
6.6.2 Applicability
7.
Minimize the need for future expenditure of public funds for flood control projects and response to and recovery from flood events; and
8.
Meet the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program for community participation as set forth in Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Section 59.22.
D. Coordination with the Florida Building Code
This Section is intended to be administered and enforced in conjunction with the Florida Building Code. Where cited, ASCE 24 refers to the edition of the standard that is referenced by the Florida Building Code.
E. Warning
The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance and the Florida Building Code, as amended by this community, is considered the minimum reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside of mapped special flood hazard areas, or that uses permitted within such flood hazard areas, will be free from flooding or flood damage. The flood hazard areas and base flood elevations contained in the Flood Insurance Study and shown on Flood Insurance Rate Maps and the requirements of Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Sections 59 and 60 may be revised by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, requiring this community to revise these regulations to remain eligible for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. No guaranty of vested use, existing use, or future use is implied or expressed by compliance with this ordinance.
F. Disclaimer of Liability
This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City Council of the City of Apopka or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
6.6.2. APPLICABILITY
A. General
Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable.
B. Areas To Which This Section Applies
This Section shall apply to all flood hazard areas within the City of Apopka, as established in C, below.
C. Basis for Establishing Flood Hazard Areas
The Flood Insurance Study for Orange County, Florida and Incorporated Areas dated June 20, 2018, and all subsequent amendments and revisions, and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), and all subsequent amendments and revisions to such maps, are adopted by reference as a part of this Section and shall serve as the minimum basis for establishing flood hazard areas. Studies and maps that establish flood hazard areas are on file at the Community Development Department, 120 East Main Street, 2nd Floor, Apopka.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 6 11
-
Article 6: Environmental Standards
Section 6.6 Floodplains
6.6.3 Duties and Powers of the Floodplain Administrator
D. Submission of Additional Data to Establish Flood Hazard Areas
To establish flood hazard areas and base flood elevations, pursuant to Sec. 6.6.5, Site Plans and Construction Documents, the Floodplain Administrator may require submission of additional data. Where field surveyed topography prepared by a Florida licensed professional surveyor or digital topography accepted by the community indicates that ground elevations:
1.
Are below the closest applicable base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard area on a FIRM, the area shall be considered as flood hazard area and subject to the requirements of this Section and, as applicable, the requirements of the Florida Building Code.
2.
Are above the closest applicable base flood elevation, the area shall be regulated as special flood hazard area unless the applicant obtains a Letter of Map Change that removes the area from the special flood hazard area.
E. Other Laws
The provisions of this Section shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law.
F. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
This Section supersedes any ordinance in effect for management of development in flood hazard areas. However, it is not intended to repeal or abrogate any existing ordinances including but not limited to land development regulations, zoning ordinances, stormwater management regulations, or the Florida Building Code. In the event of a conflict between this Section and any other ordinance, the more restrictive shall govern. This Section shall not impair any deed restriction, covenant or easement, but any land that is subject to such interests shall also be governed by this Section.
G. Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of this Section, all provisions shall be:
1.
Considered as minimum requirements;
2.
Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
3.
Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
6.6.3. DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR
A. Designation
The City Engineer is designated as the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator may delegate performance of certain duties to other employees.
B. General
The Floodplain Administrator is authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this Section. The Floodplain Administrator shall have the authority to render interpretations of this Section consistent with the intent and purpose of this Section and may establish policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies, and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving
Land Development Code Page 6 12 Apopka, FL
-
Article 6: Environmental Standards
Section 6.6 Floodplains
6.6.3 Duties and Powers of the Floodplain Administrator
requirements specifically provided in this Section without the granting of a variance pursuant to Sec. 6.6.7, Variances and Appeals.
C. Applications and Permits
The Floodplain Administrator, in coordination with other pertinent offices of the community, shall:
1.
Review applications and plans to determine whether proposed new development will be located in flood hazard areas;
2.
Review applications for modification of any existing development in flood hazard areas for compliance with the requirements of this Section;
3.
Interpret flood hazard area boundaries where such interpretation is necessary to determine the exact location of boundaries; a person contesting the determination shall have the opportunity to appeal the interpretation;
4.
Provide available flood elevation and flood hazard information;
5.
Determine whether additional flood hazard data shall be obtained from other sources or shall be developed by an applicant;
6.
Review applications to determine whether proposed development will be reasonably safe from flooding;
7.
Issue floodplain development permits or approvals for development other than buildings and structures that are subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, when compliance with this Section is demonstrated, or disapprove the same in the event of noncompliance; and
8.
Coordinate with and provide comments to the Building Official to assure that applications, plan reviews, and inspections for buildings and structures in flood hazard areas comply with the applicable provisions of this Section.
D. Substantial Improvement and Substantial Damage Determination
For applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and structures, the Floodplain Administrator, in coordination with the Building Official, shall:
1.
Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed work; in the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are made;
2.
Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or structure;
3.
Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 6 13
-
Article 6: Environmental Standards
Section 6.6 Floodplains
6.6.3 Duties and Powers of the Floodplain Administrator
4. Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance with the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code and this Section is required.
E. Modification of the Strict Application of the Requirements of the Florida Building Code
The Floodplain Administrator shall review requests submitted to the Building Official that seek approval to modify the strict application of the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code to determine whether such requests require the granting of a variance pursuant to Sec. 6.6.7, Variances and Appeals.
F. Notices and Orders
The Floodplain Administrator shall coordinate with appropriate local agencies for the issuance of all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this Section.
G. Inspections
The Floodplain Administrator shall make the required inspections as specified in Sec. 6.6.6, Inspections, for development that is not subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The Floodplain Administrator shall inspect flood hazard areas to determine if development is undertaken without issuance of a permit.
H. Other Duties of the Floodplain Administrator
The Floodplain Administrator shall have other duties, including but not limited to:
1.
Establish, in coordination with the Building Official, procedures for administering and documenting determinations of substantial improvement and substantial damage made pursuant to Sec. 6.6.3.D, Substantial Improvement and Substantial Damage Determination;
2.
Require that applicants proposing alteration of a watercourse notify adjacent communities and the Florida Division of Emergency Management, State Floodplain Management Office, and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA);
3.
Require applicants who submit hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses to support permit applications to submit to FEMA the data and information necessary to maintain the Flood Insurance Rate Maps if the analyses propose to change base flood elevations, flood hazard area boundaries, or floodway designations; such submissions shall be made within 6 months of such data becoming available;
4.
Review required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by this Section and the Florida Building Code to determine that such certifications and documentations are complete; and
5.
Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency when the corporate boundaries of the City of Apopka are modified.
Land Development Code Page 6 14 Apopka, FL
-
Article 6: Environmental Standards
Section 6.6 Floodplains
6.6.4 Permits
I. Floodplain Management Records
Regardless of any limitation on the period required for retention of public records, the Floodplain Administrator shall maintain and permanently keep and make available for public inspection all records that are necessary for the administration of this Section and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, including Flood Insurance Rate Maps; Letters of Map Change; records of issuance of permits and denial of permits; determinations of whether proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by the Florida Building Code and this Section; notifications to adjacent communities, FEMA, and the state related to alterations of watercourses; assurances that the flood carrying capacity of altered watercourses will be maintained; documentation related to appeals and variances, including justification for issuance or denial; and records of enforcement actions taken pursuant to this Section and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. These records shall be available for public inspection at Community Development Department, 120 East Main Street, 2nd Floor, Apopka, Florida 32703.
6.6.4. PERMITS
A. Permits Required
Any owner or owner’s authorized agent (hereinafter “applicant”) who intends to undertake any development activity within the scope of this Section, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, which is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area shall first make application to the Floodplain Administrator, and the Building Official if applicable, and shall obtain the required permit(s) and approval(s). No such permit or approval shall be issued until compliance with the requirements of this Section and all other applicable codes and regulations has been satisfied.
B. Floodplain Development Permits or Approvals
Floodplain development permits or approvals shall be issued pursuant to this Section for any development activities not subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Depending on the nature and extent of proposed development that includes a building or structure, the Floodplain Administrator may determine that a floodplain development permit or approval is required in addition to a building permit.
C. Buildings, Structures, and Facilities Exempt from the Florida Building Code
Pursuant to the requirements of federal regulation for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (44 C.F.R. Sections 59 and 60), floodplain development permits or approvals shall be required for the following buildings, structures and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code and any further exemptions provided by law, which are subject to the requirements of this Section:
1.
Railroads and ancillary facilities associated with the railroad.
2.
Nonresidential farm buildings on farms, as provided in Sec. 604.50, Fla. Stat.
3.
Temporary buildings or sheds used exclusively for construction purposes.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 6 15
-
Article 6: Environmental Standards
Section 6.6 Floodplains
6.6.4 Permits
4.
Mobile or modular structures used as temporary offices.
5.
Those structures or facilities of electric utilities, as defined in Sec. 366.02, Fla. Stat., which are directly involved in the generation, transmission, or distribution of electricity.
6.
Chickees constructed by the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida or the Seminole Tribe of Florida. As used in this paragraph, the term “chickee” means an open-sided wooden hut that has a thatched roof of palm or palmetto or other traditional materials, and that does not incorporate any electrical, plumbing, or other non-wood features.
7.
Family mausoleums not exceeding 250 square feet in area which are prefabricated and assembled on site or preassembled and delivered on site and have walls, roofs, and a floor constructed of granite, marble, or reinforced concrete.
8.
Temporary housing provided by the Department of Corrections to any prisoner in the state correctional system.
9.
Structures identified in Sec. 553.73(10)(k), Fla. Stat., are not exempt from the Florida Building Code if such structures are located in flood hazard areas established on Flood Insurance Rate Maps
D. Application for a Permit or Approval
To obtain a floodplain development permit or approval the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished by the community. The information provided shall:
1.
Identify and describe the development to be covered by the permit or approval.
2.
Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be conducted by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitively locate the site.
3.
Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed development is intended.
4.
Be accompanied by a site plan or construction documents as specified in Sec. 6.6.5, Site Plans and Construction Documents.
5.
State the valuation of the proposed work.
6.
Be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent.
7.
Give such other data and information as required by the Floodplain Administrator.
E. Validity of a Permit or Approval
The issuance of a floodplain development permit or approval pursuant to this Section shall not be construed to be a permit for, or approval of, any violation of this Section, the Florida Building Codes, or any other ordinance of this community. The issuance of permits based on submitted applications, construction documents, and information shall not prevent the Floodplain Administrator from requiring the correction of errors and omissions.
Land Development Code Page 6 16 Apopka, FL
-
Article 6: Environmental Standards
Section 6.6 Floodplains
6.6.5 Site Plans and Construction Documents
F. Expiration
A floodplain development permit or approval shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the work commences. Extensions for periods of not more than 180 days each shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause shall be demonstrated.
G. Suspension or Revocation
The Floodplain Administrator is authorized to suspend or revoke a floodplain development permit or approval if the permit was issued in error, on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of this Section or any other ordinance, regulation or requirement of this community.
H. Other Permits Required
Floodplain development permits and building permits shall include a condition that all other applicable state or federal permits be obtained before commencement of the permitted development, including but not limited to the following:
1.
The St. Johns River Water Management District; Sec. 373.036, Fla. Stat.
2.
Florida Department of Health for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems; Sec. 381.0065, Fla. Stat. and Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C.
3.
Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities subject to the Joint Coastal Permit; Sec. 161.055, Fla. Stat.
4.
Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities that affect wetlands and alter surface water flows, in conjunction with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; Section 404 of the Clean Water Act.
5.
Federal permits and approvals.
6.6.5. SITE PLANS AND CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS
A. Information for Development in Flood Hazard Areas
The site plan or construction documents for any development subject to the requirements of this Section shall be drawn to scale and shall include, as applicable to the proposed development:
1.
Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zone(s), base flood elevation(s), and ground elevations if necessary for review of the proposed development.
2.
Where base flood elevations or floodway data are not included on the FIRM or in the Flood Insurance Study, they shall be established in accordance with Sec. 6.6.5.B.2 or Sec. 6.6.5.B.3.
3.
Where the parcel on which the proposed development will take place will have more than 50 lots or is larger than 5 acres and the base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM or in the Flood Insurance Study, such elevations shall be established in accordance with Sec. 6.6.5.B.1.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 6 17
-
Article 6: Environmental Standards
Section 6.6 Floodplains
6.6.5 Site Plans and Construction Documents
4.
Location of the proposed activity and proposed structures, and locations of existing buildings and structures.
5.
Location, extent, amount, and proposed final grades of any filling, grading, or excavation.
6.
Where the placement of fill is proposed, the amount, type, and source of fill material; compaction specifications; a description of the intended purpose of the fill areas; and evidence that the proposed fill areas are the minimum necessary to achieve the intended purpose.
7.
Existing and proposed alignment of any proposed alteration of a watercourse.
The Floodplain Administrator is authorized to waive the submission of site plans, construction documents, and other data that are required by this Section but that are not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the proposed development is such that the review of such submissions is not necessary to ascertain compliance with this Section.
B. Information in Flood Hazard Areas Without Base Flood Elevations (Approximate Zone A)
Where flood hazard areas are delineated on the FIRM and base flood elevation data have not been provided, the Floodplain Administrator shall:
1.
Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices.
2.
Obtain, review, and provide to applicants base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source or require the applicant to obtain and use base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source.
3.
Where base flood elevation and floodway data are not available from another source, where the available data are deemed by the Floodplain Administrator to not reasonably reflect flooding conditions, or where the available data are known to be scientifically or technically incorrect or otherwise inadequate:
a.
Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices; or
b.
Specify that the base flood elevation is two feet above the highest adjacent grade at the location of the development, provided there is no evidence indicating flood depths have been or may be greater than two feet.
4.
Where the base flood elevation data are to be used to support a Letter of Map Change from FEMA, advise the applicant that the analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA, and that it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to satisfy the submittal requirements and pay the processing fees.
C. Additional Analyses and Certifications
As applicable to the location and nature of the proposed development activity, and in addition to the requirements of this section, the applicant shall have the following
Land Development Code Page 6 18 Apopka, FL
-
Article 6: Environmental Standards
Section 6.6 Floodplains
6.6.6 Inspections
analyses signed and sealed by a Florida licensed engineer for submission with the site plan and construction documents:
1.
For development activities proposed to be located in a regulatory floodway, a floodway encroachment analysis that demonstrates that the encroachment of the proposed development will not cause any increase in base flood elevations; where the applicant proposes to undertake development activities that do increase base flood elevations, the applicant shall submit such analysis to FEMA as specified in Sec. 6.6.5.D, Submission of Additional Data, and shall submit the Conditional Letter of Map Revision, if issued by FEMA, with the site plan and construction documents.
2.
For development activities proposed to be located in a riverine flood hazard area for which base flood elevations are included in the Flood Insurance Study or on the FIRM and floodways have not been designated, hydrologic and hydraulic analyses that demonstrate that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated flood hazard area encroachments, will not increase the base flood elevation more than one foot at any point within the community. This requirement does not apply in isolated flood hazard areas not connected to a riverine flood hazard area or in flood hazard areas identified as Zone AO or Zone AH.
3.
For alteration of a watercourse, an engineering analysis prepared in accordance with standard engineering practices which demonstrates that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse will not be decreased, and certification that the altered watercourse shall be maintained in a manner which preserves the channel's flood-carrying capacity; the applicant shall submit the analysis to FEMA as specified in Sec. 6.6.5.D, Submission of Additional Data.
D. Submission of Additional Data
When additional hydrologic, hydraulic or other engineering data, studies, and additional analyses are submitted to support an application, the applicant has the right to seek a Letter of Map Change from FEMA to change the base flood elevations, change floodway boundaries, or change boundaries of flood hazard areas shown on FIRMs, and to submit such data to FEMA for such purposes. The analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
6.6.6. INSPECTIONS
A. General
Development for which a floodplain development permit or approval is required shall be subject to inspection.
B. Development Other than Buildings and Structures
The Floodplain Administrator shall inspect all development to determine compliance with the requirements of this Section and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 6 19
-
Article 6: Environmental Standards
Section 6.6 Floodplains
6.6.7 Variances and Appeals
C. Buildings Structures, and Facilities Exempt from the Florida Building Code
The Floodplain Administrator shall inspect buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code to determine compliance with the requirements of this Section and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals.
D. Buildings Structures, and Facilities Exempt from the Florida Building Code, Lowest Floor Inspection
Upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the owner of a building, structure or facility exempt from the Florida Building Code, or the owner’s authorized agent, shall submit to the Floodplain Administrator:
1.
If a design flood elevation was used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor, the certification of elevation of the lowest floor prepared and sealed by a Florida licensed professional surveyor; or
2.
If the elevation used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor was determined in accordance with Sec. 6.6.5.B.3.b, the documentation of height of the lowest floor above highest adjacent grade, prepared by the owner or the owner’s authorized agent.
E. Buildings Structures, and Facilities Exempt from the Florida Building Code, Final Inspection
As part of the final inspection, the owner or owner’s authorized agent shall submit to the Floodplain Administrator a final certification of elevation of the lowest floor or final documentation of the height of the lowest floor above the highest adjacent grade; such certifications and documentations shall be prepared as specified in Sec. 6.6.6.D, Buildings Structures, and Facilities Exempt from the Florida Building Code, Lowest Floor Inspection.
F. Manufactured Homes
The Floodplain Administrator shall inspect manufactured homes that are installed or replaced in flood hazard areas to determine compliance with the requirements of this Section and the conditions of the issued permit. Upon placement of a manufactured home, certification of the elevation of the lowest floor shall be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator.
6.6.7. VARIANCES AND APPEALS
A. General
The City Council shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of this Section. Pursuant to Sec. 553.73(5), Fla. Stat., the City Council shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code.
B. Appeals
The City Council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the
Land Development Code Page 6 20 Apopka, FL
-
Article 6: Environmental Standards
Section 6.6 Floodplains
6.6.7 Variances and Appeals
administration and enforcement of this Section. Any person aggrieved by the decision may appeal such decision to the Circuit Court, as provided by Florida Statutes.
C. Limitations on Authority to Grant Variances
The City Council shall base its decisions on variances on technical justifications submitted by applicants, the considerations for issuance in subsection G, below, the conditions of issuance set forth in subsection H, below, and the comments and recommendations of the Floodplain Administrator and the Building Official. The City Council has the right to attach such conditions as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this Section.
D. Restrictions in Floodways
A variance shall not be issued for any proposed development in a floodway if any increase in base flood elevations would result, as evidenced by the applicable analyses and certifications required in Sec. 6.6.5.C, Additional Analyses and Certifications.
E. Historic Buildings
A variance is authorized to be issued for the repair, improvement, or rehabilitation of a historic building that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 12 Historic Buildings, upon a determination that the proposed repair, improvement, or rehabilitation will not preclude the building’s continued designation as a historic building and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the building. If the proposed work precludes the building’s continued designation as a historic building, a variance shall not be granted and the building and any repair, improvement, and rehabilitation shall be subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code.
F. Functionally Dependent Uses
A variance is authorized to be issued for the construction or substantial improvement necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, as defined in this Section, provided the variance meets the requirements of subsection D, above, is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, and all due consideration has been given to use of methods and materials that minimize flood damage during occurrence of the base flood.
G. Considerations for Issuance of Variances
In reviewing requests for variances, the City Council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all other applicable provisions of the Florida Building Code, this Section , and the following:
1.
The danger that materials and debris may be swept onto other lands resulting in further injury or damage;
2.
The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
3.
The susceptibility of the proposed development, including contents, to flood damage and the effect of such damage on current and future owners;
4.
The importance of the services provided by the proposed development to the community;
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 6 21
-
Article 6: Environmental Standards
Section 6.6 Floodplains
6.6.7 Variances and Appeals
5.
The availability of alternate locations for the proposed development that are subject to lower risk of flooding or erosion;
6.
The compatibility of the proposed development with existing and anticipated development;
7.
The relationship of the proposed development to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area;
8.
The safety of access to the property in times of flooding for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
9.
The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and debris and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
10.
The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets and bridges.
H. Conditions for Issuance of Variances
Variances shall be issued only upon:
1.
Submission by the applicant, of a showing of good and sufficient cause that the unique characteristics of the size, configuration, or topography of the site limit compliance with any provision of this Section or the required elevation standards;
2.
Determination by the City Council that:
a.
Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the land that render the lot undevelopable; increased costs to satisfy the requirements or inconvenience do not constitute hardship;
b.
The granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws and ordinances; and
c.
The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief;
3.
Receipt of a signed statement by the applicant that the variance, if granted, shall be recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Court in such a manner that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land; and
4.
If the request is for a variance to allow construction of the lowest floor of a new building, or substantial improvement of a building, below the required elevation, a copy in the record of a written notice from the Floodplain Administrator to the applicant for the variance, specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the proposed elevation of the lowest floor, stating that the cost of federal flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced floor elevation (up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage), and stating that construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property.
Land Development Code Page 6 22 Apopka, FL
-
Article 6: Environmental Standards
Section 6.6 Floodplains
6.6.8 Violations
6.6.8. VIOLATIONS
Any development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this Section that is performed without an issued permit, that is in conflict with an issued permit, or that does not fully comply with this Section, shall be deemed a violation of this Section. A building or structure without the documentation of elevation of the lowest floor, other required design certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this Section or the Florida Building Code is presumed to be a violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
A. Authority
For development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this Section and that is determined to be a violation, the Floodplain Administrator is authorized to serve notices of violation or stop work orders to owners of the property involved, to the owner’s agent, or to the person or persons performing the work.
B. Unlawful Continuance
Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a notice of violation or a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove or remedy a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law.
6.6.9. BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
A. Design and Construction of Buildings, Structures and Facilities Exempt from the Florida Building Code
Pursuant to Sec. 6.6.4.C, Buildings, Structures, and Facilities Exempt from the Florida Building Code, buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code, including substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage of such buildings, structures and facilities, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of ASCE 24. Structures exempt from the Florida Building Code that are not walled and roofed buildings shall comply with the requirements of Sec. 6.6.15, Other Development.
6.6.10. SUBDIVISIONS
A. Minimum Requirements
Subdivision proposals, including proposals for manufactured home parks and
subdivisions, shall be reviewed to determine that:
1.
Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding;
2.
All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 6 23
-
Article 6: Environmental Standards
Section 6.6 Floodplains
6.6.11 Site Improvements, Utilities and Limitations
3. Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
B. Subdivision Plats
Where any portion of proposed subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, lies within a flood hazard area, the following shall be required:
1.
Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zones, and design flood elevations, as appropriate, shall be shown on preliminary plats;
2.
Where the subdivision has more than 50 lots or is larger than 5 acres and base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM, the base flood elevations determined in accordance with Sec. 6.6.5.B.1; and
3.
Compliance with the site improvement and utilities requirements of Sec. 6.6.11, Site Improvements, Utilities and Limitations.
4.
Each lot must include a site suitable for constructing a structure in conformity with the standards of these flood damage prevention regulations.
6.6.11. SITE IMPROVEMENTS, UTILITIES AND LIMITATIONS
A. Minimum Requirements
All proposed new development shall be reviewed to determine that:
1.
Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding;
2.
All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and
3.
Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
B. Sanitary Sewage Facilities
All new and replacement sanitary sewage facilities, private sewage treatment plants (including all pumping stations and collector systems), and on-site waste disposal systems shall be designed in accordance with the standards for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems in Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the facilities and discharge from the facilities into flood waters, and impairment of the facilities and systems.
C. Water Supply Facilities
All new and replacement water supply facilities shall be designed in accordance with the water well construction standards in Chapter 62-532.500, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems.
Land Development Code Page 6 24 Apopka, FL
-
Article 6: Environmental Standards
Section 6.6 Floodplains
6.6.12 Manufactured Homes
D. Limitations on Sites in Regulatory Floodways
No development, including but not limited to site improvements, and land disturbing activity involving fill or regrading, shall be authorized in the regulatory floodway unless the floodway encroachment analysis required in Sec. 6.6.5.C.1 demonstrates that the proposed development or land disturbing activity will not result in any increase in the base flood elevation.
E. Limitations on Placement of Fill
Subject to the limitations of this Section, fill shall be designed to be stable under conditions of flooding including rapid rise and rapid drawdown of floodwaters, prolonged inundation, and protection against flood-related erosion and scour. In addition to these requirements, if intended to support buildings and structures (Zone A only), fill shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code.
6.6.12. MANUFACTURED HOMES
A. General
All manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed by an installer that is licensed pursuant to Sec. 320.8249, Fla. Stat., and shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 15C-1, F.A.C. and the requirements of this Section.
B. Foundations
All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed on permanent, reinforced foundations that are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code Residential Section R322.2 and this Section. Foundations for manufactured homes subject to subsection F, below, are permitted to be reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength.
C. Anchoring
All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring include, but are not limited to, use of over-thetop or frame ties to ground anchors. This anchoring requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for wind resistance.
D. Elevation
Manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved shall comply with subsection E or F, below, as applicable.
E. General Elevation Requirement
Unless subject to the requirements of subsection F, below, all manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located: (a) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (b) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (c) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or
(d) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall be elevated such
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 6 25
-
Article 6: Environmental Standards
Section 6.6 Floodplains
6.6.13 Recreational Vehicles and Park Trailers
that the bottom of the frame is at or above the elevation required, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (Zone A).
F. Elevation Requirement for Certain Existing Manufactured Home Parks and Subdivisions
Manufactured homes that are not subject to subsection E, above, including manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, unless on a site where substantial damage as result of flooding has occurred, shall be elevated such that either the:
1.
Bottom of the frame of the manufactured home is at or above the elevation required in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (Zone A); or
2.
Bottom of the frame is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are not less than 36 inches in height above grade.
G. Enclosures
Enclosed areas below elevated manufactured homes shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 for such enclosed areas.
H. Utility Equipment
Utility equipment that serves manufactured homes, including electric, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.
6.6.13. RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND PARK TRAILERS
A. Temporary Placement
Recreational vehicles and park trailers placed temporarily in flood hazard areas shall:
1.
Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or
2.
Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, which means the recreational vehicle or park model is on wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanent attachments such as additions, rooms, stairs, decks and porches.
B. Permanent Placement
Recreational vehicles and park trailers that do not meet the limitations in subsection A, above, for temporary placement shall meet the requirements of Sec. 6.6.12, Manufactured Homes.
6.6.14. TANKS
A. Underground Tanks
Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty.
Land Development Code Page 6 26 Apopka, FL
-
Article 6: Environmental Standards
Section 6.6 Floodplains
6.6.15 Other Development
B. Above-Ground Tanks, Not Elevated
Above-ground tanks that do not meet the elevation requirements of Sec. 6.6.14.C, Above-Ground Tanks, Elevated, shall be permitted in flood hazard areas provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty and the effects of flood-borne debris.
C. Above-Ground Tanks, Elevated
Above-ground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be elevated to or above the design flood elevation and attached to a supporting structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement during conditions of the design flood. Tank-supporting structures shall meet the foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area.
D. Tank Inlets and Vents
Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be:
1.
At or above the design flood elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tanks during conditions of the design flood; and
2.
Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood.
6.6.15. OTHER DEVELOPMENT
A. General Requirements for Other Development
All development, including man-made changes to improved or unimproved real estate for which specific provisions are not specified in this Section or the Florida Building Code, shall:
1.
Be located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
2.
Meet the limitations of Sec. 6.6.11.D, Limitations on Sites in Regulatory Floodways, if located in a regulated floodway;
3.
Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood;
4.
Be constructed of flood damage-resistant materials; and
5.
Have mechanical, plumbing, and electrical systems above the design flood elevation or meet the requirements of ASCE 24, except that minimum electric service required to address life safety and electric code requirements is permitted below the design flood elevation provided it conforms to the provisions of the electrical part of building code for wet locations.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 6 27
-
Article 6: Environmental Standards
Section 6.7 Stormwater Management Systems
6.7.1 General
B. Fences in Regulated Floodways
Fences in regulated floodways that have the potential to block the passage of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, shall meet the limitations of Sec. 6.6.11.D, Limitations on Sites in Regulatory Floodways.
C. Retaining Walls, Sidewalks, and Driveways in Regulated Floodways
Retaining walls and sidewalks and driveways that involve the placement of fill in regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of Sec. 6.6.11.D, Limitations on Sites in Regulatory Floodways.
D. Roads and Watercourse Crossings in Regulated Floodways
Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts, low-water crossings and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel from one side of a watercourse to the other side, that encroach into regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of Sec. 6.6.11.D, Limitations on Sites in Regulatory Floodways. Alteration of a watercourse that is part of a road or watercourse crossing shall meet the requirements of Sec. 6.6.5.C, Additional Analyses and Certifications.
Section 6.7. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
6.7.1. GENERAL
A. No drainage system, natural or manmade, shall be altered, designed, constructed, abandoned, restricted or removed without prior approval of the City and all appropriate State and federal agencies. Where any applicant proposes to construct any facility, the applicant must demonstrate that his project will not adversely impact drainage of any other landowner.
B. No subdivision shall be platted nor shall construction commence for any multifamily, commercial, industrial, or institutional development until the drainage design for such project is approved by the City Engineer. The drainage design plans and calculations for the project shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a registered professional engineer. The design shall equal or exceed the design standards in this section and the policies and procedures and design standards established by the SJRWMD, FDEP, and FDOT.
6.7.2. DESIGN BASE
All subdivisions, multifamily, and nonresidential projects must provide for retention and/or detention of stormwater runoff.
A. The postdevelopment peak rate of discharge shall not exceed the predevelopment peak rate of discharge for the 25-year, 24-hour storm.
B. Pollution abatement volume shall be in accordance with SJRWMD criteria.
C. Finished floor slab elevations of all habitable structures shall be constructed at least two feet above the 100-year storm elevation.
D. All drainage discharge structures and bleed-down devices shall be designed in accordance with SJRWMD criteria.
Land Development Code Page 6 28 Apopka, FL
-
Article 6: Environmental Standards
Section 6.7 Stormwater Management Systems
6.7.2 Design Base
E. The City shall receive a copy of the SJRWMD permit before the City grants an approval of final engineering plans.
F. The 25-year/24-hour rainfall amount of 8.6 inches and the 100-year/24-hours rainfall amount of 11.3 inches shall be used in runoff calculations.
G. All retention ponds and detention ponds shall be designed as dry bottom ponds unless otherwise approved by City Council.
H. Retention ponds and detention ponds shall meet the following requirements based on type:
1. Design criteria for pollution abatement utilizing retention or detention with filtration:
a.
The bottom of a required retention or detention with filtration pond shall be a minimum of three feet above the estimated seasonal high water table. Where this is not possible due to a high water table, underdrains shall be installed with a minimum invert elevation of one foot below the pond bottom, along the entire perimeter of the pond, unless a geotechnical engineer can show to the satisfaction of the City Engineer that a lesser amount of underdrain can adequately control the high water table.
b.
Final design seepage rates shall be determined by a geotechnical engineer. All necessary calculations to support the above shall be submitted to the City Engineer.
2. Design criteria of detention facilities to reduce peak rate of flow for a 25-year/24-hour storm event:
a.
The detention pond shall be sized to limit the peak rate of discharge from the developed site to that discharge generated prior to development. Supporting calculations shall be submitted and will contain, as a minimum, runoff hydrographs for the predeveloped site and the postdeveloped site, and a discharge hydrograph after routing through the proposed detention facility. All routing calculations to be submitted must consider the tailwater of the receiving facility. If the receiving facility is an existing storm sewer, the hydraulic gradient line elevation (HGL) of this receiving facility can be assumed at one-half foot below its gutter in elevation unless a detailed study of the existing system indicates otherwise.
b.
Credit for seepage to further reduce the peak rate of discharge will not be allowed unless accompanied by supporting documentation prepared by a geotechnical engineer.
c.
All detention ponds shall be dry within 72 hours following the storm event.
3. Design criteria where a positive outfall is not available:
a. When a positive outfall is not available for stormwater discharge, the on-site pond shall be designed to retain the 100-year storm event. The pond shall be designed to evacuate a daily volume equivalent to one inch of runoff from the total area contributing to the pond. The pond shall be dry within 11 days following the storm event. If geotechnical data certified by a geotechnical
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 6 29
-
Article 6: Environmental Standards
Section 6.7 Stormwater Management Systems
6.7.3 Soil Reports
engineer is submitted showing that an 11-day drawdown is impossible to achieve, City Council approval is required.
b.
When the project discharges to landlocked lakes that have no positive outfall which are adjacent to properties of one ownership, on-site detention ponds shall be designed to accommodate the pollution abatement volume as required by the SJRWMD from the developed site prior to discharge. At the request of the City Engineer, the certifying engineer may be required to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City Engineer any impact of runoff from the developed site upon the landlocked lake(s).
c.
When the project discharges to landlocked lakes that have no positive outfall which are adjacent to properties of more than one ownership, on-site detention ponds shall be designed to accommodate the 100-year/24-hours storm. Postdevelopment runoff rate and runoff volume shall not exceed predevelopment runoff rate and volume. The certifying engineering may be required at the request of the City Engineer to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City Engineer any impact of runoff from the developed site upon the landlocked lake(s).
6.7.3. SOIL REPORTS
Soils reports indicating high water table, permeability rate, and verifying the HSG classification of soils existing on the site and referenced in stormwater calculations shall be submitted to the City Engineer. Soils reports shall be prepared, signed, and sealed by a geotechnical engineer registered in the State of Florida.
6.7.4. SLOPES
A. Fencing for retention ponds and detention ponds shall be provided as follows:
1.
All retention ponds and detention ponds shall be fenced unless they can meet one of the following conditions identified in Table 6.7.4.A.1: Maximum Slope and Excavation Depth.
TABLE 6.7.4.A.1 : MAXIMUM SLOPE AND EXCAVATION DEPTH
MAXIMUM SIDE SLOPES
MAXIMUM EXCAVATION DEPTH (FEET)
2:1
2
3:1
3
5:1
5
6:1
-2.
All required fencing shall be of a decorative type and shall be in keeping with the required buffer treatments, character, and/or architecture of the project, if applicable. The requirements for the decorative elements of the fencing shall be determined on a case by case basis dependent upon the nature of the project. Recommendations shall be provided by the DRC, with a final determination to be made by the City Council. The DRC may make the final determination in reviewing applicable redevelopment
Land Development Code Page 6 30 Apopka, FL
-
Article 6: Environmental Standards
Section 6.7 Stormwater Management Systems
6.7.5 Development Within Special Flood Hazard Area (100-Year Flood)
plans. Chainlink and/or stockade fencing shall be prohibited, unless a waiver is
granted by City Council.
3. The fencing treatment selected shall provide adequate security to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the public. Evidence to this effect shall be provided with all stormwater plans.
B. Ponds shall be configured in a curvilinear manner.
C. Ponds constructed on slopes will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis.
D. The minimum bottom width and/or length of any pond shall be four feet.
E. All ponds shall have a minimum one foot of freeboard to the design high water resulting from the design storm.
F. The minimum width requirements for maintenance berms are as follows:
1.
Ponds with fencing: Ten feet around pond perimeter.
2.
Ponds without fencing: Five feet around pond perimeter.
6.7.5. DEVELOPMENT WITHIN SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (100-YEAR FLOOD)
All development within areas of special flood hazard as delineated on the official flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) shall comply with the following requirements:
A. Establish the 100-year Base Flood Elevation to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.
B. Finished floor slab elevations of all habitable structures shall be constructed at least two feet above the 100-year storm elevation.
C. Provide storage to compensate for all floodwater displaced by development from above the Estimated Seasonal High Groundwater Table to below the elevation of the base 100year flood.
6.7.6. STORM SEWER DESIGN
A. Design Discharges
Storm sewer system design shall be based upon a ten-year-frequency event. The system shall be designed to handle the flows from the contributory area within the proposed subdivision. Then, the system shall be analyzed a second time to insure that any off-site flows can also be accommodated. This second analysis shall consider the relative timing of the on-site and the off-site flows in determining the adequacy of the designed system.
B. Pipe Size
1.
The minimum size of pipe to be used in storm sewer systems is 15 inches.
2.
Designs shall be based upon six-inch increments in sizes above 18 inches.
3.
The maximum runs of pipe identified in Table: 6.7.6.B.3: Maximum Pipe Size and Run, shall be used when spacing access structures of any type.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 6 31
-
Article 6: Environmental Standards
Section 6.7 Stormwater Management Systems
6.7.7 Hydraulic Gradient Line Computations
TA
BLE
6
.7
.6
.B.3
:
MA
XIMUM PIPE SIZE AN
D R
UN
P
IPE SIZE (INCHES) MAXIMUM RUN (FEET)
15
200
18
300
24 to 36
400
42 and larger
500
C. Pipe Grade
All storm sewers shall be designed and constructed to produce a minimum velocity of 2.5 feet per second (fps) when flowing full. No storm sewer system or portion thereof shall be designed to produce velocities in excess of 20 fps for reinforced concrete pipe or ten fps for metal pipe, providing that the outlet ends have sufficient erosion protection and/or energy dissipaters.
D. Inlets
1.
Inlets, including manholes, must accept 100 percent of the runoff flow in the inlet’s direction.
2.
The maximum allowable gutter run is 1,200 feet for standard curb and gutter.
E. Design Tailwater
All storm sewer systems shall be designed taking into consideration the tailwater of the receiving facility. In the case where the detention pond is the receiving facility, the design tailwater level can be estimated from the information generated by routing through the pond the hydrograph resulting from a ten-year frequency storm of duration equal to that used in designing the pond. The design tailwater level can be assumed to be the ten-year pond level corresponding to the time at which peak inflow occurs from the storm sewer into the pond. In-lieu of the above detailed analysis, however, a simpler design tailwater estimate can be obtained by averaging the established 25-year design high-water elevation for the pond and the pond bottom elevation for "dry bottom" ponds or the normal water elevation for "wet bottom" ponds.
6.7.7. HYDRAULIC GRADIENT LINE COMPUTATIONS
A. General
1.
The hydraulic gradient line for the storm sewer system shall be computed taking into consideration the design tailwater on the system, and the energy losses associated with entrance into and exit from the system, friction through the system, and turbulence in the individual manholes, catchbasins, and junctions within the system.
2.
The energy losses associated with the turbulence in the individual manholes are minor for an open channel or gravity storm sewer system and can typically be overcome by adjusting (increasing) the upstream pipe invert elevation in a manhole by a small amount. However, the energy losses associated with the turbulence in the individual manholes can be significant for a pressure or surcharged storm sewer system and must be accounted for in establishing a reasonable hydraulic gradient line.
Land Development Code Page 6 32 Apopka, FL
-
Article 6: Environmental Standards
Section 6.7 Stormwater Management Systems
6.7.7 Hydraulic Gradient Line Computations
B. Design Storm Frequency
The design storm frequency to be utilized for the design of pavement drainage shall be as follows:
1.
Arterial streets: Ten-year, hydraulic gradient line, 1.0 feet below gutter line.
2.
Collector and local streets: Ten-year, hydraulic gradient line, 0.5 feet below gutter line.
.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 6 33

ConcurrencyManagement System (CMS)

Article 7
: Concurrency Management System
................................................
7-1
Section 7.1. Consistency and Concurrency Determinations
.................................................................
7-1
7.1.1.
Purpose
...............................................................................................................
7-1
7.1.2.
Consistency and Concurrency
............................................................................
7-1
7.1.3.
Exemptions
.........................................................................................................
7-1
7.1.4.
Change of Use
.....................................................................................................
7-2
7.1.5.
Level of Service (LOS) Standards
........................................................................
7-3
Section 7.2. Concurrency Administration
.............................................................................................
7-5
7.2.1.
Capacity Banks
....................................................................................................
7-5
Section 7.3. Concurrency Verification Letter
........................................................................................
7-8
7.3.1.
Purpose
...............................................................................................................
7-8
7.3.2.
Application
..........................................................................................................
7-8
7.3.3.
Processing
...........................................................................................................
7-9
7.3.4.
Content
...............................................................................................................
7-9
Section 7.4. Concurrency Encumbrance Letter (CEL)
............................................................................
7-9
7.4.1.
Purpose
...............................................................................................................
7-9
7.4.2.
Application for CEL
..............................................................................................
7-9
7.4.3.
Processing
.........................................................................................................
7-10
7.4.4.
Approval of Concurrency Encumbrance Letter
................................................
7-11
7.4.5.
Denial of concurrency Encumbrance Letter
.....................................................
7-12
Section 7.5. Concurrency Evaluation
...................................................................................................
7-13
7.5.1.
Requirement for Concurrency Evaluation
........................................................
7-13
7.5.2.
Burden of Showing Compliance on Applicant
..................................................
7-14
7.5.3.
Determination of Capacity
................................................................................
7-14
Section 7.6. Capacity Reservation Certificate (CRC)
............................................................................
7-16
7.6.1.
Purpose
.............................................................................................................
7-16
7.6.2.
Application
........................................................................................................
7-16
7.6.3.
Processing
.........................................................................................................
7-16
7.6.4.
Time Period
.......................................................................................................
7-16
7.6.5.
Time Extension
..................................................................................................
7-17
7.6.6.
Expiration
..........................................................................................................
7-17
7.6.7.
Transfer of Certificates
.....................................................................................
7-17
7.6.8.
Capacity Reservation Fees
................................................................................
7-17
Section 7.7. Concurrency Resolution Process
.....................................................................................
7-18
7.7.1.
Purpose
.............................................................................................................
7-18
7.7.2.
Applicability
......................................................................................................
7-18
7.7.3.
Review Process
.................................................................................................
7-18

-
Article 7: Concurrency Management System
Section 7.1 Consistency and Concurrency Determinations
7.1.1 Purpose
Article 7: Concurrency Management System
Section 7.1. CONSISTENCY AND CONCURRENCY DETERMINATIONS
7.1.1. PURPOSE
The purpose of this article is to implement the consistency and concurrency provisions of the comprehensive plan. No development order or permit which contains a specific plan of development, including densities and intensities of development, shall be issued except in accordance with this article. This article may be cited as the concurrency management system (CMS).
7.1.2. CONSISTENCY AND CONCURRENCY
A. All applications for development approval shall demonstrate that they are consistent with the comprehensive plan.
B. All applications for development approval shall demonstrate that the proposed development does not violate levels of service (LOS) adopted by the City.
C. The latest point at which concurrency is determined is prior to issuance of the final development order or prior to any City permit required to initiate development activities.
7.1.3. EXEMPTIONS
A. Vested Rights
Nothing in this LDC shall be construed or applied in such a way as to constitute a temporary or permanent taking of private property without compensation, or the abrogation of vested rights. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the party alleging vested rights to affirmatively demonstrate a claim of vested rights in accordance with Sec. 2.5.5.C, Vested Rights Determination.
B. De Minimus Development
Development or redevelopment which does not exceed the level of service (LOS) impacts identified in Table 7.1.3.B: De Minimus Development, shall be declared de minimus and shall not be required to demonstrate capacity availability in accordance with this article.
TABLE 7.1.3.B: DE MINIMUS DEVELOPMENT
FACILITY TYPE
LEVEL OF SERVICE IMPACT
Transportation
20 average daily trip ends; and
Potable water
678 gallons per day; and
Wastewater
308 gallons per day; and
Solid waste
11 pounds per day
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 7 1
-
Article 7: Concurrency Management System
Section 7.1 Consistency and Concurrency Determinations
7.1.4 Change of Use
7.1.4. CHANGE OF USE
A. Increased Impact on Public Facilities or Services
If a change of use increases the impact on public facilities and services, then a concurrency encumbrance letter (see Sec. 7.4, Concurrency Encumbrance Letter (CEL)) is required for the net increase in impact only. The applicant shall demonstrate by reasonably sufficient evidence that the previous use has been actively maintained on the site during one year prior to application for the concurrency evaluation (see Sec. 7.5, Concurrency Evaluation). Such evidence may include proof of utility records, records for the use shown, or other documentation. Occupational license issuance is not of itself substantial proof.
B. Decreased Impact on Public Facilities or Services
1.
If a change of use decreases the impact on public facilities and services, then no concurrency encumbrance letter is required. For the purpose of this subsection, "previous use" shall mean: (1) the use existing on the site when a concurrency evaluation is sought; or (2) the most recent use on the site, within one year prior to the application. If no use existed on the site for five years prior to the application, no credit shall be issued in accordance with this subsection. The applicant shall demonstrate by reasonably sufficient evidence that the previous use has been actively maintained on the site during one year prior to application for the concurrency evaluation. Such evidence may include proof of utility records, records for the use shown, or other documentation. Occupational license issuance is not of itself substantial proof.
2.
If a change of use decreases the impact on public facilities and services, then the Concurrency Management Official (CMO) shall issue a concurrency credit letter to the property owner within 30 days of the date of the concurrency evaluation. This letter shall provide that, if the less intense use is changed again to a more intense use within five years of the date of issuance of the letter, a credit shall be given for the original use and a concurrency encumbrance letter shall be required for only the net increase of the more intense use over the original use. Credit for the prior use shall not be transferable to another location.
C. Demolition
In the case of a demolition or termination of an existing use or structure, the concurrency evaluation for future redevelopment shall be based upon the net increase of the impact for the new or proposed use as compared to the land use existing prior to demolition, provided that such credit is utilized, through a concurrency encumbrance, within five years of the date of the issuance of the demolition permit. Credit for the prior use shall not be transferable to another location.
Land Development Code Page 7 2 Apopka, FL
-
Article 7: Concurrency Management System
Section 7.1 Consistency and Concurrency Determinations
7.1.5 Level of Service (LOS) Standards
7.1.5. LEVEL OF SERVICE (LOS) STANDARDS
A. General
1. Method of Evaluation
A capacity evaluation shall be required for each of the following six services in accordance with the procedures provided in this article and the performance standards listed below.
2. Official Source of Information
The City Engineer or CMO, as appointed by the Mayor, is designated as the administrative official responsible for evaluating whether development complies with the capacity requirements of this section and this article.
B. Transportation
Development shall not be approved unless there is sufficient available capacity to sustain the following levels of service (LOS) for transportation as established in the transportation element of the comprehensive plan:
1.
All development shall be required to demonstrate that the additional daily vehicle trip ends generated by such development would not cause any road segments within a one-mile diameter to exceed 100 percent of LOS capacity, as defined in the comprehensive plan. Affected road segments shall be determined by drawing a circle with a center point at the centerline of each development access point and a radius of 2,640 linear feet. Any arterial or collector intersection that is captured within this diameter shall be the starting point for a road segment that must be evaluated; except that any intersection which could not be reached by normal driving practices on a paved access from the development's access point may be excluded from evaluation.
2.
By January 1 of each year, the City shall complete a traffic count study, designed and administered by a Florida registered professional traffic engineer or transportation planner, to determine whether the City's road system is operating within the level of service (LOS) standards provided in the comprehensive plan. In the event any road segment is determined to be operating at a level exceeding 99 percent of capacity, then no additional development order shall be authorized which would impact such road segment until corrective action is taken to alleviate the strained capacity.
C. Drainage
Development shall not be approved unless there is sufficient available capacity to sustain the following levels of service (LOS) for drainage as established in the drainage subelement of the comprehensive plan. Adequate stormwater retention is provided as follows:
1. Where no positive outfall is available:
a.
On-site retention for the 100-year, 24-hour storm (10.6 inches of rainfall).
b.
Retention ponds shall be designed to percolate the total runoff volume within 11 days following the rainfall event.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 7 3
-
Article 7: Concurrency Management System
Section 7.1 Consistency and Concurrency Determinations
7.1.5 Level of Service (LOS) Standards
2.
When runoff is discharged to a landlocked lake with no positive outfall: on-site detention for the 25-year, 96-hour storm (12 inches of rainfall).
3.
When runoff is discharged to a positive outfall: on-site retention for the 25-year, 24hour storm (8.6 inches of rainfall)
D. Potable Water
Development shall not be approved unless there is sufficient available capacity to sustain the following levels of service (LOS) for potable water as established in the potable water subelement of the comprehensive plan:
1.
Adequate plant capacity exists, expressed in gallons per day (gpd).
2.
Adequate storage capacity exists, expressed in hours of fire flow plus necessary operational storage.
3.
Adequate distribution capacity is provided, expressed in pounds per square inch (psi), for both normal and emergency conditions.
E. Wastewater
Development served by public wastewater treatment shall not be approved unless there is sufficient available capacity to sustain the following levels of service (LOS) for wastewater as established in the wastewater subelement of the comprehensive plan:
1.
Adequate plant capacity exists, expressed in gallons per day (gpd).
2.
Adequate collection system capacity exists.
F. Solid Waste
Development shall not be approved unless there is sufficient available capacity to sustain the following levels of service for solid waste as established in the solid waste subelement of the comprehensive plan:
1.
Adequate disposal capacity exists, expressed in pounds per capita per day.
2.
Adequate collection capacity exists, expressed in tons per day (tpd).
G. Recreation and Open Space
Development shall not be approved unless the City's parks and recreation capital facilities fee is paid in accordance with the City Code of Ordinances, and the development complies with LOS standard established in the recreation and open space element of the comprehensive plan. The Parks and Recreation Director shall be responsible for ensuring that adequate facilities are constructed in accordance with the guidelines of the City's parks and recreation capital facilities fee ordinance.
H. Water for Fire Protection
Development shall not be approved unless there is sufficient and available water for fire protection. The amount of water for fire protection shall be determined by the Fire Chief or a designee, and shall be based on the guide for the determination of required fire flows per the insurance service office (See Fire Suppression Addition 6-80). Private wells will be allowed for common area irrigation only, and on a case-by-case basis when other sources are not feasible as determined by the DRC.
Land Development Code Page 7 4 Apopka, FL
-
Article 7: Concurrency Management System
Section 7.2 Concurrency Administration
7.2.1 Capacity Banks
Section 7.2. CONCURRENCY ADMINISTRATION
7.2.1. CAPACITY BANKS
A. Establishment
The following six capacity banks are hereby established, to be used by the CMO in the implementation of this article.
1.
Available capacity bank;
2.
Encumbered capacity bank;
3.
Reserved capacity bank;
4.
Permitted capacity bank;
5.
Vested capacity bank; and
6.
Committed capacity bank.
B. Purpose
The capacity banks allow capacity to be transferred among the various categories. "Contracted projects" can be added to system capacity in accordance with Policy 2.2 of the capital improvement element of the comprehensive plan. Capacity is withdrawn from the available capacity bank and deposited into an encumbered capacity bank when a concurrency encumbrance letter is issued, and then into the reserved bank when a capacity reservation certificate is issued, and is transferred to the permitted capacity bank when a building permit is issued. Each of the six capacity banks will experience deposits and withdrawals on a regular basis. The available capacity bank shall be adjusted whenever the City's actual capacity demand is recalculated. The permitted capacity bank shall also be adjusted commensurate with the certificates of occupancy issued since the last actual capacity update. Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 7 5
-
Article 7: Concurrency Management System
Section 7.2 Concurrency Administration
7.2.1 Capacity Banks
C. Monitoring of Available Capacity
1. The CMO shall maintain and continuously update records sufficient to monitor the available system capacity. For purposes of measuring capacity, the following common features shall be used:
a. Number of Households
The number of households shall be calculated by adding the number of single-family detached dwellings and the number of dwelling units within all other residential or mixed-use structures located within the City as of December 31, 1991, as demonstrated in the Orange County property appraiser's files. This number shall be increased by one for every dwelling unit for which a Certificate of Occupancy is issued, or that is annexed into the City. Conversely, this number shall be decreased by one for every dwelling unit that is demolished or that is deannexed from the City.
b. Estimated City Population
The estimated City population shall be calculated by multiplying the appropriate number of households (as determined above) by the corresponding population multiplier provided in the comprehensive plan for the respective year (e.g., 2.06 in 1992) or as amended.
c. Nonresidential Conversion
Conversion of nonresidential measurement standards to equivalent residential units shall be done in accordance with the appropriate impact fee or other established conversion method. Where no such method exists, the square footage of floorspace shall be used. The CMO shall be responsible for determining the total nonresidential square footage as of December 31, 1991 and for adding (or subtracting) new floor square footage as required by issuance of certificates of occupancy, demolition, annexation or deannexation.
2. In addition, the CMO shall periodically, but at least monthly, update the following data records.
a. Additional instructions for building permits data records
The columns for the number of building permits issued and the respective units or floor square footage shall be:
1.
Carried over: equal to the active value for the last reporting period;
2.
Issued: equal the value corresponding to permits issued during the report period;
3.
Expired: equal the value corresponding to permits which expired during the reporting period because construction was not initiated;
4.
Certificate of occupancy: equal the value corresponding to permits which received a certificate of occupancy during the reporting period; and
5.
Active: equal the value corresponding to permits that have been issued but not CO'd or expired.
Land Development Code Page 7 6 Apopka, FL
-
Article 7: Concurrency Management System
Section 7.2 Concurrency Administration
7.2.1 Capacity Banks
b. Building permits—Total
Carried Over + Issued -Expired -CO'd = Active
1.
Single-family detached, number of dwellings;
2.
All other residential or mixed use buildings, number of dwelling units ; and
3.
Nonresidential square feet of floorspace.
c. Building permits—Pursuant to development orders prior to this LDC
Carried Over + Issued -Expired -CO'd = Active
1.
Single-family detached , number of dwellings;
2.
All other residential or mixed use buildings, number of dwelling units ; and
3.
Nonresidential square feet of floorspace.
d.
Preliminary development orders:
1.
Valid development orders from previous years;
2.
Valid development orders issued during the report period;
3.
Development orders that obtained a final development orders during the report period;
4.
Development orders expired without obtaining a final development orders during the report period; and
5.
Phases and quantity of development represented by the outstanding development orders.
e.
Final development orders:
1.
Active development orders from previous years;
2.
New development orders issued during the report period;
3.
Development orders completed during the report period;
4.
Development orders with active construction during the report period;
5.
Development orders expired without initiating construction during the report period; and
6.
Phases and quantity of development represented by the outstanding development orders.
f.
Capacity evaluation:
1.
Total system capacity;
2.
Additional capacity allowed for projects under contract;
3.
Current actual capacity demand;
4.
Current vested capacity;
5.
Current committed capacity;
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 7 7
-
Article 7: Concurrency Management System
Section 7.3 Concurrency Verification Letter
7.3.1 Purpose
6.
Current permitted capacity;
7.
Current reserved capacity;
8.
Current encumbered capacity; and
9.
Current available capacity.
D. Consistency with Capital Improvement Plan
1.
By April 1 of each year, beginning in 1993, the CMO shall complete an annual capacity report for the fiscal year ending September 30. This report shall summarize the development activity, provide the actual capacity demand on the city's facilities and services, and summarize the data that is monitored.
2.
The concurrency management system's annual report shall constitute prima facie evidence of the capacity and levels of service (LOS) of public facilities for the purpose of issuing development orders during the 12 months following completion of the annual report.
3.
Based upon the analysis included in the annual capacity availability report, the CMO shall recommend to the Planning Commission and City Council, each year, any necessary amendments to the capital improvement element and any proposed amendments to the comprehensive plan. The CMO shall report to the Planning Commission the status of all capacity banks once during the year, when public hearings for comprehensive plan amendments are heard.
Section 7.3. CONCURRENCY VERIFICATION LETTER
7.3.1. PURPOSE
A concurrency verification letter is a "snapshot" of available capacity for each public facility at the time the letter is issued and does not guarantee capacity in the future or encumber capacity for any period of time.
7.3.2. APPLICATION
An application for a concurrency verification letter shall be submitted to the CMO and accompanied with a fee, which shall be set by City Council from time to time. In the event that a concurrency verification letter and a concurrency encumbrance letter are requested simultaneously, the concurrency verification letter fee shall be waived. Any applicant seeking a concurrency verification letter shall submit the following information to the CMO, on a form prescribed by the CMO. No such application shall be deemed accepted until it is complete.
A. Date of submittal;
B. Applicant's name, address and telephone number;
C. Parcel I.D. number and legal description;
D. Proposed use(s) by land use category, square feet, and number of units;
E. Phasing information by proposed uses, square feet and number of units, if applicable;
F. Existing use of property;
Land Development Code Page 7 8 Apopka, FL
-
Article 7: Concurrency Management System
Section 7.4 Concurrency Encumbrance Letter (CEL)
7.3.3 Processing
G. Acreage of property;
H. Name of DRI, PD, subdivision, office park, development, etc.;
I. Site design information, if applicable;
J. Analysis of impacts on each service;
K. Written consent of the property owner, if different from applicant.
7.3.3. PROCESSING
Upon receipt of an application, [and] sufficient information required to process this application for a concurrency verification letter, the CMO shall conduct a concurrency evaluation in accordance with this article. If a written request is provided, the CMO shall issue the concurrency verification letter, or notice of capacity deficiencies.
7.3.4. CONTENT
At a minimum, the concurrency verification letter shall contain the following:
A. Date of issuance;
B. Applicant's name, address and telephone number;
C. Parcel I.D. number and legal description;
D. Proposed use(s) by land use category, square feet and number of units;
E. Phasing information by proposed uses, square feet and number of units, if applicable;
F. Total current available capacity within the service area(s) at the time the letter was issued;
G. Project impact based on level of service (LOS) standards; and
H. Name of development.
Section 7.4. CONCURRENCY ENCUMBRANCE LETTER (CEL)
7.4.1. PURPOSE
A concurrency encumbrance letter (CEL) is a determination by the CMO that, for a particular parcel, given a specific proposed development density or intensity and based on the timing of development by phase and year, a concurrency evaluation indicates that the proposed development will be concurrent at the time the CEL is issued and that the CMO has encumbered the requested public facility or service capacity as a prerequisite to a capacity reservation certificate. In no event shall an applicant encumber a greater amount of capacity than that necessary to serve the maximum amount of development permitted on the site under its current future land use and zoning density/intensity classification.
7.4.2. APPLICATION FOR CEL
An application for a CEL shall be accompanied with a CEL fee, which shall be set by City Council from time to time. Any applicant seeking a CEL shall submit the following
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 7 9
-
Article 7: Concurrency Management System
Section 7.4 Concurrency Encumbrance Letter (CEL)
7.4.3 Processing
information to the CMO, on a form prescribed by the CMO. No such application shall be deemed accepted until it is complete.
A. Date of submittal.
B. Property owner's name, address and telephone number.
C. Applicant's name, address and telephone number.
D. Parcel I.D. number and legal description.
E. Proposed use(s) by land use category, square feet and number of units.
F. Phasing information by proposed uses, square feet and number of units, if applicable.
G. Existing use of property.
H. Acreage of property.
I. Name of DRI, PD, subdivision, office park, etc.
J. Site design information, if applicable.
K. Written consent of the property owner, if different from applicant.
L. Whether applicant will seek to reserve capacity for each service or to obtain a building permit during the encumbrance period and proposed length of reservation, if applicable.
M. Proposed allocation of capacity for each service by legal description, if applicable.
7.4.3. PROCESSING
Upon receipt of an application with sufficient information required to process the application for a CEL, the CMO shall conduct a concurrency evaluation in accordance with this article. The CMO shall issue the CEL, or concurrency denial letter, according to the following capacity evaluation flowchart:
Land Development Code Page 7 10 Apopka, FL
-
Article 7: Concurrency Management System
Section 7.4 Concurrency Encumbrance Letter (CEL)
7.4.4 Approval of Concurrency Encumbrance Letter
7.4.4. APPROVAL OF CONCURRENCY ENCUMBRANCE LETTER
A. Issuance of CEL
If the CMO determines that all public facilities and services are concurrent, concurrent with conditions, or are presumed to be concurrent in accordance with to other sections of this article, then a CEL shall be issued. A CEL shall be valid for 90 days from the date of the letter, referred to as the encumbrance period, and shall expire at the end of the encumbrance period unless the applicant obtains a capacity reservation certificate or is issued a building permit within the encumbrance period.
B. Content
The CEL shall advise the applicant that capacity is available for reservation or for issuance of a building permit. The date issued shall be deemed to be the date on the CEL. If the applicant seeks a reservation during the encumbrance period, capacity shall only be encumbered in accordance with Sec. 7.6 Capacity Reservation Certificate (CRC). At a minimum, the CEL shall include:
1.
Date of issuance;
2.
Property owner's name, address and telephone number;
3.
Applicant's name, address and telephone number;
4.
Parcel I.D. number and legal description;
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 7 11
-
Article 7: Concurrency Management System
Section 7.4 Concurrency Encumbrance Letter (CEL)
7.4.5 Denial of concurrency Encumbrance Letter
5.
Proposed use(s) by land use category, square feet and number of units;
6.
Phasing information by proposed uses, square feet, and number of units, if applicable;
7.
Capacity reserved for a specific period of time; and
8.
Date upon which the CEL shall expire, unless the encumbered capacity is reserved or a building permit is issued prior to the CEL's expiration.
C. Preservation of Encumbered Capacity
1.
If a capacity reservation certificate is issued within the encumbrance period and the capacity encumbered is greater than the capacity reserved, the excess encumbered capacity shall revert to the available capacity bank on the date the capacity reservation certificate is issued. If a building permit is issued within the encumbrance period and the capacity encumbered is greater than the capacity committed to the building permit, the excess encumbered capacity shall revert to the available capacity bank on the date the building permit is issued.
2.
When a valid capacity reservation certificate is issued for a project using encumbered capacity, that capacity shall become reserved capacity and shall not be recaptured unless the capacity reservation certificate lapses or expires without issuance of a valid building permit. When a valid building permit is issued for a project using encumbered capacity, that capacity shall become permitted capacity and shall not be recaptured unless the building permit lapses or expires without issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
D. Transfer of Encumbered Capacity
Encumbered capacity shall not be transferred to property not included in the legal description provided by the applicant in the application for the concurrency encumbrance letter. During the encumbrance period, however, an applicant for a building permit or capacity reservation certificate may designate the amount of capacity allocated to portions of the property (e.g., lots, blocks, parcels, or tracts) included in the application.
E. Expiration of Encumbered Capacity
If the CEL expires prior to issuance of a building permit or capacity reservation certificate using the encumbered capacity, the capacity shall revert to the available capacity bank. The applicant may apply for a new CEL. However, a succeeding CEL shall not be issued sooner than three months following the expiration date of the last CEL for the same property.
7.4.5. DENIAL OF CONCURRENCY ENCUMBRANCE LETTER
A. Denial of CEL
If the CMO determines that one or more public facilities or services are not concurrent, the CMO shall issue a concurrency encumbrance denial letter, which shall advise the applicant that capacity is not available for one or more public facilities or services. The applicant shall have 15 days to apply for inclusion on the capacity waiting list for the concurrency resolution process. If the applicant is not the property owner, a copy of the
Land Development Code Page 7 12 Apopka, FL
-
Article 7: Concurrency Management System
Section 7.5 Concurrency Evaluation
7.5.1 Requirement for Concurrency Evaluation
denial letter shall also be sent to the property owner. At a minimum, the denial letter shall include:
1.
Date of denial;
2.
Property owner's name, address and telephone number;
3.
Applicant's name, address and telephone number;
4.
Parcel I.D. number and legal description;
5.
Proposed use(s) by land use category, square feet, and number of units;
6.
Public services or facilities determined not to be concurrent, including the level of the deficiency, if known;
7.
Status of any applicable waiting lists; and
8.
Options available to the applicant, including but not limited to entering a waiting list for capacity.
B. Capacity Waiting List
Applicants who receive a capacity encumbrance denial letter due to insufficient capacity may elect to be placed on the capacity waiting list. Projects on the list shall be notified of capacity as it becomes available on a "first come, first served" basis. If the available capacity is insufficient to accommodate the project as a whole, the CMO shall offer the available capacity to the applicant. The applicant may reserve the available capacity and remain in place on the waiting list and continue waiting for additional capacity, or reject the offer, and the available capacity shall be offered to the next applicant on the waiting list. Once an offer is made, the applicant must obtain a capacity reservation certificate within 30 days from notification of capacity availability, which shall be measured from the date on of the offer of capacity. Rejection of or failure to obtain a capacity reservation certificate within 30 days shall result in removal from the waiting list.
Section 7.5. CONCURRENCY EVALUATION
7.5.1. REQUIREMENT FOR CONCURRENCY EVALUATION
The CMO shall use the standards and requirements set forth in this section to conduct a concurrency evaluation prior to issuance of a concurrency verification letter or concurrency encumbrance letter. In addition, the CMO may also use the standards set forth in any Florida statutes or rules regarding concurrency which may be established from time to time. In cases where level of service (LOS) standards do not apply, the CMO shall have the authority to utilize other factors in preparing concurrency evaluations, to include, but not be limited to, independent LOS analysis. Example: outside consultants.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 7 13
-
Article 7: Concurrency Management System
Section 7.5 Concurrency Evaluation
7.5.2 Burden of Showing Compliance on Applicant
A. No concurrency verification letter or concurrency encumbrance letter shall be issued except after a concurrency evaluation in accordance with this section, which indicates that capacity is available in all applicable public facilities and services.
B. A concurrency evaluation shall be required as part of any application for a preliminary or final development plan.
C. A concurrency verification letter shall be required as a part of any application for a zoning map amendment or comprehensive plan amendment which, if approved, would increase the intensity or density of development permitted. As part of that concurrency evaluation, the CMO shall determine whether capacity is available to serve both the density and intensity of the development which would result from the change. The concurrency evaluation shall be submitted as part of the staff analysis to the Planning Commission and shall be considered in determining the appropriateness of the zoning map amendment or comprehensive plan amendment.
7.5.2. BURDEN OF SHOWING COMPLIANCE ON APPLICANT
The burden of showing compliance with these level of service (LOS) requirements is upon the applicant. Applications for development approval shall provide sufficient information showing compliance with these standards.
7.5.3. DETERMINATION OF CAPACITY
A concurrency evaluation for transportation, drainage, potable water, fire flows, wastewater, solid waste, and recreation and open space shall be required prior to issuance of a concurrency verification letter or concurrency encumbrance letter. The LOS standards required by this article shall be implemented, and concurrency evaluation for provision of these services shall be conducted, through application of performance standards established by the CMO. These standards shall include the following information:
A. Total capacity of existing facilities.
B. Total capacity of new facilities, if any, that will be available on or before the date of occupancy of the development. The capacity of new facilities may be counted only if one or more of the following is shown:
1.
The City of Apopka shall establish a development permit management system which ensures that minimum levels of service (LOS) are maintained.
2.
Concurrency determination shall be made prior to issuance of a final development order which shall be defined as the last order or approval in the city's development permitting process which issues a building permit, zoning permit, subdivision approval, rezoning, certificate of occupancy, special exception, variance or any other official action of the city having the effect of permitting the development as defined by Ch. 380, Fla. Stat.
3.
Projects which have received a final development order must initiate construction within 18 months and be at least substantially completed within 36 months, unless there is an executed developer's agreement which provides otherwise.
4.
Projects which have been approved for construction (i.e., obtained final engineering approval and obtained required DEP permits) and projects within the scheduled
Land Development Code Page 7 14 Apopka, FL
-
Article 7: Concurrency Management System
Section 7.5 Concurrency Evaluation
7.5.3 Determination of Capacity
review process for approval of construction plans at the time this comprehensive plan is adopted will be considered to have vested rights providing that construction occurs within the allowable time periods as currently described through the developer's agreement or this LDC.
5.
The capacity needed to accommodate development orders issued in accordance with Policy 2.5 or Policy 3.14 of the Future Land Use Element of the comprehensive plan shall be reserved from the capacity available for future development proposals.
6.
Upon adoption of this plan, the City shall require all development to bear a fair, equitable and proportionate share of facility improvements required to maintain the level of service (LOS) standards.
7.
All new developments will be assessed a pro rata share of the costs necessary to ensure the public facility improvements generated are available at the time the impacts of the development occur.
8.
The City shall reevaluate impact fees at least every five years to ensure the rates are consistent with the required construction costs for public facility needs generated by new development.
9.
Policy 3.8.1 of the drainage subelement of the comprehensive plan shall be Policy 3.3 of the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan.
10.
The City shall evaluate the need for additional fees for public facility needs generated by new development at least every five years. Such new fees shall require review by the Citizens Advisory Committee and at least one public hearing by the Local Planning Agency (the Planning Commission), before the additional fees are adopted by the City.
11.
The City will accept dedications, or construction in-lieu of, as an alternative to the payment of all, or a portion of, any required fees provided there is an executed developer's agreement.
12.
The City will at least annually establish financial indicators in order to ensure the ability to fund the City's share of needed improvements is within acceptable limits.
13.
The following debt service indicators will be monitored by the Finance Department and reviewed annually:
a.
The ratio of total debt service to total revenue shall not exceed 1:2.0.
b.
The ratio of total capital indebtedness to property tax shall not exceed 1:250.
14.
In no case shall the City incur debt for those capital facilities which exceed the capacity to issue bonds or other financial mechanisms as determined in part by the indicators described in Policy 4.1 of the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan.
C. Existing level of service (LOS) standards.
D. Reserved capacity.
E. Projected demand for the proposed development.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 7 15
-
Article 7: Concurrency Management System
Section 7.6 Capacity Reservation Certificate (CRC)
7.6.1 Purpose
Section 7.6. CAPACITY RESERVATION CERTIFICATE (CRC)
7.6.1. PURPOSE
The purpose of the capacity reservation certificate (CRC) is to allow property owners and developers to ensure that capacity is available when it is needed for a particular project, and to provide a high degree of certainty during the construction financing process.
7.6.2. APPLICATION
An application for a CRC shall be submitted and accompanied with a valid concurrency encumbrance letter and a reservation fee to the CMO. The application shall include the following:
A. Date of request.
B. Property owner's name, address and telephone number.
C. Applicant's name, address and telephone number.
D. Parcel I.D. number and legal description.
E. Proposed use(s) by land use category, square feet and number of units.
F. Phasing information by proposed uses, square feet and number of units, if applicable.
G. Existing use of property.
H. Acreage of property.
I. Name of DRI, PD, subdivision, office park, etc.
J. Site design information, if applicable.
K. Written consent of the property owner, if different from applicant.
L. Copy of a valid concurrency encumbrance letter.
M. The reservation period requested.
N. Allocation of capacity, by legal description, if applicable.
7.6.3. PROCESSING
Within 20 working days of the receipt of a complete application for a CRC, accompanied by a valid concurrency encumbrance letter and the applicable fee, the CMO shall issue a CRC. The CRC shall describe the amount and length of time the capacity shall be reserved. Upon issuance of the CRC, the CMO shall transfer the requested capacity from the encumbered capacity bank to the reserved capacity bank.
7.6.4. TIME PERIOD
The CRC shall allow the applicant to reserve infrastructure capacity for up to three years. Reservations may be made for one, two, or three years.
Land Development Code Page 7 16 Apopka, FL
-
Article 7: Concurrency Management System
Section 7.6 Capacity Reservation Certificate (CRC)
7.6.5 Time Extension
7.6.5. TIME EXTENSION
Up to 30 days before the expiration date of the CRC, the applicant may request an extension, not to exceed 12 months. The extension shall not exceed the three-year total reservation established above. Any extension shall be contingent upon payment of an additional reservation fee, equivalent to ten percent of all applicable impact fees. The CMO shall determine whether the extension is warranted, based on the following criteria:
A. Size of the project and the amount of capacity requested. A limit may be put on the amount of capacity that may be extended;
B. Phasing;
C. Location of the project;
D. Capacity availability within the service area;
E. Reasons for requesting the reservation extension; and
F. Whether the developer exercised good faith in attempting to acquire a building permit.
Any unused capacity for a specific yearly timeframe may be carried forward into the next yearly timeframe. No unused capacity may be carried forward beyond the duration of the certificate or any subsequent extension.
7.6.6. EXPIRATION
Upon expiration of the timeframe set forth in the CRC, if a building permit was not obtained within the reservation period, the CMO shall notify the applicant, by certified U.S. mail, return receipt, that the capacity has been recovered by the City and transferred from the reserved capacity bank to the available capacity bank.
7.6.7. TRANSFER OF CERTIFICATES
All certificates continue to be valid for the specific property described in the original application. Capacity may be reassigned or allocated within the boundaries of the original reservation certificate by application to the CMO. At no time may capacity or any certificate be sold or transferred to another party or entity without the real property described in the original application.
7.6.8. CAPACITY RESERVATION FEES
A. General
1. A capacity reservation fee shall be required for transportation, water, wastewater, solid waste, drainage, police, fire, and recreation and open space. A reservation fee equal to ten percent of all applicable impact fees shall be required to reserve capacity for one year, 20 percent for two years, and 30 percent for three years. The applicant shall be required to pay the reservation fee as a condition of capacity reservation. The applicant shall have 90 days from issuance of a concurrency encumbrance letter to remit the fee. Failure to make payment within this timeframe shall be deemed to be a withdrawal of the application for CRC and the CMO shall remove the encumbered capacity from the encumbered capacity bank.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 7 17
-
Article 7: Concurrency Management System
Section 7.7 Concurrency Resolution Process
7.7.1 Purpose
2. The applicant shall be required to pay the remaining impact fees in accordance with the impact fee schedule in effect at the time the permit is issued. The value of payment of the capacity reservation fee shall be counted toward applicable impact fee payment schedules. Payment of all impact fees due shall be a condition for issuance of a building permit.
B. Refund of Reservation Fee
Reservation fees shall be refundable, subject to a charge for administrative costs and as set forth in this subsection. The city shall refund 90 percent of the reservation fee. Refunds shall be granted only to the extent that new reservation fees are received by the city to refund the canceled or expired CRC. Those applicants awaiting refunds shall be placed on a list and their fees refunded on a first come, first served basis.
Section 7.7. CONCURRENCY RESOLUTION PROCESS
7.7.1. PURPOSE
The resolution process is intended to identify options available to the City and applicant in mitigating impacts on public facilities and services, after the issuance of a concurrency encumbrance denial letter, or when the public facilities and services are not available.
7.7.2. APPLICABILITY
The procedures described in this section shall apply when:
A. A concurrency encumbrance denial letter has been issued pursuant to this article; or
B. The city's annual traffic count study indicates that a portion of the future traffic circulation network, as adopted in the city's comprehensive plan, exceeds allowable capacity.
C. The annual capacity report indicates that any public facility or service is not available to serve the proposed development.
7.7.3. REVIEW PROCESS
A. Application Submission
1.
The applicant shall submit to the CMO an application and fee which conforms to the submittal requirements, in five copies. No application shall be deemed accepted unless it is complete.
2.
Along with a concurrency resolution agreement application, the applicant shall submit all information required as part of an application for a concurrency encumbrance letter, as well as the following:
Land Development Code Page 7 18 Apopka, FL
-
Article 7: Concurrency Management System
Section 7.7 Concurrency Resolution Process
7.7.3 Review Process
a.
Recent plat of survey.
b.
Preliminary development plan, prepared in accordance with the requirements of this code, when required by the Director.
c.
Consent to agents. If title to the property is not in the applicant's name and the property owner does not sign the application, one of the following must be submitted:
1.
Documents signifying the owner's approval or consent; or
2.
Applicant's affidavit.
d. Determination of Completeness
The CMO shall review each application for a concurrency resolution agreement and, within 30 days of the date the application is submitted, shall determine whether the application is sufficient. No application shall be deemed to be sufficient unless it contains all information which, in the professional judgment of the CMO, is reasonably necessary to evaluate the impacts of the proposed development on public facilities and services. Within the 30-day period set out above, the CMO shall notify the applicant that: (a) the application is sufficient of [or] (b) that the application is insufficient and that additional information is required, which may include, but is not limited to, a traffic study. When additional information is required, the applicant and the CMO shall agree on a timeframe for its submittal, based on the complexity of the information required. Failure to submit the required information in accordance with that schedule shall result in denial of the concurrency resolution application.
B. Concurrency Management Official
When the CMO deems the application complete, the application shall be evaluated within 45 days in accordance with this part and the CMO shall determine whether the development, as proposed or with conditions, would degrade the LOS set forth in this article. If such development can be approved or approved with conditions, the CMO shall, within the 45-day period set forth above, issue a concurrency resolution offer to the applicant, which at a minimum shall contain all information contained in a concurrency encumbrance letter and any conditions deemed necessary in order to approve the development. The letter shall specify that the applicant shall have 30 days to either accept the offer or to appeal the conditions to the Mayor or a designee, in accordance with this article. If the applicant accepts the offer, the CMO and the applicant shall agree, in writing, on a timeframe for preparation of a concurrency resolution agreement. This timeframe shall be no less than 30 days and no more than 120 days. After the concurrency resolution agreement is executed by the applicant, the CMO shall schedule the agreement for the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting. No such agreement shall be effective until approved by the City Council.
C. City Council Review and Conditions
1. Based on the application, and the requirements of this article, the City Council shall approve, approve with conditions in conformance with Sec. 7.7.3.C.2, or deny the application and agreement. Following approval of the agreement by City Council, the
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 7 19
-
Article 7: Concurrency Management System
Section 7.7 Concurrency Resolution Process
7.7.3 Review Process
agreement shall be recorded in the public records of Orange County at the expense of the applicant.
2. When the City Council approves a concurrency resolution agreement, they may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the intent and provisions of this article, including but not limited to any of the following:
a.
Limit the manner in which the use is conducted, including restricting the density and intensity of the use;
b.
Limit the height, size, location, density, or intensity of a building or other structure;
c.
Phasing;
d.
Designate the size, number, location, or nature of vehicle access points;
e.
Increase the amount of street dedication, roadway width, or require construction of road improvements within the street right-of-way;
f.
Protect existing trees, vegetation, water resources, wildlife habitat, or other significant natural resources; and
g.
Specify other conditions to permit development of the City in conformity with the intent and purposes of this article and the comprehensive plan.
3.
Violation of such conditions and safeguards as in Sec. 7.7.3.C.2, when made part of the terms under which a concurrency encumbrance is approved, shall be deemed a violation of this article, and is subject to enforcement in accordance with Article 9: Enforcement.
4.
Approval of the concurrency resolution agreement shall give the applicant authority to submit an application for a concurrency encumbrance letter. This application must be submitted within six months of approval of the concurrency resolution agreement, or the agreement shall expire and the capacity shall be transferred to the available capacity bank.
5.
A concurrency resolution agreement shall be approved only on the basis of the development plan and other information submitted with the application, and shall be valid only for the location and area shown on the application.
Land Development Code Page 7 20 Apopka, FL
Nonconformities

Article 8
: Nonconformities
............................................................................
8-1
Section 8.1. General Applicability
.........................................................................................................
8-1
8.1.1.
Purpose and Scope
.............................................................................................
8-1
8.1.2.
Authority to Continue
.........................................................................................
8-1
8.1.3.
Determination of Nonconformity Status
............................................................
8-1
8.1.4.
Minor Repairs and Maintenance
........................................................................
8-1
8.1.5.
Change of Tenancy or Ownership
.......................................................................
8-1
Section 8.2. Nonconforming Uses
.........................................................................................................
8-2
8.2.1.
General
................................................................................................................
8-2
8.2.2.
Extension, Expansion, or Relocation
...................................................................
8-2
8.2.3.
Change in Use
.....................................................................................................
8-2
8.2.4.
Discontinuance or Abandonment of Nonconforming Use
.................................
8-2
8.2.5.
Structures Used for Nonconforming Use
............................................................
8-2
Section 8.3. Nonconforming Structures
................................................................................................
8-3
8.3.1.
General
................................................................................................................
8-3
8.3.2.
Relationship with Conforming and Nonconforming Uses
..................................
8-3
8.3.3.
Enlargement or Alteration
..................................................................................
8-3
8.3.4.
Relocation
...........................................................................................................
8-4
8.3.5.
Reconstruction or Repair after Casualty Damage
...............................................
8-4
Section 8.4. Nonconforming Lots of Record
.........................................................................................
8-5
8.4.1.
General
................................................................................................................
8-5
8.4.2.
Structures on Nonconforming Lots
.....................................................................
8-5
8.4.3.
Combination of Lots to Eliminate Nonconformity
..............................................
8-5
8.4.4.
Governmental Acquisition of a Portion of Lot
....................................................
8-5
Section 8.5. Nonconforming Signs
........................................................................................................
8-5
8.5.1.
General
................................................................................................................
8-5
8.5.2.
Exemptions
.........................................................................................................
8-5
8.5.3.
Enlargement or Alteration
..................................................................................
8-5
8.5.4.
Reconstruction or Repair after Damage
.............................................................
8-6
8.5.5.
Abandonment or Discontinuance of a Sign
........................................................
8-6
8.5.6.
Nonconforming Signs Along Federal Highways
..................................................
8-6
Section 8.6. Nonconforming Site Features
............................................................................................
8-6
8.6.1.
Purpose
...............................................................................................................
8-6
8.6.2.
Applicability
........................................................................................................
8-6
8.6.3.
Interior and Exterior Remodeling of Structures
.................................................
8-7
8.6.4.
Compliance to Maximum Extent Practicable on Constrained Properties
..........
8-9

-
Article 8: Nonconformities
Section 8.1 General Applicability
8.1.1 Purpose and Scope
Article 8: Nonconformities
Section 8.1. GENERAL APPLICABILITY
8.1.1. PURPOSE AND SCOPE
A. In this LDC there exist uses of land, structures, lots of record, signs, and site features that were lawfully established before the LDC was adopted or amended, that do not conform to its terms and requirements. It is the general policy of the City to allow such uses, structures, lots of record, signs, and site features to continue to exist. It also is the policy of the City to bring as many of these nonconformities into conformance with this LDC as is reasonably practicable, subject to the requirements of this article.
B. The purpose and intent of this article is to recognize the interests of the landowner in continuing to use the land, but to preclude the expansion of a nonconformity or reestablishment of a discontinued or substantially destroyed nonconformity unless allowing such expansion or reestablishment can serve as an incentive to achievement of even greater public benefit.
8.1.2. AUTHORITY TO CONTINUE
Nonconformities are allowed to continue, and are encouraged to receive routine maintenance in accordance with the requirements of this article as a means of preserving safety and appearance.
8.1.3. DETERMINATION OF NONCONFORMITY STATUS
In all cases, the burden of establishing that a nonconformity lawfully exists shall be the responsibility of the owner of the land on which the nonconformity is located.
8.1.4. MINOR REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE
Minor repairs and normal maintenance that are required to keep nonconforming uses, structures, lots of record, signs, and site features in a safe condition are permitted. For the purposes of this subsection "minor repair or normal maintenance" means:
A. Repairs that are necessary to maintain a nonconforming use, structure, lot of record, sign, or site feature in a safe condition; and
B. Maintenance of land areas to protect against health hazards and promote the safety of surrounding uses.
8.1.5. CHANGE OF TENANCY OR OWNERSHIP
No change of title or possession or right to possession of land involved shall be construed to prevent the continuance of such nonconformity.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 8 1
-
Article 8: Nonconformities
Section 8.2 Nonconforming Uses
8.2.1 General
Section 8.2. NONCONFORMING USES
8.2.1. GENERAL
Nonconforming uses are declared generally incompatible with the permitted uses in the zoning district in which they are located and with the provisions of this LDC. Nonconforming uses shall be subject to the standards in this section.
8.2.2. EXTENSION, EXPANSION, OR RELOCATION
A nonconforming use shall not be extended, expanded, or moved to occupy a different area of a structure or lot, except an existing nonconforming use may extend into any portion of a structure that was clearly designed or arranged for the particular use when the use became nonconforming.
8.2.3. CHANGE IN USE
A. An existing nonconforming use may be converted to another nonconforming use, subject to approval of a special exception permit (see Sec. 2.5.1.G, Special Exception Permit) with the following additional findings:
1.
The new nonconforming use is a permitted use in a more restrictive zoning district; and
2.
The new nonconforming use would improve the character of the immediate neighborhood.
B. Other than in Sec.8.2.3.A, above, a nonconforming use may only be changed to a use that is permitted in the zoning district in which it is located. Once a nonconforming use is converted to a conforming use, it shall not be changed back to a nonconforming use.
8.2.4. DISCONTINUANCE OR ABANDONMENT OF NONCONFORMING USE
A. If a nonconforming use ceases to operate or is discontinued or abandoned for a period of six consecutive months or longer, it shall not be reestablished and shall only be replaced with a conforming use.
B. Time spent renovating or repairing a structure that houses the nonconforming use is not considered a discontinuance of the use, provided:
1.
All appropriate development permits are obtained;
2.
The renovation or repair is completed within 18 months after commencement of the repair or renovation;
3.
The use is reestablished within one month after completion of the renovation or repairs; and
4.
Any discontinuance of use caused by government action without the contributing fault by the nonconforming user shall not be considered in determining the length of discontinuance.
8.2.5. STRUCTURES USED FOR NONCONFORMING USE
Any reconstruction or repair of a damaged structure used for a nonconforming use shall be subject to the same provisions applicable to nonconforming structures in Sec. 8.3, Nonconforming Structures.
Land Development Code Page 8 2 Apopka, FL
-
Article 8: Nonconformities
Section 8.3 Nonconforming Structures
8.3.1 General
Section 8.3. NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
8.3.1. GENERAL
Nonconforming structures shall be subject to the standards in this section.
8.3.2. RELATIONSHIP WITH CONFORMING AND NONCONFORMING USES
Where a nonconforming principal structure contains a conforming use, only the nonconforming structure is subject to the standards and limitations in this section. Where a nonconforming structure contains a nonconforming use, the nonconforming structure is subject to the standards and limitations of this section and the nonconforming use is subject to the standards and limitations in Sec. 8.2, Nonconforming Uses.
8.3.3. ENLARGEMENT OR ALTERATION
A. General
A nonconforming structure shall not be enlarged or structurally altered in any way that increases the nonconformity, unless otherwise stated in Sec. 8.3.3.B, Exceptions in Floodplains.
Example: A structure that has a side yard setback of five feet where the LDC requires a minimum side yard setback of ten feet cannot be enlarged so as to further encroach into the side yard setback. Enlargement or structural alteration of the structure in a way that complies with applicable dimensional standards, or structural alteration of the structure in a way that decreases the degree of nonconformity, is permitted.
B. Exception in Floodplains
1. General
A nonconforming structure located within an area of special flood hazard as designated on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (see Sec. 6.6, Floodplains may be enlarged or altered without regard to the limitations in Sec. 8.3.3.A above, if it makes the structure more resilient to storm and flood damage by undertaking at least four of the resiliency measures identified in B.2, below, in accordance with the standards and guidelines of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), if:
a.
The footprint of the nonconforming part of the structure is not increased by more than 20 percent.
b.
The enlargement or alteration of the nonconforming structure complies with flood hazard prevention standards in Sec. 6.6, Floodplains.
c.
The enlargement or alteration of the nonconforming structure is compatible with the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
2. Resiliency Measures
a.
Elevate the structure so its lowest habitable floor is at least one foot above the base flood elevation;
b.
Dry floodproof exterior walls below the base flood elevation up to at least 75 percent of the height between ground level and the base flood elevation;
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 8 3
-
Article 8: Nonconformities
Section 8.3 Nonconforming Structures
8.3.4 Relocation
c.
Convert enclosed areas of the structure below the base flood elevation to nonhabitable space;
d.
Wet floodproof enclosed areas of the structure below the base flood elevation to allow flood waters to temporarily fill the areas to equalize hydrostatic loads and prevent buoyancy, including the elevation or floodproofing of HVAC equipment and electrical system components;
e.
Install permanent storm shutters on glass windows and doors or replace glass windows and doors with shatterproof glass;
f.
Install flood openings in foundations and enclosed areas of the structure below the base flood elevation to allow flood waters to pass through to equalize hydrostatic loads and prevent buoyancy; or
g.
Secure shingle, built-up, and metal roofs against high wind damage.
8.3.4. RELOCATION
A nonconforming structure shall not be moved, in whole or in part, to another location on or off the parcel of land on which it is located, unless the entire structure conforms to the requirements of this LDC.
8.3.5. RECONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR AFTER CASUALTY DAMAGE
Except as otherwise provided in Sec. 6.6, Floodplains, , the reconstruction or repair of a nonconforming structure damaged as a result of a natural disaster or other unforeseen and unpreventable accident or occurrence shall be subject to the following provisions.
A. Damage up to 50 Percent of Value
If a nonconforming structure is damaged to an extent whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would be 50 percent or less of its assessed value before the damage, the structure may be reconstructed or repaired if:
1.
The reconstruction or repair does not increase, expand, enlarge, or extend the degree of nonconformity; and
2.
The reconstruction or repair begins within one year after the damage and is diligently pursued to completion.
B. Damage greater than 50 Percent of Value
If a nonconforming structure is damaged to an extent whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would exceed 50 percent or more of its assessed value before the damage, the structure shall not be reconstructed or repaired except in conformity with the provisions of this LDC.
C. Exemption for Certain Single-Family Residential Structures
Any structure which has been in the same ownership, family ownership, family-inherited ownership, or a combination of these, for at least 25 years, and is used for single-family residential purposes and maintained as a nonconforming use may be enlarged or replaced, if damaged or destroyed, with a similar structure, provided the enlargement or replacement does not create new nonconforming uses or increase the extent of the existing nonconforming structure or site features. Sale of the nonconforming property to a non-family owner dissolves this particular right to enlarge or replace. A destroyed
Land Development Code Page 8 4 Apopka, FL
-
Article 8: Nonconformities
Section 8.4 Nonconforming Lots of Record
8.4.1 General
nonconforming structure being replaced under this subsection shall be maintained as a nonconforming use for a minimum of five years.
Section 8.4. NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD
8.4.1. GENERAL
No development shall be established on a nonconforming lot of record except in accordance with the standards in this section.
8.4.2. STRUCTURES ON NONCONFORMING LOTS
A. Nonconforming structures legally established on a nonconforming lot of record before March 6, 2019 may be continued, enlarged, or redeveloped only in accordance with the standards in Sec. 8.3 Nonconforming Structures.
8.4.3. COMBINATION OF LOTS TO ELIMINATE NONCONFORMITY
If a vacant nonconforming lot abuts another lot (whether conforming or nonconforming) held in the same ownership, the lots shall be combined or recombined to create one or more conforming lots, or lot(s) that are less nonconforming.
8.4.4. GOVERNMENTAL ACQUISITION OF A PORTION OF LOT
If a conforming lot is made nonconforming due to governmental acquisition of a portion of the lot for a public purpose that results in the lot no longer complying with applicable lot area or other dimensional standards, the lot shall be deemed a conforming lot upon the Director approving a concept site plan for development of the lot that demonstrates the development existing or proposed on the lot:
A. Complies with Table 4.2.2, Principal Use Table;
B. Complies with the dimensional standards of the zoning district in which it is located, to the maximum extent practicable;
C. Complies with the off-street parking and landscaping standards of this LDC, to the maximum extent practicable;
D. Complies with all other standards and requirements of this LDC; and
E. Is designed and configured in a way that is compatible with surrounding development.
Section 8.5. NONCONFORMING SIGNS
8.5.1. GENERAL
Nonconforming signs shall be subject to the standards in this section.
8.5.2. EXEMPTIONS
Signs that were in existence prior to or on December 6, 1972 (the date of the City’s original sign ordinance) are deemed conforming.
8.5.3. ENLARGEMENT OR ALTERATION
A nonconforming sign shall not be enlarged or structurally altered in any way that increases the nonconformity.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 8 5
-
Article 8: Nonconformities
Section 8.6 Nonconforming Site Features
8.5.4 Reconstruction or Repair after Damage
8.5.4. RECONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR AFTER DAMAGE
The reconstruction or repair of a damaged nonconforming sign shall be subject to the following standards:
A. Damage up to 50 Percent of Value
If a nonconforming sign is damaged by any means to an extent whereby the cost of restoring the sign to its before-damaged condition would be 50 percent or less of its replacement value before the damage, the sign may be reconstructed or repaired if:
1.
The reconstruction or repair does not increase, expand, enlarge, or extend the degree of nonconformity; and
2.
The reconstruction or repair is begun within one year after the damage and is diligently pursued to completion.
B. Damage Greater than 50 Percent of Value
1.
If a nonconforming sign is damaged by any means to an extent whereby the cost of restoring the sign to its before-damaged condition would exceed 50 percent of its replacement value before the damage, the sign shall not be reconstructed or repaired except in conformity with the provisions of this LDC.
2.
In cases where businesses were in existence in the City under the same name and location prior to 1960, signs may be maintained or replaced even if damaged above 50 percent of their value.
8.5.5. ABANDONMENT OR DISCONTINUANCE OF A SIGN
If a nonconforming sign is abandoned or ceases to be used for a period exceeding six consecutive months, it shall not be reestablished and shall only be replaced with a conforming sign. A sign shall be considered abandoned or discontinued if its copy area is no longer readable or comprehensible, or if the business it identifies or advertises ceases to operate.
8.5.6. NONCONFORMING SIGNS ALONG FEDERAL HIGHWAYS
If it is determined that a nonconforming sign along a federal interstate or primary aid highway may not be removed in accordance with the above provisions, the City shall develop a plan for their expeditious removal in accordance with state and federal law.
Section 8.6. NONCONFORMING SITE FEATURES
8.6.1. PURPOSE
The purpose of this section is to provide a means whereby the city may require certain nonconforming site features to be brought into compliance with the standards of this LDC as part of remodeling or expansion of a structure.
8.6.2. APPLICABILITY
A. For purposes of this section, the term “nonconforming site features” includes the following:
1. Nonconforming off-street parking;
Land Development Code Page 8 6 Apopka, FL
-
Article 8: Nonconformities
Section 8.6 Nonconforming Site Features
8.6.3 Interior and Exterior Remodeling of Structures
2.
Nonconforming landscaping; and
3.
Nonconforming perimeter buffers.
B. If an application is submitted for a building permit for the remodeling or expansion of a structure and the development site contains one or more nonconforming site features identified in subsection A above, and the value of the proposed improvements totals at least 25 percent of the assessed value of the existing structure, the applicant shall be required to address the nonconforming site feature as provided in Sec. 8.6.3, Interior and Exterior Remodeling of Structures.
C. If an application is submitted for a Building Permit for the expansion of a building or structure that contains one or more nonconforming site features identified in subsection A, and the proposed area of the expansion over a five-year period exceeds at least 20 percent of the area of the building or structure over that five-year period, the applicant shall address the nonconforming site features as provided in Sec. 8.6.3, Interior and Exterior Remodeling of Structures.
D. This section does not apply to:
1.
The reconstruction of a nonconformity damaged by a calamity; or
2.
Repairs for normal maintenance.
8.6.3. INTERIOR AND EXTERIOR REMODELING OF STRUCTURES
A. For purposes of determining when nonconforming site features shall be brought into partial or full compliance with the standards of this LDC, the costs that constitute the estimated cost of the structural alteration of a building or structure shall be shown on the building permit application and shall include the cost of materials and labor.
B. Nonconforming site features shall be brought into compliance in accordance with Table
8.6.3.B: Standards for Nonconforming Site Features.
TABLE 8.6.3.B: STANDARDS FOR NONCONFORMING SITE FEATURES
TYPE OF REMODELING OR EXPANSION
DEFINITION
REQUIRED COMPLIANCE
1
Remodeling
Remodeling or alterations that are not exempt from this section
See rows 2 through 4 below.
2
Remodeling Costing 25 Percent or Less of Structure Value
Remodeling of a structure in any continuous five-year period that costs 25 percent or less of the current assessed value of the structure.
There is no requirement for any upgrading of the nonconforming site features identified in Sec. 8.6.2.A.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 8 7
-
Article 8: Nonconformities
Section 8.6 Nonconforming Site Features
8.6.3 Interior and Exterior Remodeling of Structures
TABLE 8.6.3.B: STANDARDS FOR NONCONFORMING SITE FEATURES
TYPE OF REMODELING OR EXPANSION
DEFINITION
REQUIRED COMPLIANCE
3
Remodeling Costing between 25 and 75 Percent of Structure Value
Remodeling of a structure in any continuous five-year period that costs more than 25 percent, but less than 75 percent, of the current assessed value of the structure.
Action is required for the nonconforming site features identified in Sec. 8.6.2.A to be upgraded towards compliance with the standards of this LDC by a corresponding percentage of full compliance, up to achievement of 100 percent compliance. Example: A nonresidential site with nonconforming off-street parking (site feature) with an assessed value of $100,000 is undergoing remodeling equaling $40,000 (40% of the assessed value). The developer must add a corresponding number of additional required parking spaces until the site fully complies. If the site at the time of remodel has 10 parking spaces, but the LDC requires a minimum of 20 for the use that is proposed (10 more spaces are required for the site to be conforming), the applicant would be required to provide 40% of the 20 spaces – or 8 more parking spaces, bringing the total number of spaces on the site to 18 spaces.
4
Remodeling Costing 75 Percent or More of Structure Value
Remodeling of a structure in any continuous five-year period that costs 75 percent or more of the current assessed value of the structure.
Action is required for all nonconforming site features identified in Sec. 8.6.2.A to be upgraded to achieve 100 percent compliance with the standards of this LDC.
5
Addition and Expansion
Additions or expansions to buildings, structures, or use areas on sites with nonconforming site feature
See rows 6 through 8 below.
6
Additions and Expansion Less than 20 Percent
Additions or expansions to a structure or use area in any continuous five-year period that increase the gross square footage of the structure or use area (measured at the beginning of the five-year period) by 20 percent or less.
There is no requirement for any upgrading of the nonconforming site features identified in Section Sec. 8.6.2.A.
7
Additions and Expansions between 20 and 60 Percent
Additions or expansions to a structure or use area in any continuous five-year period that increase the gross square footage of the structure or use area (measured at the beginning of the five-year period) by more than 20 percent but less than 60 percent.
Action is required for the nonconforming site features identified in Sec. 8.6.2.A to be installed or upgraded towards compliance with the standards of this LDC by a corresponding percentage of full compliance, up to achievement of 100 percent compliance. Example: Under this LDC’s minimum off-street parking space standards, an existing building, if built today, would be required to provide at least 40 parking spaces, but the site only contains 20 spaces. If the building is expanded by 30 percent of its gross floor area, the expansion project must add 12 parking spaces (30% x 40 required spaces), increasing compliance from 50 percent (20 of 40 required spaces) to 80 percent (32 of 40 required spaces). A subsequent addition whose size also equals 30 percent of existing building size might seem to call for addition of another 12 spaces (30% x 40 required spaces), but actually only 8 new spaces would be required to achieve 100% compliance (32 + 8 = 40 spaces).
Land Development Code Page 8 8 Apopka, FL
-
Article 8: Nonconformities
Section 8.6 Nonconforming Site Features
8.6.4 Compliance to Maximum Extent Practicable on Constrained Properties
TABLE 8.6.3.B: STANDARDS FOR NONCONFORMING SITE FEATURES
TYPE OF REMODELING OR EXPANSION
DEFINITION
REQUIRED COMPLIANCE
8
Additions and Expansions Greater than 60 Percent
Additions or expansions to a structure or use area in any continuous five-year period that increase the gross square footage of the structure or use area (measured at the beginning of the five-year period) by more than 60 percent.
Action is required for all nonconforming site features identified in Sec. 8.6.2.A to be installed or upgraded to achieve 100 percent compliance with the standards of this LDC.
9
Generally
The situations referred to in rows 10-12 below apply to any structural alterations or expansions
See rows 10 through 11.
10
Five or Fewer Parking Spaces Required as a Part of a Change in Use
Remodeling project to install five or fewer additional off-street parking spaces as a part of a change in use.
Such additional off-street parking is not required to be installed.
11
Additions and Expansions of Outdoor Use Areas Only
Only outdoor operations, storage, and display areas are being added or expanded on a site.
The percentage increase in the gross square footage of the outdoor operations, storage, and display areas shall require perimeter buffers and screening to be installed or upgraded towards compliance with the standards of this LDC by a corresponding percentage of full compliance. The increased perimeter buffer and screening shall be located so as to achieve the performance objectives in Sec. 5.2, Landscaping and Buffer Standards, with priority given to screening the impacts of outdoor operations.
8.6.4. COMPLIANCE TO MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE ON CONSTRAINED PROPERTIES
Where full compliance with the requirements of this section is precluded by a lack of sufficient developable area due to the area of the lot, the layout of existing development, or the presence of significant wetlands, floodplains, watercourses, or other significant environmental constraints on development, the applicant shall comply with the requirements of this section to the maximum extent practicable, as determined by the Director.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 8 9

Enforcement

Article 9
: Enforcement
..................................................................................
9-1
Section 9.1. Purpose
..............................................................................................................................
9-1
Section 9.2. Compliance Required
........................................................................................................
9-1
9.2.1.
General
................................................................................................................
9-1
9.2.2.
Receipt of Development Approval or Permit Required
......................................
9-1
9.2.3.
Development Approval or Permit Only Authorizes Development Approved
....
9-1
Section 9.3. Violations
...........................................................................................................................
9-1
9.3.1.
General Violations
...............................................................................................
9-1
9.3.2.
Specific Violations
...............................................................................................
9-1
Section 9.4. Responsible Persons
..........................................................................................................
9-2
Section 9.5. Enforcement Generally
......................................................................................................
9-2
9.5.1.
Responsibility for Enforcement
..........................................................................
9-2
9.5.2.
Code Enforcement Hearing Officer
.....................................................................
9-3
9.5.3.
Remedies and Penalties
......................................................................................
9-4

-
Article 9: Enforcement
Section 9.1 Purpose
9.2.1 General
Article 9: Enforcement
Section 9.1. PURPOSE
This article establishes procedures and standards to ensure compliance with the provisions of this LDC and obtain corrections for violations of the LDC. It also sets forth the remedies and penalties that apply to violations of this LDC. The provisions of this article are intended to encourage the voluntary correction of violations, where possible.
Section 9.2. COMPLIANCE REQUIRED
9.2.1. GENERAL
Compliance with all the procedures, standards, and other provisions of this LDC is required by all persons owning, developing, managing, using, or occupying land or structures in the City.
9.2.2. RECEIPT OF DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL OR PERMIT REQUIRED
All persons shall obtain all development orders for development approvals and permits required by this LDC prior to development.
9.2.3. DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL OR PERMIT ONLY AUTHORIZES DEVELOPMENT APPROVED
A development order for a development approval or permit issued by a decision-making body or person authorizes only the use, arrangement, location, design, density or intensity, and development set forth in such development order.
Section 9.3. VIOLATIONS
9.3.1. GENERAL VIOLATIONS
A. Failure to Comply with the LDC or a Term or Condition Constitutes Violation of the LDC
Any failure to comply with a standard, requirement, prohibition, or limitation imposed by this LDC, or the terms or conditions of any development order or authorization granted in accordance with this LDC constitutes a violation of this LDC punishable as provided in this article.
B. Development Orders Authorize Development Approved
A development order issued by a decision-making body or person authorizes only the use, arrangement, location, design, density or intensity, and development set forth in the development order.
9.3.2. SPECIFIC VIOLATIONS
It shall be a violation of this LDC to undertake any activity contrary to the provisions of this LDC, including but not limited to any of the following:
A. Develop land or a structure without first obtaining all appropriate development orders.
B. Occupy or use land or a structure without first obtaining all appropriate development orders.
C. Subdivide land without first obtaining all appropriate development orders required to engage in subdivision.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 9 1
-
Article 9: Enforcement
Section 9.4 Responsible Persons
9.5.1 Responsibility for Enforcement
D. Excavate, grade, cut, clear, or undertake any land disturbing activity without first obtaining all appropriate development orders.
E. Remove existing trees from a site or parcel of land without first obtaining appropriate development orders.
F. Disturb any landscaped area or vegetation required by this LDC.
G. Install, create, erect, alter, or maintain any sign without first obtaining the appropriate development order.
H. Fail to remove any sign installed, created, erected, or maintained in violation of this LDC, or for which the development order has expired.
I. Create, expand, replace, or change any nonconformity except in compliance with this LDC.
J. Reduce or diminish the requirements for development, design, or dimensional standards below the minimum required by this LDC.
K. Increase the intensity or density of development, except in accordance with the standards of this LDC.
L. Through any act or omission, fail to comply with any other provision, procedure, or standard as required by this LDC.
Section 9.4. RESPONSIBLE PERSONS
Any person who violates this LDC shall be subject to the remedies and penalties set forth in this article.
Section 9.5. ENFORCEMENT GENERALLY
9.5.1. RESPONSIBILITY FOR ENFORCEMENT
A. General
1.
The Director, the Code Enforcement Officer, the Code Enforcement Hearing Officer, or City Attorney, as appropriate, shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of this LDC. Nothing in this subsection shall prevent the Director from delegating authority to another City Official.
2.
The Code Enforcement Hearing Officer may prosecute any violation of the provisions of this LDC in accordance with the standards and procedures in the article.
3.
Whenever a violation of this LDC occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a complaint with the Director or the Code Enforcement Officer. The complaint should state fully the cause and basis for the alleged violation. On receiving a complaint, the Code Enforcement Officer shall properly record such complaint and take appropriate action as provided by this LDC.
4.
Whenever a violation of this LDC occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, the Code Enforcement Officer may request the alleged violator to supply proof of a permit or authorization document allowing the actions to occur.
Land Development Code Page 9 2 Apopka, FL
-
Article 9: Enforcement
Section 9.5 Enforcement Generally
9.5.2 Code Enforcement Hearing Officer
5.
On receiving a written complaint about noncompliance with the provisions of this LDC, the Code Enforcement Officer shall investigate the complaint and determine whether a violation of this Code exists.
6.
On presenting proper credentials, the Code Enforcement Officer may enter on land or inspect any structure to determine compliance with the provisions of this LDC. These inspections shall be carried out during normal business hours unless the Director or the Code Enforcement Officer determines there is an emergency necessitating inspections at another time.
B. Notice of Violations
1.
When the Director or Code Enforcement Officer finds a violation of the LDC, the Code Enforcement Officer shall notify, in writing, the person violating the LDC. Such notification shall indicate the nature of the violation, order the necessary action to abate the violation, give a deadline for correcting the violation, and state the action to be taken if the violation is not corrected within the specified timeframe. The notice shall also indicate that the Code Enforcement Officer’s decision may be appealed to the Code Enforcement Hearing Officer in accordance with Sec.9.5.2.A, Notice of Hearing.
2.
If a violation is not corrected within the specified period of time provided, the Code Enforcement Officer shall schedule a hearing before the Code Enforcement Hearing Officer, who shall conduct a hearing in accordance with Sec 9.5.2.B, Procedure at Hearing, and take appropriate action, as provided in Sec. 9.5.3, Remedies and Penalties, to correct and abate the violation and to ensure compliance with the LDC.
9.5.2. CODE ENFORCEMENT HEARING OFFICER
A. Notice of Hearing
Upon appeal or failure of a violator to correct a violation identified by the Code Enforcement Officer in accordance with Sec. 9.5.1.B, Notice of Violations, the Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the Code Enforcement Hearing Officer and shall schedule a hearing on the violation. A Notice of Hearing shall be delivered by certified mail to the alleged violator. The Notice of Hearing shall state the time, place, and nature of the hearing before the Code Enforcement Hearing Officer. The date for the hearing shall not be less than 14 calendar days from the date the Notice of Hearing is delivered, unless the Code Enforcement Officer has reason to believe a violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare.
B. Procedure at Hearing
The Code Enforcement Hearing Officer shall proceed to hear the cases on the agenda for that day. Each case before the Hearing Officer shall be presented by the Code Enforcement Officer, who shall detail the nature of the violation , the steps taken to correct the violation (if any), and the steps necessary to comply with the requirements of the LDC.
C. Action by Code Enforcement Hearing Officer
At the conclusion of the hearing, the Code Enforcement Hearing Officer shall issue an order affording the proper relief consistent with Sec. 9.5.3, Remedies and Penalties. The order may include a notice that it must be complied with by a specified date and that a
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 9 3
-
Article 9: Enforcement
Section 9.5 Enforcement Generally
9.5.3 Remedies and Penalties
fine may be imposed if the order is not complied with by said date. The order shall have the force of law to command whatever steps are necessary to bring a violation into compliance.
D. Notification of Action
Notification of the Code Enforcement Hearing Officer’s action, including any findings of fact and conclusions of law consistent with the record, shall be delivered to the violator by certified mail within ten days of the Hearing Officer’s action.
E. Appeal
Any aggrieved party may appeal an order of the Code Enforcement Hearing Officer by certiorari proceedings in the Circuit Court of Orange County. The petition for writ of certiorari must be filed within 30 days after the hearing at which the order is rendered. The scope of review shall be limited to an appellate review of the record made before the Code Enforcement Hearing Officer and shall not be a trial de novo.
9.5.3. REMEDIES AND PENALTIES
A. Available Remedies
The Director, Code Enforcement Officer, Code Enforcement Hearing Officer, or City Attorney, as appropriate may use any combination of the following enforcement actions, remedies, and penalties to correct, stop, abate, and enjoin a violation of this LDC.
1. Notification of Violation
The Code Enforcement Officer may issue a notification to the person responsible for violating the LDC, requiring the person to abate the violation. If however, a person who has been issued a notice for violating the LDC abates the violation, but shortly thereafter re-institutes or re-initiates the violation, the appropriate City Official may pursue other remedies without re-issuing a notice pursuant to this section.
2. Hearing Before Code Enforcement Hearing Officer
The Code Enforcement Officer may inform the Code Enforcement Hearing Officer, who shall schedule and hold a hearing for the purposes of determining why a violation has not been corrected following a notice of violation, and determine the appropriate remedy or penalty.
3. Stop Order
The Director, Code Enforcement Officer, Code Enforcement Hearing Officer, or City Attorney may issue and serve upon a person pursuing the activity or activities in violation of the LDC a stop order requiring that the person stop all activities in violation of the LDC.
4. Revocation of Development Order
Any development order or other form of authorization required under the LDC may
be revoked by the Director or City Attorney if it is determined that:
Land Development Code Page 9 4 Apopka, FL
-
Article 9: Enforcement
Section 9.5 Enforcement Generally
9.5.3 Remedies and Penalties
a.
There is a failure to comply with the approved development order, plans, specifications, or terms or conditions required under the order;
b.
The development order was procured by false representation; or
c.
The development order was issued in error.
Written notice of revocation shall be served upon the landowner, the landowner’s agent, applicant, or other person to whom the development approval or permit was issued, and such notice may be posted in a prominent location at the place of violation. No work or construction shall proceed after service of the revocation notice.
5. Denial or Withholding of Related Authorization
The appropriate City Official may deny or withhold authorization to use or develop any land, structure, or improvements until an alleged violation related to such land, structure, or improvements is corrected and any associated civil penalty is paid.
6. Repairs by City
If a violation is one that presents a serious threat to the public health, safety, or welfare, or is irreparable or irreversible, the City may make all reasonable repairs necessary to bring the land into compliance and may charge the violator with the reasonable cost of the repairs, in accordance with Ch. 162, Fla. Stat.
7. Civil Remedies and Penalties
In addition to all other remedies and penalties outlined in this article, the City Attorney on behalf of the City or any aggrieved or interested person shall have the right to apply to the Circuit Court of Orange County, Florida, to enjoin and restrain any person violating the provisions of the LDC, and the Court shall, upon proof of the violation of same, have the duty to issue such temporary and permanent injunctions or remedies that are necessary to prevent the violation of the same.
8. Administrative Fines
a. General
The Code Enforcement Hearing Officer—on receiving notice from the Code Enforcement Officer that an order issued has not been complied with by the time specified in the order, or on finding that a repeat violation has been committed— may order the violator to pay an administrative fine in accordance with Ch. 162, Fla. Stat., Administrative Fines; Cost of Repair; Liens.
b. Maximum Fines
1.
A fine imposed in accordance with this subsection shall not exceed the $250 per day per violation for a first violation and shall not exceed $500 per day per violation for a repeat violation.
2.
If, after due notice and hearing, the Code Enforcement Hearing Officer finds a violation to be irreparable or irreversible in nature, the Officer may impose a fine not to exceed $5,000 per violation.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 9 5
-
Article 9: Enforcement
Section 9.5 Enforcement Generally
9.5.3 Remedies and Penalties
c. Criteria for Determining Amount of a Fine
In determining the amount of a fine imposed under this section, the Code
Enforcement Hearing Officer shall consider the following factors:
1.
The gravity of the violation;
2.
Any actions taken by the violator to correct the violation; and
3.
Any previous violations committed by the violator.
d. Lien
On being recorded with the Orange County Clerk of the Circuit Court, an order imposing an administrative fine or an administrative fine plus repair costs shall, in accordance with Chapter 162 of the Florida Statutes, constitute a lien against the land on which the violation exists and on any other real or personal property owned by the violator, and may be recovered through suit or foreclosure.
9. Injunction
When a violation occurs, the City, through the City Attorney, may, apply to the appropriate court for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction ordering the offender to correct the unlawful condition or cease the unlawful use of the land in question.
10. Abatement
a.
The City, through the City Attorney, may apply for and the court may enter an order of abatement as part of the judgment in the case. An order of abatement may direct any of the following actions:
1.
That buildings or other structures on the land be closed, demolished, or removed;
2.
That fixtures, furniture, or other moveable property be moved or removed entirely;
3.
That improvements, alterations, modifications, or repairs be made;
4.
That removed trees be replaced; or
5.
That any other action be taken as necessary to bring the land into compliance with this LDC.
b.
The City may execute an order of abatement and shall have a lien on the property for the cost of executing the order.
11. Equitable Remedies
The City, through the City Attorney, may apply to a court of law for any other appropriate equitable remedy to enforce the provisions of this LDC. The fact that other remedies are provided under general law or this LDC shall not be used by a violator as a defense to the city’s application for equitable relief.
12. Criminal Penalties
Any person violating any of the provisions of this LDC or who fails to abide by or obey all orders and resolutions promulgated as herein provided, shall be guilty of a
Land Development Code Page 9 6 Apopka, FL
-
Article 9: Enforcement
Section 9.5 Enforcement Generally
9.5.3 Remedies and Penalties
misdemeanor of the second degree, and shall be subject to the same penalties as a second degree misdemeanor.
13. Private Civil Relief
Any citizen may, in addition to other remedies, institute an action or enjoin any person from unlawfully erecting, constructing, reconstructing, altering, maintaining, or using, any building or structure in violation of this LDC. This is in addition to the right of the City to bring an enforcement action.
B. Remedies are Cumulative
1.
The remedies and penalties provided for violations of this LDC, whether civil, equitable, or criminal, shall be cumulative and in addition to any other remedy or penalty provided by law, and may be exercised in any order.
2.
Each day of continued violation of this LDC shall be considered a separate violation for purposes of computing cumulative civil or criminal penalties.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 9 7

Defi
nitions and Rules of Measurement

Article 10
: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
........................................
10-1
Section 10.1. General Rules for Construction and Interpretation
........................................................
10-1
10.1.1.
Meanings and Intent
.........................................................................................
10-1
10.1.2.
Headings, Illustrations, and Text
.......................................................................
10-1
10.1.3.
Lists and Examples
............................................................................................
10-1
10.1.4.
Computation of Time
........................................................................................
10-1
10.1.5.
References to Other Regulations/Publications
.................................................
10-2
10.1.6.
Delegation of Authority
....................................................................................
10-2
10.1.7.
Public Officials and Agencies
............................................................................
10-2
10.1.8.
Mandatory and Discretionary Terms
................................................................
10-2
10.1.9.
Conjunctions
.....................................................................................................
10-2
10.1.10.
Tenses and Plurals
............................................................................................
10-2
10.1.11.
Term Not Defined
.............................................................................................
10-2
Section 10.2. Rules of Measurement
....................................................................................................
10-3
10.2.1.
Buildings
............................................................................................................
10-3
10.2.2.
Density and Area
...............................................................................................
10-3
10.2.3.
Lots and Yards
...................................................................................................
10-4
10.2.4.
Exceptions and Variations
.................................................................................
10-6
Section 10.3. Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
.....
10-9
10.3.1.
Principal Use Classification System
...................................................................
10-9
10.3.2.
Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
....................
10-43
Section 10.4. Definitions
.....................................................................................................................
10-46

-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.1 General Rules for Construction and Interpretation
10.1.1 Meanings and Intent
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.1. GENERAL RULES FOR CONSTRUCTION AND INTERPRETATION
The rules in this section shall apply for construing or interpreting the terms and provisions of this LDC.
10.1.1. MEANINGS AND INTENT
All provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions contained in this LDC shall be interpreted in accordance with the general purposes set forth in Sec. 1.3, General Purpose and Intent, and the specific purpose statements set forth throughout the LDC. When a specific section of the LDC gives a different meaning than the general definition provided in this article, the specific section’s meaning and application of the term shall control.
10.1.2. HEADINGS, ILLUSTRATIONS, AND TEXT
In the event of a conflict or inconsistency between the text of this LDC and any heading, caption, figure, illustration, table, or map, the text shall control. Graphics and other illustrations are provided for informational purposes only and should not be relied upon as a complete and accurate description of all applicable regulations or requirements.
10.1.3. LISTS AND EXAMPLES
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, lists of items or examples that use terms like "for example," "including," and "such as," or similar language are intended to provide examples and are not exhaustive lists of all possibilities.
10.1.4. COMPUTATION OF TIME
A. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed, the day of the act, event or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, in which event the period shall run until the end of the next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation.
B. The term "day" means a business day, unless a calendar day is indicated.
C. The term "month" means a calendar month.
D. The term “year” means a calendar year unless otherwise indicated.
E. Whenever a person has the right or is required to do some act within a prescribed period of time following the service of a notice or other document through mailed delivery:
1.
Three days shall be added to the prescribed period; and
2.
The time period shall be counted starting from and including the post-marked date.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 1
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.1 General Rules for Construction and Interpretation
10.1.5 References to Other Regulations/Publications
10.1.5. REFERENCES TO OTHER REGULATIONS/PUBLICATIONS
Whenever reference is made to a resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, or document, it shall mean a reference to the most recent edition of such regulation, resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, or document, unless otherwise specifically stated.
10.1.6. DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY
Any act authorized by this LDC to be carried out by the Director may be delegated by the Director to a professional-level City employee under the Director’s authority or control.
10.1.7. PUBLIC OFFICIALS AND AGENCIES
All public officials, bodies, and agencies to which references are made are those of the City of Apopka, Florida, unless otherwise indicated.
10.1.8. MANDATORY AND DISCRETIONARY TERMS
The words "shall," "must," "should" and "will" are mandatory, establishing an obligation or duty to comply with the particular provision. The word "may" is permissive.
10.1.9. CONJUNCTIONS
Unless the context clearly suggests the contrary, conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows:
A. "And" indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions or events apply; and
B. "Or" indicates that one or more of the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events apply.
10.1.10. TENSES AND PLURALS
Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular number include the plural number and the plural number includes the singular number, unless the context of the particular usage clearly indicates otherwise. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine gender, and vice versa.
10.1.11. TERM NOT DEFINED
If a term used in this LDC is not defined in this LDC, the Director is authorized to interpret its meaning in accordance with Sec. 2.5.6, Interpretation. Such interpreted meaning shall be based upon the definitions used in accepted sources—including, but not limited to, A Planners Dictionary, A Glossary of Zoning, Development, and Planning Terms, and A Survey of Zoning Definitions (all published by the American Planning Association), as well as general dictionaries such as Merriam-Webster, American Heritage, Webster's New World, and New Oxford American dictionaries.
Land Development Code Page 10 2 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.2 Rules of Measurement
10.2.1 Buildings
Section 10.2. RULES OF MEASUREMENT
10.2.1. BUILDINGS
A. Building Footprint
The exterior outline of a building where it meets the earth.
B. Building Frontage
The length of the outside building wall facing a public right-of-way.
C. Building Height
The vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of a flat roof or a mansard roof or to the mean height level between the eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs.
D. Building Line
The line beyond which a building shall not extend, except as specifically provided by law, and which is determined from the extreme support of the roof of the main structure or appurtenance thereto.
E. Highest Adjacent Grade
The highest natural elevation of the ground surface adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure.
F. Lowest Floor
The lowest enclosed floor of a structure, including a basement, but not including the floor of an area enclosed only with insect screening or wood lattice as permitted by the flood damage prevention regulations in this LDC.
10.2.2. DENSITY AND AREA
A. Density or Gross Density
The total number of dwelling units divided by the total site area, but excluding lakes, natural water bodies, and other designated nonresidential productive areas, such as commercial or industrial uses.
B. Floor Area Ratio (FAR)
The gross floor area (in square feet) devoted to nonresidential development on all floors of all buildings located or proposed on a lot, by lot area (in square feet). FAR standards apply only to nonresidential portions of development.
C. Gross Acreage
The total number of acres within the perimeter boundaries of a lot.
D. Gross Floor Area
The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the floor(s) of a building measured from the exterior face of exterior walls, or from the centerline of a wall separating two buildings, but not including interior parking spaces, loading space for motor vehicles, or any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than six feet.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 3
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.2 Rules of Measurement
10.2.3 Lots and Yards
10.2.3. LOTS AND YARDS
A. Lot
A unit of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a use permitted in this LDC. The term lot has the same meaning as parcel and tract.
1. Example Diagram of Lot Types
B. Lot, Corner
A lot abutting two or more streets at their intersection.
C. Lot Area
Lot area shall be determined by measuring the total horizontal land area (in acres or square feet) within the lot lines of the lot, excluding public street rights-of-way and private street easements.
D. Lot Coverage
The total horizontal land area (in acres or square feet) covered by all solid surfaces (hard surfaces like swimming pools, decks, patios, driveways, and buildings) on the lot, and dividing that coverage area by the lot area, and multiplying the result by 100.
E. Lot Depth
The distance measured from the midpoint of the front line of a lot to the midpoint of the opposite rear line of the lot.
F. Lot Depth Line
Land Development Code Page 10 4 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.2 Rules of Measurement
10.2.3 Lots and Yards
A line connecting the midpoint of the front lot line with the midpoint of the rear lot line.
G. Lot, Double-Frontage
A lot having a frontage of two nonintersecting streets as distinguished from a corner lot.
H. Lot, Interior
A lot other than a corner lot.
I. Lot, Width at the Building Line
The distance between the side lot lines, measured at the front building line and parallel to the front lot line.
J. Lot, Through
[See Lot, Double-Frontage]
K. Setback
The distance by which a building or structure is separated from a property line. Setback may be expressed as a minimum, a maximum, or a range encompassing both a minimum and a maximum.
L. Sight Triangle
Sight triangles are used to avoid obstruction of vision at intersections. No walls, fences signs or landscaping shall be permitted on local road corner lots within a setback of 25 feet of intersecting street rights-of-way and lots on collector and arterial roads within a setback of 50 feet of intersecting street rights-of-way if such a wall, fence, sign or landscaping may obstruct traffic visibility. Combination of the various rights-of-way may be combined (See sample figure). The City Engineer may review any clear site triangle for changes to the setback distances depending on sight conditions.
1. Example Diagram of Sight Triangle Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 5
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.2 Rules of Measurement
10.2.4 Exceptions and Variations
M. Yard
An open space at grade between a principal building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the extreme support of the roof of the principal building shall be used.
N. Yard, Front
A yard extending across the front of a lot between side lot lines and being a minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the principal building or any projections thereof. On corner lots, the front yard shall be considered as abutting the street upon which the lot has its least dimension.
O. Yard, Rear
A yard extending across the rear of a lot between the side lot line and being a minimum
horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the principal building or any projections
thereof. On all corner lots, the rear yard shall be at the opposite end of the lot from the
front yard.
P. Yard, Side
A yard between the main building and the side line of the lot, and extending from the front lot line to the rear yard, and being the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the side of the main buildings or any projections thereof.
Q. Zero Lot Line
The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one or more of the building's sides rest directly on a property line.
10.2.4. EXCEPTIONS AND VARIATIONS
A. Exceptions to Maximum Structure Height.
1. The maximum structure height limits established in Article 3: Zoning Districts, shall not apply to the following structures or structural elements:
a.
Monuments, water towers, silos, granaries, barns, utility transmission towers, derricks, cooling towers, fire towers, and other similar structures not intended for human occupancy.
b.
Spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, chimneys, elevator shaft enclosures, ventilators, skylights, mechanical equipment and appurtenances, and similar rooftop structures or structural elements not intended for human occupancy, provided they:
1. Cover not more than 25 percent of the roof area of the structure to which they are attached;
Land Development Code Page 10 6 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.2 Rules of Measurement
10.2.4 Exceptions and Variations
2.
Comply with applicable screening requirements for mechanical equipment and appurtenances in Sec. 5.2, Landscaping and Buffer Standards.
3.
Extend above the applicable maximum height limit by no more than 25 percent of the height limit (unless otherwise allowed in this LDC).
2.
Ham radio antennas, roof-mounted satellite dishes, and television or radio antennas, provided they comply with height limits established for the specific use in Sec. 4.3.4.B.1, Amateur ham radio antenna.
3.
Roof-mounted small-scale solar energy collection systems in accordance with the height standards in Sec. 4.3.4.B.18, Solar Energy Collection Facility, Small-Scale.
4.
Small-scale wind energy systems, in accordance with the height standards in Sec 4.3.4.B.20, Wind Energy Conversion System, Small-Scale.
5.
Telecommunications facilities, in accordance with the height standards in Sec. 4.2.3.D.1.a, Wireless telecommunications tower.
B. Allowable Encroachments into Required Yards/Build-to Zones
1.
Every part of every required yard shall remain open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky except as otherwise allowed in Table 10.2.4.B, Allowable Encroachments into Required Yards/Build-to Zones, or allowed or limited elsewhere in this LDC.
2.
No encroachments are allowed in utility or drainage easements.
3.
Encroachments must be set back a minimum of 5 feet from the lot line, unless a different distance is required by the building code.
TABLE: 10.2.4.B, ALLOWABLE ENCROACHMENTS INTO REQUIRED YARDS / BUILD-TO ZONES
FEATURE
EXTENT AND LIMITATIONS OF ENCROACHMENT
1.
Open balconies and fire escapes
May extend up to five feet into any required minimum yard
2.
Decks, porches (screened or unscreened), stoops, or exterior stairways
May extend up to five feet into any required minimum yard; decks and porches decks and porches on a single-family attached dwelling may extend to a rear lot line that abuts permanent open space or to within 3 feet of a rear lot line that abuts another single-family attached dwelling lot, provided that any stairs leading to the deck or porch is at least 3 feet from the rear lot line
3.
Bay windows
May extend up to three feet into any required minimum yard if no more than nine feet wide
4.
Chimneys or fireplaces
May extend up to three feet into any required minimum yard
5.
Moveable awnings
6.
Roof eaves and overhangs, or marquees
7.
Window sills or entablatures
May extend up to 18 inches into any required minimum yard
8.
Patios or terraces, or walkways
May extend into or be located in any required minimum yard if less than 2 inches high
9.
Signs, projecting or free-standing
May extend into or be located in any required minimum yard in accordance with Section 5.10, Signs.
10.
Driveways and parking areas
May be located in any minimum required yard unless restricted by other provisions in this LDC.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 7
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.2 Rules of Measurement
10.2.4 Exceptions and Variations TABLE: 10.2.4.B, ALLOWABLE ENCROACHMENTS INTO REQUIRED YARDS / BUILD-TO ZONES FEATURE EXTENT AND LIMITATIONS OF ENCROACHMENT 11. Garages, detached May extend into or be located in any required minimum side or rear yard, subject to the height-related setback standards in Sec. 4.3.3, General Standards for all Accessory Uses and Structures. However a detached garage shall not extend into a street-side setback on a double-fronted lot. 12. Utility sheds Within RSF-1A or RSF-1B districts, utility sheds with a maximum floor area of 100 square feet may extend into or be located in any required minimum rear yard, set back from rear lot lines a minimum of five feet, not within a utility easement, and subject to the limitations in Sec 4.3.3, General Standards for all Accessory Uses and Structures 13. Flagpoles May be located in any required minimum yard if less than 20 feet high, set back from side and rear lot lines by at least ten feet, and set back from abutting street rights-of-way by a distance equal to the flagpole height 14. Lighting fixtures, projecting or free-standing (including lampposts) May be located in any required minimum yard 15. Mailbox, freestanding May be located in any required minimum yard 16. Fences or walls (including associated gates and arbors) May be located in any required minimum yard, subject to the limitations in Section 5.5, Fences and Walls. 17. Accessory structures other than those listed above May be located in a required minimum side or rear yard, subject to the limitations in Sec 4.3.3, General Standards for all Accessory Uses and Structures. However an accessory structure other than those listed above shall not extend into a street-side setback on a double-fronted lot. 18. Swimming pool May be located in any required minimum side or rear yard 19. Vegetation and landscaping and minor ornamental yard or garden features such as retaining walls, fountains, ponds, birdbath, sculptures and similar landscaping features May be located in any required minimum yard Land Development Code Page 10 8 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.1 Principal Use Classification System TABLE: 10.2.4.B, ALLOWABLE ENCROACHMENTS INTO REQUIRED YARDS / BUILD-TO ZONES FEATURE EXTENT AND LIMITATIONS OF ENCROACHMENT
Section 10.3. USE CLASSIFICATIONS AND INTERPRETATION OF UNLISTED USES AND ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
10.3.1. PRINCIPAL USE CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM
A. Purpose
This subsection is intended to provide a systematic framework for identifying, describing, categorizing, consolidating, and distinguishing land uses in a way that makes it easier to determine whether a particular use, activity, or combination of activities should be considered a form or example of a use listed as an allowable principal use in Table 4.2.2.C: Principal Use Table, or is subject to other use-specific provisions in this LDC. This subsection is also intended to guide interpretations of how a particular unlisted use should be categorized and to address future additions to the use table.
B. Structure of Principal Use Classification System
The following three-tiered hierarchy of use classifications, use categories, and use types is used to organize allowable uses listed in Table 4.2.2.C: Principal Use Table, and the use-specific standards set out in Sec. 4.2.3, Standards Specific to Principal Uses.
1. Use Classifications
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 9
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.1 Principal Use Classification System
Use Classifications are very broad and general (e.g., Agricultural Uses, Residential Uses, Public, Civic, and Institutional Uses, Commercial Uses, and Industrial Uses).
2. Use Categories
a.
Use categories represent major subgroups of the use classifications that have common functional, product, or physical characteristics, such as the type and amount of activity, type of occupants or users/customers, or operational characteristics. For example, the Commercial Use Classification is divided into multiple use categories, including Eating or Drinking Establishment Uses and Visitor Accommodation Uses.
b.
Each use category is described in terms of the common characteristics of included uses (including common or typical accessory uses), examples of common use types included in the category, and, for a number of use categories, exceptions—i.e., those uses that might appear to fall within the use category, but are included in another use category.
3. Use Types
Use types identify specific principal land uses whose characteristics are considered to fall within the various use categories. For example, brewpub or microbrewery and restaurant are use types within the Eating or Drinking Establishment Use Category. Each use type is defined in Section 10.3, Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries.
C. Rural and Agricultural Uses Classification
1. Agriculture/Forestry Uses
The Agriculture/Forestry Uses category is characterized by activities related to: the production of field crops, fruits, vegetables, ornamental and flowering plants, and the breeding, raising, or keeping of livestock, poultry, swine, or other animals for food or other marketable products. The Agriculture/Forestry Uses category also includes forestry or silvicultural activities related to the planting, management, protection, and harvesting of trees for timber or other forest products. Use types include: agricultural production and forestry; the keeping of horses or ponies; other agricultural uses; private noncommercial gardening and community gardens: and similar uses. This use category does not include the processing of animal or plant products for wholesale or retail sale purposes, which is generally considered an industrial manufacturing use type. Accessory uses may include offices, storage areas, greenhouses, barns, irrigation systems, and repair facilities related to the agricultural, nursery, and forestry activities. Use types in this category include:
Agricultural production
The business, science and art of cultivating and managing the soil, composting, growing, harvesting, and selling crops, livestock and the products of forestry, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, hydroponics, animal husbandry, i.e., breeding, raising, or managing livestock, including horses, poultry, fish, dairying, beekeeping and similar activities. Agriculture includes processing on the farm of an agricultural product in the course of preparing the product for market, which may cause a change in the natural form or state of the product. The term "agriculture" shall not include the commercial feeding of garbage or offal to animals, the slaughtering of livestock for
Land Development Code Page 10 10 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.1 Principal Use Classification System
marketing or the disposal of sludge except for fertilization of crops, horticultural products, or floricultural products in connection with an active agricultural operation, nursery, or home gardening.
Apiaries
Structures for the keeping of bees and beehives.
Community garden
A private or public facility for cultivation of fruits, flowers, vegetables, or ornamental plants by more than one person, household, family, or non-profit organization for personal or group use, consumption, or donation. Community gardens may be divided into separate plots for cultivation by one or more individuals or may be farmed collectively by members of the group and may include common areas maintained and used by group members.
Forestry
The use of land whereby forests are tended, harvested for commercial purposes, and reforested either by natural or artificial reforestation, and where timber is cut and sorted on-site. Forestry management also includes but is not limited to the planting and harvesting of pulpwood and saw timber.
Greenhouse and nursery
Land and buildings used in production or sale of foliage plants, plants, and flowers.
Keeping of horses or ponies
The use of land and structures to provide forage, shelter, and care to one or more horses or ponies.
Other agricultural use
Any agricultural use that is not specifically defined here, but is listed in the description of the Agricultural/Forestry Uses category. Examples include, but are not limited to, aquaculture, hydroponics, and fungiculture.
2. Agriculture/Forestry-Related Uses
The Agriculture/Forestry-Related Uses category includes use types that provide support and services to agricultural and forestry uses, or are otherwise closely related to agricultural or forestry production in their form and function. Use types include: equestrian centers; riding stables; farm machinery and implement sales and rental (or repair); farm supply sales; agricultural research facilities; and rural corporate retreats. Accessory uses may include offices, storage areas, sale of produce on the site where it is raised, and retail sales.
Agriculture research facility
A facility for the investigation, testing, and demonstration of agricultural products and processes, including biotechnical agriculture, veterinary, soil, plant and animal sciences.
Agritourism (570, Fla. Stat.)
An agritourism activity as defined in Sec. 570.86, Fla. Stat., or as amended.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 11
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.1 Principal Use Classification System
Equestrian center
A facility designed and intended for the teaching and display of equestrian skills— including, but not limited to, show jumping and dressage—and the hosting of events, competitions, exhibitions, or other displays of equestrian skills. Accessory uses include the caring for, breeding, boarding, dealing, selling, renting, riding, or training of equines. It includes barns, stables, rings, paddocks, or other related accessory structures.
Farm distribution hub
A place where farmers can deliver agricultural products for pick-up by consumers or wholesalers. Farm product distribution hub does not include such uses as a trucking operation, stockyard, auction house, slaughterhouse, or cannery or other processing facility.
Farm supply sales and farm machinery/implement sales, rental, or repair
An establishment for the sale of plant seeds and bulbs, animal feed, fertilizer, herbicides and soil conditioners, fungicides and insecticides, and similar products to farmers; or for the sale, rental, and/or repair of equipment normally or routinely used on farms and gardens, and related parts, tools and accessories—but not of non-farm equipment or materials.
Farm winery
An agricultural processing facility located on a farm with a producing vineyard, orchard, or similar growing area and with facilities for fermenting and bottling wine on the premises where the owner manufactures wine and/or pomace brandy from fresh fruits or other agricultural products as allowable by State law. A farm winery includes crushing, fermenting and refermenting, bottling, blending, bulk and bottle storage, aging, shipping, receiving, laboratory equipment and maintenance facilities, administrative office functions and related agricultural tourism activities.
Riding stable
An establishment where horses are boarded and cared for, where horses may be rented to the general public for riding, and where instruction in riding, jumping, and showing may be offered.
Rural corporate retreat
A use, compatible with agriculture, horticulture, and animal husbandry, which is engaged in the study, testing, design, invention, evaluation, or development of technologies, techniques, processes, or professional and consulting services, and education and training related to such advances and services. Rural corporate retreats may be utilized for basic and applied research services and education wherein the inquiry process is conducted in a manner similar to that of institutions of higher learning or management consulting firms. Rural corporate retreat facilities may include facilities for associated training programs, seminars, conference, and related activities.
Land Development Code Page 10 12 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.1 Principal Use Classification System
3. Open Space Uses
The Open Space Uses category includes use types focusing on open space areas largely devoted to natural landscaping and outdoor recreation, and tending to have few structures. Use types include: parks (including recreational and natural area parks): greenways: arboretums and botanical gardens: cemeteries; and similar uses. This use category does not include athletic fields, golf courses, golf driving ranges, or other primarily outdoor recreational uses (categorized in the Recreation/Entertainment Uses category). Accessory uses may include caretaker’s quarters, clubhouses, statuary, fountains, maintenance facilities, concessions, and parking.
Arboretum or botanical garden
A place where trees, shrubs, or other woody plants are grown, exhibited, or labeled for scientific, educational, or passive recreational purposes—but not including the harvest of plants or their produce.
Cemetery
A place used for the permanent interment of dead human bodies (or their cremated remains) or pet animal bodies. A memorial garden located on the premises of a "Place of Worship," where only the ashes of deceased persons may be scattered or placed, is not a "Cemetery."
Park
A park consists of land used for recreation, exercise, sports, education, rehabilitation, or similar activities, or a land area intended to enhance the enjoyment of natural features or natural beauty, specifically excluding commercially operated amusement parks.
D. Residential Uses Classification
1. Household Living Uses
The Household Living Uses category includes use types providing for the residential occupancy of a dwelling unit by a single family. Tenancy is generally arranged on a month-to-month or longer basis. Use types include: single-family detached dwellings, two-family (duplex) dwellings, multifamily dwellings, townhome dwellings, live-work dwellings, and mobile home dwellings. This use category does not include residential use types that generally involve some level of managed personal care for a larger number of residents (e.g., assisted living facilities), which are categorized in the Group Living Uses category. Accessory uses common to Household Living Uses include recreational activities, raising of domestic pets, hobbies, swimming pools, and parking of the occupants’ vehicles. Some accessory uses (e.g., home occupations and accessory dwelling units) are subject to additional regulations (see Sec. Section 4.3, Accessory Uses and Structures).
Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU)
An ancillary or secondary dwelling unit that is clearly subordinate to the principal dwelling, which has a separate egress/ingress independent from the principal dwelling, and which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons and which includes provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 13
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.1 Principal Use Classification System
sanitation. It is located on the same parcel or lot as the principal dwelling and shall be subject to the required setbacks of the principal structure and may be either attached to or detached from the principal dwelling. For purposes of determining maximum density, an accessory dwelling unit shall not count as a dwelling unit. Also called a “granny flat” or “guest cottage.”
Dwelling, live-work
A structure or portion of a structure combining a residential dwelling unit for one or more persons with an integrated work space (on the ground floor) principally used by one or more of the dwelling unit residents.
Dwelling, mobile home
A structure, transportable in one or more sections, that is built on an integral permanent chassis, includes plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems, and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation as a single dwelling unit when connected to required utilities.
Dwelling, multifamily
A dwelling other than a townhome dwelling containing three or more dwelling units. Units may be located side by side in a horizontal configuration or stacked one above the other in a vertical configuration, sharing common vertical walls or horizontal floors and ceilings. Multifamily dwellings include what are commonly called apartments, or condominium units, but not townhome dwellings.
Dwelling, single-family detached
A dwelling designed for or occupied exclusively by one family on a lot. There shall only be one single-family detached dwelling on one individual lot.
Dwelling, townhome
A housing complex where dwelling units are attached horizontally through fireproof and soundproof common walls, with each dwelling unit occupying space from the lowest floor to the roof of the building and all or a portion of the land area is individually owned. Parking lots, driveways, walkways and accessory recreation areas may be located in areas retained in common ownership which are owned jointly by the owners of townhome units.
Dwelling, two-family (duplex)
A dwelling containing two dwelling units sharing a common wall. Each dwelling unit is occupied exclusively by one family. A two-family or duplex dwelling includes two-story units where a floor/ceiling have the function of a common wall.
Dwelling unit
A single housing unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one housekeeping unit, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.
Land Development Code Page 10 14 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.1 Principal Use Classification System
Mobile home park
Land under single ownership which is developed with all necessary facilities and services in accordance with the zoning and development standards of this LDC, and which is intended for the express purpose of providing a satisfactory living environment for mobile home residents on a long-term occupancy basis.
2. Group Living Uses
The Group Living Uses category includes use types providing for the residential occupancy of a group of living units by persons who sometimes do not constitute a single family (but not always) and may receive some level of personal care. Individual living units often consist of a single room or group of rooms without cooking and eating facilities (even though some do have such facilities), but unlike a hotel/motel, are generally occupied on a monthly or longer basis. Use types include: assisted living facilities; group residential facilities; boarding or rooming houses; convents or monasteries; fraternity or sorority houses; and similar uses. Although continuing care retirement communities include household living uses (e.g., dwellings) and health care uses, they are categorized as a group living use because of their focus on the present or future provision of personal care to senior citizens and their integration of various uses as a single cohesive development. This use category does not include use types where persons generally occupy living units for periods of less than 30 days (e.g., hotel/motels), which are categorized in the Visitor Accommodation Uses category. It also does not include use types where residents or inpatients are routinely provided more than modest health care services (e.g., nursing homes), which are categorized in the Health Care Uses category. Accessory uses common to group living uses include recreational facilities, administrative offices, and food preparation and dining facilities.
Assisted living facility
A facility that provides living and sleeping facilities and care to four or more individuals who, because of advanced age or physical or mental disability, require intermittent assistance in performing the activities of daily living, which may include the supervision and/or administration of medication, in a protective environment. Such care includes, but is not be limited to, meal preparation, laundry services, housekeeping, personal observation and direction in the activities of daily living, transportation for routine social and medical appointments, and the availability of a responsible adult for companionship or nonclinical counseling. The use does not include a "Nursing Home Facility.”
Assisted Living Facility, Extended Congregate Care
This type of assisted living facility includes professional nursing services as per Ch. 429, Fla. Stat.
Adult Foster Home
A family care facility, providing care and supervision pursuant to state rules and regulations to persons not requiring a special treatment program who are 18 years of age or older. Such a facility is not occupied solely by persons related to each other by blood, adoption, or marriage living together as a family.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 15
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.1 Principal Use Classification System
Boardinghouse or roominghouse
A building or portion of which is used by its occupants to provide (for compensation) lodging (and meals) to two or more, but not exceeding nine, guests, with only one kitchen. A boardinghouse or roominghouse shall not be considered a "Bed-and-Breakfast Inn."
Child foster home
A family care facility, providing care and supervision in a single-family home setting in accordance with state rules and regulations to persons not requiring special treatment who are under 18 years of age. Such a facility is not occupied solely by persons related to each other by blood, adoption or marriage living together as a family.
Continuing care retirement community
An integrated development that offers senior citizens a full continuum of housing options and assistance, ranging from fully independent dwelling units, to assistance with personal care in assisted living facilities, to long-term skilled nursing care in a nursing home facility.
Emergency shelter or home
A facility in which room, board, and supervision are provided on a temporary basis for a period not exceeding 30 days to one or more persons in danger of abuse, neglect or exploitation.
Family day care home
A child care arrangement as defined in Ch. 402, Fla. Stat. All family day care homes will be operated pursuant to federal, state, and local regulations.
E. Public, Civic, and Institutional Uses Classification
1. Communication Uses
The Communication Uses category includes uses and facilities providing regional or community-wide communications services, such as wireless communications and radio and television broadcasting, and newspaper or magazine publishing. Services may be publicly or privately provided and may include on-site personnel. Use types include: wireless telecommunication towers and antennas: broadcasting studios: newspaper or magazine publishing facilities; and similar uses. Accessory uses may include offices, monitoring, storage areas, or data transmission equipment.
Broadcasting studio
Commercial and public communications uses including radio and television broadcasting and receiving stations and studios, with facilities entirely within buildings.
Newspaper/periodical publishing establishment
An establishment primarily involved in carrying out operations necessary for producing and distributing newspapers, including gathering news; writing news columns, feature stories, and editorials; selling and preparing advertisements; and publishing of newspapers in print or electronic form. Not included are establishments
Land Development Code Page 10 16 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.1 Principal Use Classification System
primarily engaged in printing publications without publishing (categorized as manufacturing and production uses) or education or membership organizations incidentally engaged in publishing magazines or newsletters for distribution to their membership.
Wireless telecommunications tower
See definition of “Tower” in Sec 75-22, Definitions, Code of Ordinances.
2. Community Service Uses
The Community Service Uses category includes use types of a public, nonprofit, or charitable nature providing a local service (e.g., child care facility, cultural, recreational, counseling, training, religious) directly to people of the community. Generally, such uses provide ongoing continued service on-site or have employees at the site on a regular basis. The category does not include uses with a residential component. Use types include: adult day care facilities; child care centers; clubs or lodges of community-oriented associations; community centers/facilities; noncommercial cultural facilities (noncommercial or public) (e.g., libraries or museums); philanthropic institutions; emergency services facilities; places of worship; government administrative services facilities; government maintenance, storage, or distribution facilities; or similar uses. This use category does not include private or commercial health clubs or recreational facilities (categorized in the Recreation/Entertainment Uses category), or counseling in an office setting (categorized in the Office Use category), or passenger terminals for public transportation services (categorized in the Transportation Use category). Accessory uses may include offices, meeting areas, food preparation and dining areas, health and therapy areas, and indoor and outdoor recreational facilities.
Adult day care facility
An establishment in which a program is operated that is designed to provide care and activities (during the daytime) for five or more adults (unrelated to the operator by blood, adoption, or marriage) who are members of a service population that, because of advanced age, or emotional, mental, physical, familial, or social conditions, need assistance in daytime activities. The term shall not include a school, private, or philanthropic institution.
Child care facility
Any child care arrangement, as defined in Ch. 402, Fla. Stat. All child care facilities will be operated in accordance with federal, state, and local laws.
Club or lodge or community-oriented associations
An establishment providing facilities for social or recreational purposes including those organized chiefly to promote friendship and welfare among its members and not operated for profit, excluding adult entertainment.
Community center/facility
A place, building, area, or other facility used for providing social and recreational programs. The facility may be private or the facility may be open to the general public and designed to accommodate and serve significant segments of the community.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 17
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.1 Principal Use Classification System
Cultural facility
A facility for storing, using, and loaning—but not sale—of literary, historical, scientific, musical, artistic, or other reference materials (e.g., library), or for displaying or preserving objects of interest or providing facilities for one or more of the arts or sciences to the public (e.g., museum). Accessory uses include offices and storage facilities used by staff and meeting rooms.
Emergency services facility
A facility for public services such as fire and police protection, emergency medical services (EMS), emergency operation centers, and related administrative services.
Philanthropic institution
Any facility operated by a private, nonprofit organization offering religious, social, physical, recreational, emergency, or benevolent services, and that is not already specifically identified as a use in this LDC. The organization shall not carry on a business on the premises. The term does not include an “adult day care center" or "child care facility."
Post office
A facility that provides mailing services, post office boxes, offices, vehicle storage areas, and sorting and distribution facilities for mail.
Place of worship
A structure, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where people regularly assemble to conduct religious worship, ceremonies, rituals, and related education. The structure and its accessory buildings and uses are maintained and controlled by a religious body. Places of worship include chapels, churches, mosques, shrines, synagogues, tabernacles, temples, and other similar religious places of assembly. Accessory uses may include administrative offices, classrooms, meeting rooms, schools, day care facilities, and cooking and eating facilities. A place of worship may include other uses that generally exist as principal uses—e.g., day care center, school, or recreational facility. Such uses are treated as principal uses and subject to the standards and limitations applicable to such uses.
3. Educational Uses
The Educational Uses category includes use types such as public schools and private schools (including charter schools) at the elementary, middle, or high school level that provide State-mandated basic education or a comparable equivalent. This use category also includes colleges, universities, and other institutions of higher learning such as vocational or trade schools that offer courses of general or specialized study leading to a degree or certification. Accessory uses at schools may include offices, play areas, recreational and sport facilities, cafeterias, auditoriums, and before-or after-school day care. Accessory uses at colleges or universities may include offices, dormitories, food service, laboratories, health care facilities, recreational and sports facilities, theaters, meeting areas, maintenance facilities, and supporting commercial uses (e.g., eating establishments, bookstores).
Land Development Code Page 10 18 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.1 Principal Use Classification System
Boarding school
An educational institution that offers a program of high school or middle school instruction meeting State requirements, where pupils are provided with meals and lodging.
College or university
An institution offering a program of post-secondary education and instruction leading to associate, baccalaureate, or higher degrees, that is accredited by a national association of colleges and universities.
School, elementary, middle, or high
An educational institution that offers a program of high school, middle school (or junior high school), and elementary school (including kindergarten, pre-k, pre-k – 8, or nursery school) instruction meeting State requirements for a school. Such uses include classrooms, laboratories, auditoriums, libraries, cafeterias, after school care, athletic facilities, dormitories, and other facilities that further the educational mission of the institution. This definition is inclusive of “educational facilities” as defined in CH. 1013., Fla. Stat.
Vocational or trade school
A public or private school offering vocational or trade instruction—such as teaching of trade or industrial skills, clerical or data processing, barbering or hair dressing, computer or electronic technology, or artistic skills—to students, and that operates in buildings or structures or on premises on land leased or owned by the educational institution, and that meets the State requirements for a vocational training facility. Such uses include classrooms, laboratories, auditoriums, libraries, cafeterias, and other facilities that further the educational mission of the institution.
4. Health Care Uses
The Health Care Uses category includes use types providing a variety of health care services, including surgical or other intensive care and treatment, various types of medical treatment, nursing care, preventative care, diagnostic and laboratory services, and physical therapy. Care may be provided on an inpatient, overnight, or outpatient basis. Use types include: hospitals; nursing home facilities; medical/dental offices and labs; methadone treatment centers; and similar uses. This use category does not include assisted living facilities, which focus on providing personal care rather than medical care to residents, and are categorized in the Group Living Uses category. Accessory uses may include food preparation and dining facilities, recreation areas, offices, meeting rooms, teaching facilities, hospices, maintenance facilities, staff residences, and limited accommodations for members of patients’ families.
Clinic
An establishment where patients who are not lodged overnight are admitted for examination and treatment by one person or a group of persons practicing any form of healing or health-building services to individuals, whether such persons be medical doctors, chiropractors, osteopaths, chiropodists, naturopaths, optometrists, dentists, or any such profession the practice of which is lawful in the State of Florida.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 19
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.1 Principal Use Classification System
Hospital
An institution receiving inpatients and rendering medical care on a 24-hours-per-day basis. The term includes general hospitals, sanitariums, sanatoriums, and institutions in which service is limited to special fields, such as cardiac, eye, ear, nose and throat, pediatric, orthopedic, skin, cancer, mental, tuberculosis, chronic disease, and obstetrics. The facilities may also include outpatient care, ambulatory care, offices of medical practitioners, adult day care, respite care, medical day care and day care for sick children, gift shops, restaurants, and other accessory uses. The term shall not include an "adult day care center," "assisted living facility," or "nursing home facility."
Medical or dental lab
Facilities and offices for performing services to provide information or materials for use in the diagnosis, prevention, or treatment of a disease or a medical or dental condition. Such services include, but are not limited to, the examination of bodily fluids or tissues and the production or repair of prosthetic dentures, bridges, or other dental appliances. They may be a part of doctor’s or dentist’s offices.
Medical marijuana dispensary
A location that satisfies “dispensing facility" as provided at Rule 64-4.001, FAC, and includes any area approved by the Florida Department of Health for the dispensation of medical marijuana.
Nursing home facility
A licensed institution providing comprehensive medical and nursing services for chronically ill, disabled, or convalescent patients who require supervised care on a 24hour-a-day basis. Services are rendered by or under the supervision of a registered nurse. The use includes facilities providing subacute level nursing care and restorative care. Accessory uses may include dining rooms and recreation and physical therapy facilities for residents, and offices and storage facilities for professional and supervisory staff. This use does not include assisted living facilities, where the focus is on providing personal care rather than medical care, or hospitals, where more acute and specialized medical care is provided.
5. Transportation Uses
The Transportation Uses category includes use types providing for the landing and takeoff of airplanes and helicopters, including loading and unloading areas and associated aircraft sales, repair, fuel sales, and flight instruction uses. It also includes passenger terminals for surface or water-based transportation. Accessory uses may include freight handling areas, concessions, offices, maintenance, limited storage, and fueling facilities. Use types include: airports or heliports; private airstrips; passenger stations/terminals for ground transportation services (e.g., buses); park and ride facilities; and parking facilities (as a principal use). This use category does not include transit–related infrastructure such as bus stops and bus shelters (deemed minor utilities under the Utility Uses category).
Land Development Code Page 10 20 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.1 Principal Use Classification System
Airport
A place where aircraft may take off or land, discharge or receive cargo or passengers, be repaired or serviced, take on fuel, or be stored, and "accessory uses" which are commonly associated with these facilities.
Heliport
A facility designed to accommodate all phases of helicopter operations, with space for a terminal and the loading, unloading, service, and storage of helicopters, including accessory uses commonly associated with an airport terminal. Heliports may be associated with hospital facilities.
Park and ride facility
An off-street parking facility designed or intended to provide peripheral collection and storage of motor vehicles and bicycles to accommodate commuter traffic into or out of the community via a nearby transit station or terminal located within convenient walking distance of the facility. An accessory structure may include passenger shelters.
Parking facility (as a principal use)
An off-street, hard-surfaced, ground level area—or a structure composed of one or more levels or floors—that is used exclusively for the temporary storage of motor vehicles.
Terminal
Any structure or facility that is primarily used as part of a system for the purpose of loading, unloading, or transferring of passengers or accommodating the movement of passengers from one mode of transportation to another.
6. Utility Uses
The Utility Uses category includes both major utilities, which are infrastructure services that provide regional or City-wide service, and minor utilities, which are infrastructure services that need to be located in or near where the service is provided. Large-scale solar energy collection systems that constitute a principal use of a lot are included as a special type of major utility use. Services may be publicly or privately provided and may include on-site personnel. Accessory uses may include offices, monitoring, or storage areas.
Solar energy collection facility (large-scale)
A facility consisting of solar panels, modules, and related equipment (e.g., heat exchanger, pipes, inverter, wiring, storage) that collects solar radiation and transfers it as heat to a carrier fluid for use in hot water heating or space heating and cooling, and/or that collects solar energy and converts it into electricity. As a principal use, a solar energy collection system is designed to meet demands for a large area and is typically mounted on the ground.
Utility facility, major
A structure or facility that is a relatively major component of an infrastructure system providing community-or region-wide utility services. Examples of major utility
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 21
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.1 Principal Use Classification System
facilities include potable water treatment plants, water towers, wastewater treatment plants, solid waste facilities, gas compressor stations, and electrical substations. This use does not include telecommunications facilities or towers.
Utility facility, minor
A structure or facility that by itself is a relatively minor component of an infrastructure system providing community-or region-wide utility services and that needs to be in or near the neighborhood or use type where the service is provided. Examples of minor utility facilities include water and sewage pipes and pump stations, stormwater pipes and retention/detention facilities, telephone lines and local exchanges, electric lines and transformers, gas transmission pipes and valves, CATV lines, and bus and transit shelters.
F. Commercial Uses Classification
1. Adult Uses
The Adult Uses category includes use types that sell, distribute, or present material or feature performances or other activities emphasizing the depiction or display of specified sexual activities. Use types include adult book or video stores (distinguished by being largely devoted to selling, renting or presenting media emphasizing sexually explicit content) and adult entertainment.
Adult book or video store
See Sec. 10-98, Definitions, Code of Ordinances.
Adult entertainment
See Sec. 10-98, Definitions, Code of Ordinances.
2. Animal Care Uses
The Animal Care Uses category is characterized by use types related to the provision of medical services, general care, and boarding services for household pets and domestic animals. Use types include: animal shelters; kennels (that provide boarding); veterinary hospitals or clinics; and similar uses.
Animal shelter
A facility used to house and care for stray, homeless, abandoned, or neglected household and domestic animals that is owned, operated, or maintained by a public body or an established humane society or other private or nonprofit organization.
Kennel
An establishment where four or more dogs and/or cats over six months of age are kept for any purpose, excluding pet shops, pet beauty parlors, hobby kennels, and veterinary hospitals or clinics.
Kennel, hobby
An establishment where four or more dogs and/or cats over six months of age are kept solely for the owner's companionship, recreational, sporting, or hobby purposes, where no services are offered for remuneration, and where no puppies or kittens are
Land Development Code Page 10 22 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.1 Principal Use Classification System
sold, or offered for sale, with the exception that one litter of puppies or kittens may be sold every year.
Pet beauty parlor
An establishment for the cleaning and grooming, of dogs, cats, and other small pets.
Veterinary hospital or clinic
A facility used for the care, diagnosis, and treatment of sick, ailing, infirm, or injured animals and preventive care for healthy animals. Accessory uses may include animal grooming services, short-term boarding that is incidental to medical care or treatment, and limited retail sales of pet-related merchandise.
3. Business Support Service Uses
The Business Support Service Uses category includes use types primarily providing routine business support functions for the day-to-day operations of other businesses, as well as to households. Use types include: business service centers; conference or training centers; data processing facilities; employment agencies; travel agencies; telephone call centers; and similar uses.
Business service center
An establishment primarily engaged in providing a range of office support services, such as document copying services, facsimile services, word processing services, on-site personal computer rental, and office product sales, and the delivery of parcels
(e.g. Federal Express service)
Conference or training center
A facility designed to accommodate fewer than 2,500 persons and used for conferences, seminars, product displays, recreation activities, and entertainment functions, along with accessory functions including temporary outdoor displays, and food and beverage preparation and service for on–premise consumption.
Data processing facility
An establishment primarily engaged in providing infrastructure (e.g., computer systems and associated components such as telecommunications and storage systems) for data processing and storage, web hosting, application hosting, streaming services, and related services.
Employment or travel agency
An establishment primarily engaged in finding jobs for people seeking them and finding people to fill particular jobs offered by employers (employment agency), or in providing travel arrangement and reservation services to the general public and commercial clients (travel agency).
Telephone call center
An establishment primarily engaged in answering telephone calls and relaying messages to clients or in initiating or receiving communications for telemarketing purposes, such as promoting clients’ products or services, taking orders for clients, or soliciting contributions or providing information for clients.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 23
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.1 Principal Use Classification System
4. Eating or Drinking Establishment Uses
The Eating or Drinking Establishment Uses category consists of establishments primarily engaged in the preparation and serving of food or beverages for on or off premises consumption. Use types include: alcoholic beverage establishments; brewpubs or microbreweries; restaurants; fast food restaurants; drive-in restaurants; and similar uses. Accessory uses may include areas for outdoor seating, drive-through service facilities, facilities for live entertainment, and valet parking services.
Alcoholic beverage establishments
Establishments that sell alcoholic beverages. This includes, but is not limited to, bars, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, package stores, and eating or drinking establishments.
Brewpub or microbrewery
An establishment which brews ales, beers, meads, and similar beverages on site, and serves and sales those beverages on-site. Brewpubs may not brew more than 15,000 barrels of beverages (in total) annually.
Restaurant
An establishment where food and/or beverages are prepared, served, and consumed, and whose principal method of operation includes one or both of the following characteristics: (1) customers are normally provided with an individual menu and served their food and beverages by a restaurant employee at the same table or counter where the items are consumed; or (2) a cafeteria-type operation where food and beverages generally are consumed within the restaurant building.
Restaurant, drive-in
An establishment used for sale, dispensing, or serving food, refreshments, or beverages to persons in automobiles, including those establishments where customers may serve themselves and may eat or drink the food, refreshments, or beverages on the premises.
Restaurant, fast food
An establishment whose principal business is the sale of food or beverage in a ready-to-consume state for consumption within the building, within a motor vehicle parked on the premises or off the premises as carryout orders. The principal method of operation includes, but is not limited to, the following characteristics: food or beverages are usually served in paper, plastic or other types of disposable containers; there is generally not waiter or waitress service; food and beverages are served at a counter or window to be consumed elsewhere; drive-through service is often available
5. Funeral and Mortuary Uses
The Funeral and Mortuary Services Uses category consists of establishments that provide services related to the death of a human being. Use types include: funeral homes; mortuaries; crematories; and similar uses.
Land Development Code Page 10 24 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.1 Principal Use Classification System
Crematory
A facility containing furnaces for the reduction of dead bodies—either human or animal— to ashes by fire.
Funeral home or mortuary
A building used for human funeral services. A funeral home may contain facilities for:
(A)
Embalming and other services used in the preparation of the dead for burial;
(B)
The display of the deceased;
(C)
The performance of ceremonies in connection with a funeral;
(D)
The performance of autopsies and similar surgical procedures;
(E)
The sale and storage of caskets, funeral urns, and other related funeral supplies; and
(F) The storage of funeral vehicles. A funeral home may include facilities for cremation.
6. Office Uses
The Office Uses category includes office buildings housing activities conducted in an office setting, usually with limited contact with the general public, and generally focusing on the provision of business services, professional services (e.g., lawyers, accountants, engineers, architects, planners), or financial services (e.g., lenders, brokerage houses, tax preparers). Use types include: business offices; professional offices; contractor’s offices; and similar uses. This use category does not include offices that are a component of or accessory to a principal use in another use category, such as administrative government services (categorized in the Community Service Uses category), medical/dental offices (categorized in the Health Care Uses category), or banks or other financial institutions (categorized in the Retail Sales and Service Uses category). Accessory uses may include cafeterias, recreational or fitness facilities, incidental commercial uses, or other amenities primarily for the use of employees in the offices.
Contractor’s office
A building or portion of a building used by a building, heating, plumbing, electrical, or other development contractor both as an office and for the storage of a limited quantity of materials, supplies, and equipment inside the building. If outdoor storage of materials, supplies, or equipment is associated with the office, the use is considered a contractor’s storage yard.
General business
Offices used for conducting the affairs of various businesses, general businesses, nonprofit organizations, or government agencies—including administration, record keeping, clerical work, and similar business functions. Accessory uses may include uses intended to serve the daily needs of office employees, such as restaurants, coffee shops, newspapers, or candy stands.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 25
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.1 Principal Use Classification System
Office, professional
A building primarily consisting of offices for the conducting of the affairs of professionals, such as architects, engineers, attorneys, accountants, planners and the like.
7. Personal Service Uses
The Personal Services Uses category consists of establishments primarily engaged in the provision of frequent or recurrent needed services of a personal nature. Use types include: art, photographic, music, dance, or martial arts studios or schools; beauty salons or barber shops; confectionary stores; dry cleaning or laundry drop-off/pick-up establishments; fortune-telling establishments; lawn care, pool, or pest control services; self-service laundry; massage establishments; nail care establishments; pawn shops; personal or household goods repair establishments; tobacco shops, tanning salons; tattoo or body-piercing establishment; taxidermy; and similar uses.
Art, music, dance, or martial arts studio/school
An establishment with space used for the production of—or instruction in—art, music, dance, or the martial arts.
Beauty salon or barber shop
A facility that provides hair styling, hair coloring, nail care, facials, and other similar salon services. A beauty salon may also include a "day spa" that offers massage treatment or other services related to hygiene or body care, or similar services, but does not include a massage therapy establishment.
Confectionery store, ice cream, candy
An establishment for the production and sale of ice cream, candy, and other sweet confectionaries.
Dry-cleaning or laundry drop-off/pick-up establishment
A facility where retail customers drop off or pick up laundry or dry cleaning and where the cleaning processes may take place on site as long as all cleaning materials and chemicals and waste water is disposed of in compliance with all applicable permits and regulations.
Fortune telling establishment
An establishment primarily engaged in attempts to tell fortunes or predict the future (for pay or voluntary contributions) by means of occult or psychic powers, faculties, or forces; necromancy, palmistry, psychology, psychic psychometry, spirits, medium-ship, seership, prophecy, cards, talismans, sorcery, charms, potions, magnetism, tea leaves, magic, numerology, mechanical devices, handwriting analyses, phrenology, character readings, or any other similar means.
Laundry, self-service
A business that provides coin-operated washing, drying, dry cleaning, and/or ironing machines for hire to be used by customers on the premises.
Land Development Code Page 10 26 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.1 Principal Use Classification System
Lawn care, pool, or pest control service
An establishment primarily engaged in providing lawn care services (e.g., mowing, aeration, seeding, fertilizer, landscaping), swimming pool services (e.g., cleaning, draining, equipment repair), or pest control services (e.g., inspection, extermination).
Massage establishment
Any establishment primarily engaged in the administering of massages for pay by a massage therapist duly licensed or certified. This use does not include the following uses, which may include the administering of massages:
(A)
A "hospital," "nursing home facility," or "medical clinic";
(B)
The office of a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, podiatrist, or physical therapist duly licensed or certified;
(C)
A barber shop or beauty salon in which massages are administered only to the scalp, face, neck, or shoulders;
(D)
A nonprofit organization operating an educational, cultural, recreational, or athletic facility;
(E)
A facility for the welfare of the residents of the area; or
(F)
An establishment providing instruction in, and facilities for, controlled exercise, weight lifting, calisthenics, and general physical fitness, of which not more than ten percent of the space is used for massages; and whose gross income from massages is less than fifteen percent of the total gross business income derived from physical fitness sales contracts at each business location.
Nail care establishment
An establishment that primarily offers fingernail and toenail care services such as manicures, pedicures, and nail enhancements.
Pawnshop
A business at which a person lends money on the deposit or pledge of tangible personal property or purchases tangible personal property on the condition of reselling the same to the seller at a stipulated price.
Personal or household goods repair establishment
An establishment primarily engaged in the provision of repair services for computers, TVs, audio equipment, bicycles, clocks, watches, shoes, guns, canvas products, appliances, and office equipment—including tailors, locksmiths, and upholsterer services.
Tanning salon
A facility specializing in cosmetic tanning using ultraviolet lights.
Tattoo or body-piercing establishment
An establishment wherein designs, letters, figures, body piercing, or other marks are placed upon the skin of any person, using ink or other substances that result in the
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 27
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.1 Principal Use Classification System
permanent coloration or piercing of the skin by means of use of needles or other instruments designed to contact or puncture the skin.
Taxidermy
An establishment engaged in the art of preparing and preserving the skins of animals and stuffing and mounting them in lifelike form.
Tobacco shop
An establishment primarily engaged in selling tobacco and tobacco-related products.
Vape/Hookah Lounge
An establishment primarily used for social consumption of tobacco, tobacco-related, or tobacco-substitute products through “vape,” “e-cigarette,” “hookah,” or similar devices.
8. Recreation/Entertainment Uses
The Recreational/Entertainment Uses category includes use types providing indoor or outdoor facilities for recreation or entertainment-oriented activities by patrons or members. Use types include: arenas, stadiums, or amphitheaters; cinemas; country clubs; golf courses; golf driving ranges; nightclubs; performance arts centers; recreation facilities, indoor (amusement arcades, amusement centers, aquatics centers health clubs, recreation courts, skating facilities, swimming pools, and similar uses); and recreation facilities, outdoor (archery or baseball batting ranges, athletic fields, miniature golf courses, recreation courts, swimming pools, and similar uses). It does not include recreational facilities that are accessory to parks (categorized as open space uses), or that are reserved for use by a particular residential development’s residents and their guests (e.g., accessory community swimming pools and other recreation facilities). Accessory uses may include offices, concessions, snack bars, and maintenance facilities.
Arena, stadium, or amphitheater
A building or structure designed or intended for use for spectator sports, entertainment events, expositions, and other public gatherings. Such uses may or may not include lighting facilities for illuminating the field or stage area, concessions, parking facilities, and maintenance areas.
Cinema
A motion picture theater that is a building or part of a building, and is devoted to showing motion pictures. This can also include an open lot or part of an open lot and auxiliary facilities devoted primarily to the showing of motion pictures on a paid admission basis to patrons seated on outdoor seats.
Country club
A chartered, nonprofit membership club catering primarily to its members, providing but not limited to one or more of the following recreational and social activities: golf, swimming, tennis and other racquet courts, riding, outdoor recreation, club house, locker room, and pro shop.
Land Development Code Page 10 28 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.1 Principal Use Classification System
Golf course
An area of land laid out for playing golf. Accessory recreational facilities, such as driving ranges, putting greens, a country club, concessions for serving food and refreshments to members and guests, swimming pools, tennis and other racquet courts, picnic areas, and accessory facilities directly related to golf, may be included.
Golf driving range
A limited land area on which golf players do not walk, but onto which they drive golf balls from a common driving tee. Accessory uses may include a concessions stand, netting, exterior lighting fixtures, putting greens, as well as maintenance and outdoor storage areas. This use does not include a golf course.
Nightclub
A place of entertainment offering alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises that may also provide on-site entertainment in the form of live performances, dancing, billiards, comedic performances, or other entertainment activities. Performances related to the display of specified sexual activities or nudity are classified as adult entertainment and are prohibited within nightclubs.
Performance arts center
One or more adjoining structures housing one or more of the following uses: theaters or performance space for dramatic, dance, or musical productions; schools, training centers, or practice space for artists; and accessory office, storage, or workplace areas for any such uses. Accessory uses may also include other nonresidential uses serving center patrons.
Recreation facility, indoor
A commercial establishment that provides indoor facilities for recreation or entertainment-oriented activities by patrons or members. Use types include: amusement arcades, amusement centers, aquatic centers, health clubs, recreation courts, skating facilities, and similar uses.
Amusement arcade
An indoor commercial establishment which provides, as the principal "use," amusement devices or games of skill or chance, such as pinball and video games. This term shall not include establishments where amusement devices and games are "accessory uses" which either do not involve more than fifteen percent of the gross floor area of the establishment or involve more than two devices or games, whichever results in the greater number of games.
Amusement center
A commercially operated indoor facility providing a variety of amusement devices primarily including, but not limited to, play equipment, television games, electromechanical games, small kiddie rides, and other similar devices, and which may include food service.
Aquatic center
A complex with facilities for water sports, including swimming pools.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 29
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.1 Principal Use Classification System
Health club
An indoor establishment, including saunas and steam baths, offering or providing facilities for, and instruction in, general health, physical fitness and controlled exercises such as, but not limited to, weight lifting, calisthenics and aerobic/slimnastic dancing, and massages.
Recreation courts (indoor)
An indoor structure used for holding court games (basketball, tennis, racquetball, squash, etc.). Accessory uses may include a concession stand, netting, exterior lighting fixtures, public bathrooms, maintenance and storage areas, and spectator seating or stands.
Skating facility (indoor)
An indoor facility, the use of which is primarily devoted to roller or ice skating. The facility may also be used as a site for competitive events and as a practice and training facility. Accessory uses may include meeting rooms, training rooms, videotape rooms, a restaurant, a pro shop, and a snack bar.
Recreation facility, outdoor
A commercial establishment that provides outdoor facilities for recreation or entertainment-oriented activities by patrons or members. Use types include: archery or baseball batting ranges, athletic fields, miniature golf courses, recreation courts, swimming pools, and similar uses.
Archery or baseball batting range
An outdoor area used for archers to practice the skill of archery or baseball or
softball players to practice the skill of batting.
Athletic field
A facility for the staging of amateur and/or professional sporting events,
consisting of an open-air field and appropriate support facilities
Miniature golf course
A recreational facility for the playing of a novelty version of golf with a putter, typically with artificial playing surfaces and theme-oriented obstacles such as bridges and tunnels.
Recreation courts
An outdoor area used for holding court games (basketball, tennis, racquetball, squash, etc.). Accessory uses may include a concession stand, netting, exterior lighting fixtures, public bathrooms, maintenance and storage areas, and spectator seating or stands.
Swimming pool (as a principal use)
A man-made pool at least three feet deep at the deep end that is filled with water and used for wading or swimming, and that is operated for profit.
9. Retail Sales and Service Uses
Land Development Code Page 10 30 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.1 Principal Use Classification System
The Retail Sales and Service Uses category includes use types involved in the sale, rental, and incidental servicing of goods and commodities that are generally delivered or provided on the premises to a consumer. Use types include: banks or financial institutions; check cashing businesses; consumer goods establishments; ; drug stores or pharmacies; farmers’ markets; flea markets; grocery stores and food markets; and manufactured or mobile home sales. This use category does not include sales or service establishments related to vehicles (the Vehicle Services and Sales Uses category), establishments primarily selling supplies to contractors or retailers (categorized as the Wholesale Uses category), the provision of financial, professional, or business services in an office setting (categorized in the Office Uses category), uses providing recreational or entertainment opportunities (categorized in the Recreation/Entertainment Uses category), uses that provide personal services (like barber or beauty establishments, dry cleaning or laundry establishments, or product repair or services for consumer and business goods (categorized in the Personal Services Uses category), or uses involving the sales, distribution, or presentation of materials or activities featuring specific sexual activities or nudity (categorized in the Adult Uses category). Accessory uses may include offices, storage of goods, assembly or repackaging of goods for on-site sale, concessions, ATM machines, and outdoor display of merchandise.
Bank or other financial institution
An establishment that provides retail banking services, mortgage lending, or similar financial services to individuals and businesses. This use type does not include check cashing services or bail bond brokers. Accessory uses may include automated teller machines (ATMs) and facilities providing drive-through service.
Check cashing business
An establishment that accepts or cashes, for compensation, a payment instrument regardless of the date of the payment instrument. This use does not include activities undertaken by:
(A) Any bank, trust company, savings bank, savings and loan association, or credit union chartered under the laws of Florida, another state, or the United States as long as that institution has a branch that accepts deposits in Florida; or
(B) Any subsidiary or affiliate of an institution described in part (A) above. Additionally, this use does not include a business:
(A)
In which a customer presents a payment instrument for the exact amount of a purchase; or
(B)
Involving foreign currency exchange services or the cashing of a payment instrument drawn on a financial institution other than a Federal, State, or other state financial institution.
Consumer goods establishment
Establishments that sale consumer goods at retail, like art galleries; bicycle sales, rental, services, or repair; bulk retailing; catering establishments; convenience store; department stores; florist and gift shops; hobby and craft shops; home building and garden supplies stores; monument or headstone sales establishments; and similar
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 31
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.1 Principal Use Classification System
uses (e.g., floor covering stores, window treatment stores, camera stores, optical goods stores, shoe stores, luggage stores, jewelry stores, piece goods stores, and pet shops).
Art gallery
An establishment engaged in the sale, loan, or display of art books, paintings,
sculpture, or other works of art.
Bicycle sales, rental, service or repair
An establishment engaged in the sales, rental, service, or repair of bicycles.
Bulk retailing
The sale of merchandise in large quantities, such as in unbroken cases or
oversized containers, directly to ultimate consumers.
Catering establishment
An establishment that specializes in the preparation of food or beverages for social occasions, such as weddings, banquets, parties, or other gatherings, with or without banquet facilities for these private pre-arranged occasions that are not open to impromptu attendance by the general public, excluding adult entertainment.
Convenience store
A retail store that is designed and stocked to sell primarily food, beverages, and other household supplies to customers who purchase only a relatively few items (in contrast to a "supermarket"). Any food service facilities will be considered as a restaurant.
Department store
A general merchandising store offering a variety of unrelated goods and services that may include clothing, housewares, body products, and specialty items.
Florist and gift shop
An establishment primarily engaged in selling flower arrangements, plants, cards, small gifts, and the like.
Hobby and craft shop
A retail store primarily selling craft and model supplies.
Home, building, and garden supplies store
An establishment primarily engaged in retailing a general line of new home repair and improvement materials and supplies, such as lumber, plumbing goods, electrical goods, tools, house wares, appliances, hardware and lawn and garden supplies.
Monument or headstone sales establishment
An establishment primarily engaged in cutting, shaping, and finishing marble, granite, slate, and other stone, or engaged in buying or selling monuments or headstones for use in cemeteries of mausoleums.
Land Development Code Page 10 32 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.1 Principal Use Classification System
Drug store or pharmacy
A retail store engaged in the filling and sale of prescription drugs and the sale of medical supplies, nonprescription medicines, and related goods and services. It may also sell nonmedical goods such as cosmetics, cards, drinks, candy, and the like. Accessory uses may include automated teller machines (ATMs) and facilities providing drive-through service.
Farmers’ market (as a principal use)
A collection of vendors using private or publicly owned property or property owned by a not-for-profit organization for the sale of agricultural and horticultural products, or for the sale of baked, canned, or preserved foods. If the farmers’ market occurs regularly for all or most of the year, it is considered a principal use. If the farmers’ market occurs only occasionally or periodically for only a limited time period during the year, it is considered a temporary use.
Flea Market
An indoor or outdoor premises where the main use is the sale of new or used household goods, personal effects, tools, art work, small household appliances, and similar merchandise, objects, or equipment in small quantities, in broken lots or parcels, not in bulk, for the use or consumption by the immediate purchaser.
Grocery store and food market
An establishment that offers a diverse variety of unrelated, non-complementary food and non-food commodities, such as beverages, dairy, dry goods, fresh produce, and other perishable items, frozen foods, household products, and paper goods; the establishment may provide beer, wine, and/or liquor sales for consumption off the premises with the appropriate beverage license; may include a prescription pharmacy; may include a delicatessen, and prepare minor amounts or no food on site for immediate consumption; markets the majority of its merchandise at retail prices; and may have a restaurant as an accessory use.
A food market is an establishment that offers specialty food products at retail, such as meat, seafood, produce, artisanal goods, baked goods, pasta, cheese, confections, coffee, and other specialty food products, and may also offer additional food and non-food commodities related or complementary to the specialty food products. A food market may sell beer, wine, or liquor for consumption off the premises with the beverage license.
Manufactured or modular home sales
Land on which the primary use is the display and retail sale of manufactured home dwellings and/or modular homes.
10. Vehicle Sales and Service Uses
The Vehicle Sales and Service Uses category includes use types involving the direct sales and servicing of motor vehicles, including automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, and recreational vehicles, as well as trailers—whether for personal transport, commerce, or recreation. Use types include: automobile service station; commercial fuel depot; commercial vehicle repair and maintenance; commercial vehicle sales and rentals;
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 33
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.1 Principal Use Classification System
personal vehicle repair and maintenance; personal vehicle sales and rentals; taxi or limousine service facilities; vehicle equipment and supplies sales and rentals; vehicle paint and finishing shops; vehicle and trailer storage yards; vehicle towing or wrecker services; and similar uses. Accessory uses may include offices, sales of parts, maintenance facilities, outdoor display, and vehicle storage.
Automobile service station
A building where gasoline or other similar fuel, stored only in underground tanks, is dispensed directly to users of motor vehicles. The following activities are permitted as accessory uses to a gasoline station:
(A)
Sales and servicing of spark plugs, batteries, and distributors and distributor parts; tune-ups;
(B)
Tire servicing and repair, but not recapping or regrooving;
(C)
Replacement of mufflers and tail pipes, water hoses, fan belts, brake fluid, light bulbs, fuses, floor mats, windshield wipers and wiper blades, grease retainers, wheel bearings, mirrors, and the like;
(D)
Washing and polishing, and sale of automotive washing and polishing materials;
(E)
Greasing, lubrication, and radiator flushing;
(F)
Minor servicing and repair of carburetors, fuel, oil and water pumps and lines, and minor engine adjustments not involving removal of the head or crank case or racing the engine;
(G)
Emergency wiring repairs;
(H)
Adjusting and repairing brakes;
(I)
Retail sale of convenience items like cold drinks, packaged foods, tobacco, and similar convenience goods;
(J)
Retail sale of road maps and other informational material to customers; and
(K)
Provision of restroom facilities.
Commercial fuel depot
An unattended, automated fuel dispensing facility that dispenses fuel to businesses, and organizations that maintain a fleet of vehicles. This use does not include any retail sale of gasoline to the general public and does not include any store sales, vehicle service, or vending operations.
Commercial vehicle repair and maintenance
Establishments, excluding vehicle paint finishing shops, that repair, install, or maintain the mechanical components or the bodies of large trucks, mass transit vehicles, large construction or agricultural equipment, or commercial boats. Truck stops and fueling facilities are included in this commercial vehicle repair and maintenance use category equipment, or other similar vehicles.
Land Development Code Page 10 34 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.1 Principal Use Classification System
Commercial vehicle sales and rentals
Uses that provide for the sale or rental of large trucks, mass transit vehicles, large construction or agricultural equipment, or other similar vehicles.
Personal vehicle repair and maintenance
Establishments, excluding vehicle paint finishing shops, that repair, install, or maintain the mechanical components or the bodies of autos, small trucks or vans, motorcycles, motor homes, or recreational vehicles including recreational boats or that wash, clean, or otherwise protect the exterior or interior surfaces of these vehicles.
Personal vehicle sales and rentals
Establishments that provide for the sale (including auctions ) or rental of new or used autos, small trucks or vans, trailers, motorcycles, motor homes, or recreational vehicles. Typical examples include automobile dealers, auto malls, car rental agencies, and moving equipment rental establishments (e.g., U-Haul).
Taxi or limousine service facilities
A service that offers transportation in passenger automobiles, vans, shuttles, or pedicabs to persons, including those who are handicapped, in return for remuneration. The business may include facilities for servicing, repairing, and fueling the taxicabs or limousines.
Vehicle equipment and supplies sales and rentals
Establishments related to the sale, lease, or rental of new or used parts, tools, or supplies for the purpose of repairing or maintaining vehicles, including distribution of products from the same premises that sells, leases, or rents vehicles.
Vehicle paint finishing shop
Uses that apply paint to the exterior or interior surfaces of vehicles by spraying, dipping, flow-coating, or other similar means.
Vehicle or trailer storage yard
Storage of parking tow-aways, impound yards, and storage lots for automobiles, trucks, buses and recreational vehicles. "Vehicle storage" includes only the storage of operable vehicles.
Vehicle towing or wrecker service
An establishment operated for the purpose of temporary storage on-site of wrecked or inoperable motor vehicles. If an establishment regularly stores inoperable vehicles for more than 90 days, stacks vehicles, or portions of the vehicles are dismantled or removed for sale, it is considered a junkyard or salvage yard.
11. Visitor Accommodation Uses
The Visitor Accommodation Uses category includes use types providing lodging units or rooms for short-term stays of typically less than 30 days for rent, lease, or interval occupancy. Use types include: campgrounds; hotels or motels; and similar uses. Accessory uses may include pools and other recreational facilities, restaurants, bars,
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 35
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.1 Principal Use Classification System
limited storage, laundry facilities, gift shops, supporting commercial activities, meeting facilities, and offices.
Campground
An outdoor facility designed for overnight accommodation of human beings in tents, rustic cabins and shelters for recreation, education, naturalist, or vacation purposes. Office, retail, and other commercial uses commonly established in such facilities and related parking structures shall be allowed as accessory appurtenances.
Hotel or motel
A building or a group of buildings used for and maintained as a place where sleeping accommodations are offered to the public, supplied to the public, and intended primarily for use by transient persons or tourists on an overnight or short-term lodging basis. Such uses may include kitchenettes, microwaves, and refrigerators for each guest unit. In common usage, motels are typically designed to serve automobile travelers, however, hotels and motels are considered synonymous uses in this LDC. The use does not include bed and breakfasts.
12. Water-Related Uses
The Water-Related Uses category includes use types involving the direct sales and servicing of boats and other consumer watercraft, whether for recreation, commerce, or personal transport. This use category also includes the following use types: boat sales, rental, service, or repair; boat storage yards; marinas; waterfront boat fuel sales; and similar uses. Accessory uses may include offices, sales of parts, maintenance facilities, and outdoor.
Boat sales, rental, service, or repair
A business primarily engaged in the display, sale, rental, repair, or maintenance of new or old boats, marine engines, or marine equipment.
Boat storage yard
A facility designated for the on-land storage of boats, other watercraft, and marine equipment in open or enclosed roof structures or on trailers, cradles, or boat stands.
Marina
A waterfront facility which, for a fee, provides for the berthing, mooring, or water storage of boats. The use may include such facilities as major and minor boat repair; boat docks, piers, and slips; boat fueling; dry land boat maintenance and storage; pump-out stations; fishing piers; beaches; erosion control devices; boat ramps, lifts, and launching facilities; boat sales, including parts; restaurants; ship’s store; sale of ice; car and boat trailer parking; laundromat; locker rooms; cabanas; bathhouse; public showers; outdoor playing courts; and picnic areas.
Waterfront fuel sales
The sale and dispensing of fuel directly to boats from a waterfront lot.
G. Industrial Uses Classification
1. Extraction Uses
Land Development Code Page 10 36 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.1 Principal Use Classification System
The Extraction Uses category is characterized by activities related to the extraction of naturally occurring materials. Use types include surface mining. This use category does not include facilities for the drop-off or collection, and temporary holding, of household or business recyclables (classified as minor utility facility in the Utility Uses category). Accessory uses may include offices, storage areas, and vehicle washing facilities.
Surface mining
The removal of resources from their location, so as to make them more suitable for commercial, industrial, or construction use, but not including excavation for the sole purpose of aiding on-site farming or on-site construction, or the process of prospecting or investigating for resources.
2. Industrial Services Uses
The Industrial Services Uses category includes use types involving the repair or servicing of industrial, business, or consumer machinery equipment, products, or byproducts. Firms that service consumer goods do so by mainly providing centralized services for separate retail outlets. Contractors and building maintenance services and similar uses perform services off-site. Few customers, especially the general public, come to the site. Accessory activities may include limited retail or wholesale sales, offices, parking, warehousing, and outdoor storage. Example use types include: machine shops; tool repair; electric motor repair; repair of scientific or professional instruments; and heavy equipment sales, rental, repair, and servicing. Also included are fuel oil or bottled gas distribution, research and development facilities, contractor storage yards, metal-working and leather-working uses, printing, general industrial service uses, and laundry, dry-cleaning, carpet cleaning, and dyeing plants.
Building, heating/air conditioning, plumbing, or electrical contractor’s storage yard
A building, heating/air conditioning, plumbing, or electrical contractor’s yard is a use involving the outdoor storage of materials, supplies, and equipment by building, heating/air conditioning, plumbing, electrical, or other development contractors as the principal use of a lot. Accessory uses may include offices.
Dry-cleaning, laundry, or carpet-cleaning plant
A facility engaged in cleaning fabrics, textiles, wearing apparel, or other articles by immersion (and agitation) in water or volatile solvents.
Educational, scientific, or industrial research and development
A facility that engages in research, or research and development, of innovative ideas in technology-intensive fields. Examples include research and development of computer software, information systems, communication systems, transportation, geographic information systems, multi-media and video technology. Development and construction of prototypes may be associated with this use.
Fuel oil or bottled gas distribution
An establishment that distributes fuel oil or bottled gases such as propane or liquid petroleum for compensation.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 37
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.1 Principal Use Classification System
Fuel oil storage
The bulk storage of fuel oil or kerosene for heating purposes in aboveground containers.
General industrial services
An establishment engaged in the repair or servicing of agriculture, industrial, business, or consumer machinery, equipment, products, or by-products. Firms that provide these services do so by mainly providing centralized services for separate retail outlets. Contractors and building maintenance services and similar uses perform services off-site. Few customers, especially the general public, come to the site. Accessory activities may include retail sales, offices, and storage.
Heavy equipment sales, rental, repair, servicing or storage
An establishment engaged in the display, sale, leasing, rental, repair, servicing, or storage of heavy equipment of 12,000 or more pounds gross vehicular weight (GVW).
Machine Shop
An establishment that is primarily engaged in repairing and servicing large electric motors or commercial and industrial machine tools and equipment (such as punching, shearing, bending, forming, pressing, forging, and die-casting machines, or where metal is cut and shaped by machine tools.
Metal-working, welding, plumbing, or gas, steam, or water pipe fitting
An establishment primarily engaged in processing metals to create individual parts or assemblies, fabricating products by joining metals through welding, or installing or repairing piping or tubing systems that convey liquids, gas, steam, or water.
Repair of scientific or professional instruments
An establishment primarily engaged in the provision of repair services for scientific or professional instruments for businesses.
3. Manufacturing and Production Uses
The Manufacturing and Production Uses category includes use types involved in the manufacturing, processing, fabrication, packaging, or assembly of goods. Products may be finished or semi-finished and are generally made for the wholesale market, for transfer to other plants, or to order for firms for consumers. This use category also includes custom industries (establishments primarily engaged in the on-site production of goods by use of hand tools and small-scale equipment) and craft manufacturing. Goods are generally not displayed or sold on-site, but if so, such sales are a subordinate part of total sales. Relatively few customers come to the manufacturing site. Accessory uses may include limited retail sales, wholesale sales, offices, cafeterias, employee recreational facilities, warehouses, storage yards, repair facilities, truck fleets, and fueling facilities. Example use types include the specific uses of boat manufacturing, the general sectors of heavy manufacturing and light manufacturing, bakeries, cement concrete production and batching plants, food processing, vegetable and fruit packing, and breweries, wineries, and distilleries. This use category does not include the manufacturing and production of goods from salvage material or composting material (categorized as waste-related uses).
Land Development Code Page 10 38 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.1 Principal Use Classification System
Asphalt plant
An industrial facility used for the production of asphalt or concrete, or asphalt or concrete products, used in building or construction, including facilities for the administration or management of the business, the stockpiling of bulk materials used in the production process or of finished products manufactured on the premises and the storage and maintenance of required equipment, but does not include the retail sale of finished asphalt or concrete products.
Bakery
An establishment primarily engaged in manufacturing fresh and frozen bread and other bakery products (e.g., cookies, crackers).
Brewery, or distillery
An establishment primarily engaged in brewing ale, beer, malt liquors, and nonalcoholic beer (brewery), or in distilling and blending potable liquors, including mixing them with other ingredients (distillery). Accessory uses may include retail sales of beer produced on-site for take-away or on-premise consumption as allowed by State licensing laws. This use does not include brewpubs or craft distilleries.
Concrete batching plant
An establishment primarily engaged in manufacturing or mixing cement, concrete, and cement and concrete products delivered to a purchaser in a plastic or unhardened state.
Food processing or beverage bottling
A facility for the sorting, treatment, or preparation of food products including citrus fruit for sale or as inputs to further processing, or for the placing of soft drinks, juice, water, milk, alcoholic drinks, or other liquids into bottles or cans for shipment (beverage bottling) but not including the slaughtering of small or large livestock or confined animal feeding operations (food processing).
Manufacturing, assembly, or fabrication, heavy
An establishment primarily engaged in manufacturing uses that include, but are not limited to: manufacture or assembly of machinery, equipment, instruments, vehicles, appliances, communications equipment, computer or electronic equipment, precision items and other electrical items; the processing of food and related products; lumber mills, pulp and paper mills, and the manufacture of other wood products; and electric power generation plants. This use type does not include other manufacturing uses specifically listed in the principal use tables, or the manufacture of acids, ammunition, fertilizer, soap, insecticides, or batteries.
Manufacturing, assembly, or fabrication, light
An establishment primarily engaged in manufacturing uses that involve the mechanical transformation of predominantly previously prepared materials into new products, including assembly of component parts and the creation of products for sale to the wholesale or retail markets or directly to consumers. Such uses are wholly confined within an enclosed building, do not include processing of hazardous gases and chemicals, and do not emit noxious noise, smoke, vapors, fumes, dust, glare,
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 39
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.1 Principal Use Classification System
odor, or vibration. This use type does not include other manufacturing uses specifically listed in the principal use tables. Examples include, but are not limited to: computer design and development; apparel production; sign making; assembly of pre-fabricated parts, manufacture of electric, electronic, or optical instruments or devices; manufacture and assembly of artificial limbs, dentures, hearing aids, and surgical instruments; manufacture, processing, and packing of cosmetics; and manufacturing of components, jewelry, clothing, trimming decorations, and any similar item.
4. Warehouse and Freight Movement Uses
The Warehouse and Freight Movement Uses category includes use types involving the storage or movement of goods for themselves or other firms or businesses. Goods are generally delivered to other firms or the final consumer, except for some will-call pickups. There is little on-site sales activity with the customer present. Accessory uses include offices, truck fleet parking, outdoor storage, and maintenance areas. Example use types include separate storage warehouses (used for storage by retail stores such as furniture and appliance stores), distribution warehouses (used primarily for temporary storage pending distribution in response to customer orders), cold storage plants (including frozen food lockers), and outdoor storage (as a principal use). This use category does not include contractor’s yards (categorized as an industrial services use) or uses involving the transfer or storage of solid or liquid wastes (categorized as a waste-related use).
Consolidated storage (self-service storage)
A building or group of buildings divided into separate self-contained units or areas of 500 square feet or less that are offered for rent for self-service storage of household and personal property. The storage units or areas are designed to allow private access by the tenant for storing and removing personal property. Accessory uses may include leasing offices, outdoor storage of boats and recreational vehicles, incidental sales or rental of moving supplies and equipment, and living quarters for a resident manager or security guard. The rental of trucks or trailers is a separate principal use and not considered accessory to this use.
Moving and storage facility
A facility primarily engaged in providing local or long-distance trucking of used household, used institutional, or used commercial furniture and equipment. Incidental packing and storage activities are often provided by these establishments.
Outdoor storage (as a principal use)
Outdoor storage as a principal use is the keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods, material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than 24 hours, where such storage is the principal use of a lot. This use does not include a junkyard or salvage yard or the display and storage of vehicles as part of an automobile, recreational vehicle, trailer, or truck sales or rental use.
Warehouse, distribution
A distribution warehouse is a facility primarily engaged in the distribution of manufactured products, supplies, and equipment. It includes the temporary storage of such products, supplies, and equipment pending distribution.
Land Development Code Page 10 40 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.1 Principal Use Classification System
Warehouse, storage
A storage warehouse is a facility primarily engaged in the storage of manufactured products, supplies, and equipment, excluding bulk storage of materials that are flammable or explosive or that present hazards or conditions commonly recognized as offensive.
5. Waste-Related Uses
The Waste-Related Uses category includes use types receiving solid or liquid wastes from others for on-site disposal, processing, or transfer to another location for processing or disposal, or uses that manufacture or produce goods or energy from the composting of organic material or reuse, recycling, or processing of scrap or waste material. This use category also includes use types that receive hazardous wastes from others. Accessory uses may include offices, outdoor storage, recycling of materials, and repackaging and trans-shipment of by-products. Example use types include materials recovery facilities, recovered materials processing facilities, recycling drop-off centers, incinerators, and waste composting. This use category does not include wastewater treatment plants and potable water treatment plants (classified as major utilities in the utility and communication use category) or facilities for the drop-off or collection, and temporary holding, of household or business recyclables (classified as minor utilities in the utility and communication use category).
Composting facility
A facility where organic matter derived primarily from off-site is processed by composting and/or is processed for commercial purposes. Activities of a composting facility may include management, collection, transportation, staging, composting, curing, storage, marketing, or use of compost.
Incinerator
An incinerator is a facility that burns refuse at high temperatures to reduce the volume of waste. Incinerators do not include crematoriums.
Land clearing debris disposal facility
A land clearing debris disposal facility is a solid waste management facility that is the final resting place for materials that normally result from land clearing and or land development operations for a construction project—including rocks, soils, trees, tree remains, and other vegetative matter, but not vegetative matter from lawn and landscape maintenance, right-of-way or easement maintenance, farming operations, nursery operations, or other sources not related to a construction project. This use is subject to State solid waste management regulations.
Materials recovery facility
A solid waste management facility that provides for the extraction from solid waste of recyclable materials and/or materials suitable for use as a fuel or soil amendment.
Recovered materials processing facility
A solid waste management facility engaged solely in the storage, processing, resale, or reuse of recovered materials—e.g., metal, paper, glass, plastic, textile, rubber, or
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 41
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.1 Principal Use Classification System
other materials—that have known recycling potential, can be feasibly recycled, and have been diverted from the solid waste stream.
Recycling drop-off center
A small collection facility where recyclable materials are purchased or accepted from the public. Typical uses associated with a drop-off center include facilities that accept donations of charitable goods.
Salvage/recycling facility
A salvage/recycling facility is a building, structure, or parcel of land, or portion thereof, used for the collection, storage and sale of paper, rags, scrap metal, bottles, or discarded material. Where such materials are a by-product of a permitted use, such activity shall be considered outdoor storage and must comply fully with all applicable provisions.
Solid waste transfer station
A solid waste transfer station is a facility designed to store or hold solid waste for transport to a processing or disposal facility. Facility operations may include separation of incidental amounts of recyclable materials or unauthorized waste.
6. Wholesale Uses
The Wholesale Uses category includes use types involved in the sale, lease, or rent of products primarily intended for industrial, institutional, or commercial businesses. The uses emphasize on-site sales or order-taking and often include display areas. Businesses may or may not be open to the general public, but sales to the general public are limited. Products may be picked up on-site or delivered to the customer. Accessory uses may include offices, product repair, warehouses, minor fabrication services, outdoor storage, greenhouses (for plant nurseries), and repackaging of goods. Example use types include wholesale plant nurseries and showrooms, wholesale sale or rental of machinery, equipment, special trade tools, welding supplies, machine parts, electrical supplies, janitorial supplies, restaurant equipment, and store fixtures; mail-order houses; and wholesalers of food, clothing, plants and landscaping materials, auto parts, and building hardware. This use category does not include uses primarily involving sales to the general public or on a membership basis (categorized as retail sales and service uses), or uses primarily involving storage of goods with little on-site business activity (categorized as warehousing and freight movement uses).
Showroom, wholesale
An establishment that combines office and showroom uses with warehouse uses for the primary purpose of wholesale trade, display, and distribution of products.
Other wholesale use
Any establishment primarily engaged in selling goods, generally in large quantities, to other businesses for subsequent resale, and that is not specifically listed in the use tables. Such use generally includes facilities for storage and distribution of goods, and may include display areas.
Land Development Code Page 10 42 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.2. INTERPRETATION OF UNLISTED USES AND ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
A. Procedure for Interpreting Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
The Director may interpret the following in accordance with the procedures in Sec. 2.5.6, Interpretation:
1.
A particular principal use or accessory use or structure not expressly listed in the use tables, as allowable in a particular zoning district—as a permitted or special exception use—based on the standards in Sec. 10.3.2.B, Standards for Allowing Unlisted Principal Uses or 10.3.2.C, Effect of Allowing Unlisted Uses as Permitted Use or Special Exception Use below, as appropriate; and
2.
The boundaries of any zoning district shown on the Official Zoning District Map in accordance with Sec. 10.3.2.D, Rules of Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries.
B. Standards for Allowing Unlisted Principal Uses
The Director shall interpret an unlisted principal use as a permitted use or special exception use in a particular zoning district only after finding that the nature, function, and duration of the use and the impact of allowing it in the zoning district are so similar to those of a use type or use category that is allowed in the zoning district that the unlisted use should be deemed allowed in the same manner (i.e., as a permitted use or a special exception use) as the similar use type or use category and subject to the same use-specific standards. In making such interpretation, the Director shall consider the relevant characteristics of the unlisted use relevant to those of listed and defined use types and/or of the use categories described in this Section, the purpose and intent statements in this LDC concerning the zoning district (see Article 3: Zoning Districts), and the character of use types allowable in the zoning district. The relevant characteristics of the unlisted use that should be considered in making this interpretation include, but are not limited to, the following:
1.
Actual or projected characteristics of each activity likely to occur as part of the unlisted use;
2.
The type, size, orientation, and nature of buildings, and structures devoted to each activity;
3.
The number and density of employees and customers per unit area of site in relation to business hours and employment shifts;
4.
Vehicles used and their parking requirements, including the ratio of the number of spaces required per unit area or activity;
5.
Transportation demands, including the volume and frequency of trips generated to and from the site, the split of traffic volume among various means of transportation, and other characteristics of trips and traffic;
6.
Relative amounts of sales from each activity;
7.
The nature and location of storage and outdoor display of merchandise, whether enclosed, open, inside or outside the principal building, and the predominant types of items stored;
8.
Customer type for each activity;
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 43
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
9.
How the use is advertised, including signage;
10.
The amount and nature of any nuisances generated on the premises, including but not limited to noise, smoke, odor, glare, vibration, radiation, and fumes;
11.
Any special public utility requirements for serving the use, including but not limited to water supply, wastewater output, pre-treatment of wastes and emissions required or recommended, and any significant power structures and communications towers or facilities; and
12.
The impact on adjacent lands created by the use, which should not be greater than that of other use types allowed in the zoning district.
C. Effect of Allowing Unlisted Uses as Permitted Use or Special Exception Use
On interpreting an unlisted use as allowed in a zoning districts, and finding that the use or structure is likely to be common or would lead to confusion if it remains unlisted, the Director may initiate an application for a text amendment to this LDC in accordance with Sec. 2.5.1.C, Text Amendments, to list the use or structure in Article 4: Use Regulations, as a permitted or special exception use, as appropriate. Until final action is taken on the text amendment application, the interpretation of the Director shall be binding and shall be maintained in the record of interpretations required by Sec. 2.5.6.D, Tracking Interpretations.
D. Rules of Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries
In determining the boundaries of any zoning district shown on the Official Zoning District Map, the Director shall use the following general rules of interpretation:
1.
Zoning district boundary lines follow the center lines of a street, railroad, alley rightsof-way, or lot lines (or lines parallel or perpendicular to the lot lines), unless the boundary lines are fixed by dimensions on the Official Zoning District Map.
2.
Where zoning district boundaries are indicated as approximately following street, railroad, or alley lines (existing or proposed), the center lines of these street, railroad, or alley rights-of-way are considered the boundaries.
3.
Where a street or alley right-of-way and a railroad right-of-way abut each other, the boundary line between the two rights-of-way is the zoning district boundary. If a railroad right-of-way is abutted on both sides by a street, the center line of the railroad right-of-way is the zoning district boundary. Each right-of-way is considered to be in the zoning district of the land immediately abutting that right-of-way.
4.
Where zoning district boundaries approximately follow lot lines and are no more than 10 feet from these lines, the lot lines shall be the boundaries.
5.
Where zoning district boundaries are shown as following or approximately following section lines, half-section lines, or quarter-section lines they shall be construed as following such lines.
6.
Zoning district boundaries indicated as following centerlines of rivers, streams, bays, lakes, or other water courses shall be construed to follow those centerlines.
7.
Where land is not subdivided, or where a zoning district boundary divides a lot, the location of the boundary, unless it is indicated by dimensions shown on the Official Zoning District Map, shall be scaled to the nearest foot.
Land Development Code Page 10 44 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.3 Use Classifications and Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
8.
If any portion of a public street, alley, right-of-way, or easement is transferred or conveyed so it is in private ownership, or is no longer used for a public purpose, the center line of the street, alley, right-of-way, or easement is the zone boundary line if the zoning districts are not the same on both sides of the street, alley, right-of-way, or easement.
9.
If the specific location of a boundary cannot be determined from notation on the Official Zoning District Map, or in accordance with subsections 1-8, above, the boundary shall be determined by using the map’s scale to determine the boundary’s distance from other features shown on the map.
10.
Where the actual locations of existing physical or natural features vary from those shown on the Official Zoning District Map, or other circumstances not covered by this subsection, the Director shall have authority to interpret the zoning district boundaries in accordance with Sec. 2.5.6, Interpretation.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 45
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
Section 10.4. DEFINITIONS
100 YEAR FLOOD
The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year; as defined by FEMA. The 100 year flood is also commonly referred to as the "base flood" or the “1-percent-annual chance flood. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.]
100 YEAR STORM ELEVATION
The elevation of the base flood, including wave height, relative to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and shown on the FIRM; as defined FEMA. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.]
ABANDONED
A building or structure that is deserted by the owner and left unsecured, or that is not maintained. Evidence of desertion and lack of maintenance shall include, but not be limited to: unaddressed code violations; lack of required building permits or certificate of occupancy; lack of business tax receipts; and lack of active utilities.
ABANDONED SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a sign which, for a period of 30 days or more, no longer correctly directs or informs any person or advertises a bona fide business, lessor, owner, product or activity conducted, or project available on the premises where such sign is displayed.
ABUT
To physically touch or border upon, or to share a common property line.
ACCESSORY BUILDING
For the purpose of Sec. 5.13, Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways, only, a building which is clearly incidental or subordinate to and customarily in connection with the principal building and which is located on the same lot with such principal building.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE
A use or structure that is:
(A)
Clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection with and located on the same parcel as is the principal use to which it is related; and
(B)
Designed for the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants of the principal use served.
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUSTMENT
See Sec. 2.5.5.B, Administrative Adjustment.
ADVERSE IMPACT
A significant negative impact to land, water, associated resources or public facilities resulting from development. The negative impact includes increased risk of flooding; degradation of water quality; increased sedimentation; reduced groundwater recharge; negative impacts on aquatic organisms; negative impacts on wildlife and other resources; inadequate capacity for traffic, potable water, wastewater, police, fire, and EMS services and threatened public health.
Land Development Code Page 10 46 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
ADVERTISING SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, sign copy intended to directly or indirectly promote the sale or use of a product, service, commodity or entertainment on real or personal property.
A-FRAME OR MOVABLE SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a sign not permanently secured or attached to the ground, or which is free of permanent structures or supports upon the ground. (Includes sandwich board, pedestal, or other similar type signs.)
AGGRIEVED OR ADVERSELY AFFECTED PARTY
“Aggrieved or adversely affected party” has the meaning given it in Ch.163, Fla. Stat (“any person or local government that will suffer an adverse effect to an interest protected or furthered by The City of Apopka Comprehensive Plan and other adopted plans, including interests related to health and safety, police and fire protection service systems, densities or intensities of development, transportation facilities, health care facilities, equipment, or services, and environmental or natural resources. The alleged adverse interest may be shared in common with other members of the community at large but must exceed in degree the general interest in community good shared by all persons. The term includes the owner, developer, or applicant for a development order.”)
AERONAUTICAL STUDY
For the purpose of Sec. 3.6.11, AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District, a Federal Aviation Administration study, conducted in accordance with the standards of 14 C.F.R. part 77, subpart C, and Federal Aviation Administration policy and guidance, on the effect of proposed construction or alteration upon the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe and efficient use of navigable airspace.
AIRPORT
For the purpose of Sec. 3.6.11, AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District, any area of land or water designed and set aside for the landing and taking off of aircraft and used or to be used in the interest of the public for such purpose; Orlando Apopka Airport.
AIRPORT ELEVATION
For the purpose of Sec. 3.6.11, AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District, the established elevation of the highest point on the usable landing area.
AIRPORT HAZARD
For the purpose of Sec. 3.6.11, AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District, an obstruction to air navigation that affects the safe and efficient use of navigable airspace or the operation of planned or existing air navigation and communication facilities.
AIRPORT HAZARD AREA
For the purpose of Sec. 3.6.11, AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District, any area of land or water upon which an airport hazard might be established.
AIRPORT LAND USE COMPATIBILITY ZONING
For the purpose of Sec. 3.6.11, AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District, airport zoning regulations governing the use of land on, adjacent to, or in the immediate vicinity of airports.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 47
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
AIRPORT LAYOUT PLAN
For the purpose of Sec. 3.6.11, AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District, a set of scaled drawings that provides a graphic representation of the existing and future development plan for the airport and demonstrates the preservation and continuity of safety, utility, and efficiency of the airport.
AIRPORT MASTER PLAN
For the purpose of Sec. 3.6.11, AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District, a comprehensive plan of an airport that typically describes current and future plans for airport development designed to support existing and future aviation demand.
AIRPORT PROTECTION ZONING REGULATIONS
For the purpose of Sec. 3.6.11, AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District, airport zoning regulations governing airport hazards.
AIRPORT REFERENCE POINT
For the purpose of Sec. 3.6.11, AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District, the point established as the approximate geographic center of the airport landing area and so designated.
ALTERATION OF A WATERCOURSE
A dam, impoundment, channel relocation, change in channel alignment, channelization, or change in cross-sectional area of the channel or the channel capacity, or any other form of modification which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the riverine flow of water during conditions of the base flood.
AMATEUR HAM RADIO ANTENNA
An antenna, or any combination of a mast plus an attached or mounted antenna, that transmits noncommercial communications signals and is used by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC).
AMBIENT LIGHT MONITOR
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a light sensor that gauges ambient light in the environment and automatically adjusts the brightness to prevent glare and to allow optimum viewing.
ANNEXATION
The adding of land to the boundaries of the City of Apopka. Such a land addition makes the land in every way a part of the City. See Sec. 2.5.1.A, Annexations.
ANTENNA
Any device for radiating or receiving electromagnetic radiation. This definition shall specifically include, but is not limited to, all radio, television, microwave, and satellite dish antennas.
APPEAL
For the purpose of Sec. 6.6, Floodplains, only, a request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s interpretation of any provision of that section.
APPEAL TO CITY COUNCIL
See Sec 2.5.5.D, Appeals to City Council.
Land Development Code Page 10 48 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
APPLICANT
The owner of land, or the authorized representative of the landowner, applying for a development permit.
ARBOR PERMIT
See Sec. 2.5.4.A, Arbor Permit.
AREA OF SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, the area within a perimeter which forms the outside shape, including any frame which forms an integral part of the display, but excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which the sign may be placed. If the sign consists of more than one section or module, all areas will be totaled. On any sign with more than one face, only the square footage of the face visible from any one direction at a time will be counted, provided that all faces are equal in size and contained in a common perimeter.
ARTERIAL ROAD
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, the following roads are defined as arterial roads: U.S. 441 (Orange Blossom Trail); S.R. 436; and Park Avenue, north of 7th Street; and Rock Springs Road.
ASCE 24
A standard titled Flood Resistant Design and Construction that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. ASCE 24 is developed and published by the American Society of Civil Engineers, Reston, VA.
ASSESSED VALUE
The monetary value that a parcel of land, portion of land, improvement on land, or other commodity is assigned by the Orange County Property Appraiser’s office for the purposes of taxation.
ATTENTION-GETTING DEVICE
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, any pennant, flag, valance, banner, propeller, spinner, streamer, searchlight, balloon or similar device or ornamentation designed for or having the effect of attracting attention, promotion or advertising visible from public right-of-way.
AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE (ATM)
A mechanized device operated by or on behalf of a bank or financial institution that allows customers to conduct automated banking or financial transactions. Where an ATM is provided at the site of a bank or financial institution for use by customers in motor vehicles, the ATM is considered a drive-through facility accessory use. At other locations, an ATM may be considered a separate accessory use to the principal use(s) of the location.
AUTOMATIC CAR WASH (AS AN ACCESSORY USE)
A structure providing the exterior washing of vehicles where vehicles are manually driven or pulled by a conveyor through a system of rollers and/or brushes.
AUTOMATIC SYSTEM
For the purpose of Sec. 5.2, Landscaping and Buffer Standards, An irrigation system which operates using a present program entered into an automatic controller.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 49
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
AWNING SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a sign painted on, printed on or attached flat against the surface of an awning.
BANNER SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a sign having characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentations applied to cloth, paper, plastic, vinyl, or fabric.
BASE FLOOD
See “100 Year Flood”
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION
See “100 Year Storm Elevation”
BASEMENT
For the purpose of Sec. 6.6, Floodplains, the portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202; see “Basement (for flood loads)”.]
BED AND BREAKFAST (AS ACCESSORY TO A SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING)
An accessory use in which guestrooms in the principal structure of a single-family detached residential dwelling is provided to guest clients, for compensation, with breakfast available to such guests, on the premises at no additional charge. Bed and breakfasts do not include other similar use, such as motels, hotels, or boarding or lodging houses.
BOATHOUSE
A structure designed and used solely for the storage of boats or boating equipment, that is located on a body of water, and that is not used for human habitation.
BIKE PARKING RACK
A stationary fixture to which a bicycle can be supported upright, provide two points of contact, and be securely attached (typically using a bicycle lock) to prevent theft.
BIKE SHARE STATION
A public or quasi-public bicycle system, or bike-share scheme, that is a service to people who decide to participate (typically for a fee), in which bicycles are made available for shared use to individuals on a very short term basis at a bike share station. For many bike share systems, smartphone mapping applications show nearby stations with available bikes and open bike docks.
BILLBOARD SIGN
See "Off-premise signs."
BOLLARD LAMP
An outdoor luminaire that is a short (usually about 2-4 feet in height) post with the light source located at or near the top.
Land Development Code Page 10 50 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
BUILDING
For the purpose of Sec. 3.8.6, H-O: Historic Overlay District only, building is defined as a structure created to shelter any form of human activity. This may refer to a house, barn, garage, church, hotel, or similar structure. Buildings may refer to a historically or architecturally related complex, such as a courthouse and jail, or a house and barn. Parking lots and garages are hereby deemed to be "buildings." For all other purposes, building is defined as any structure designed or built for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind, but not including mobile homes.
BUILDING, EXISTING
For the purpose of Sec. 6.6., Floodplains, any buildings and structures for which the “start of construction” commenced before September 29, 1978. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.]
BUILDING PERMIT
An application for a development permit reviewed and decided by the Building Official in accordance with procedures and standards in the Building Code in the Code of Ordinances.
BUILDING FRONT
For the purpose of Sec. 5.13, Roads, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bikeways, only, that area of the building which faces the public or private street by which the building was numbered.
BUILDING FRONTAGE
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, The linear length of a building facing the public right-of-way.
BUILDING SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a sign displayed upon or attached to any part of the exterior of a building, including, but not limited to, walls, windows, doors, parapets, awnings, marquees and mansards.
BULBOUT
An extension of the sidewalk into the space of a cartway used for vehicle parking. Bulbouts may be used to narrow the roadway and provide additional pedestrian or landscaping space at key locations, and are often used at corners and at mid-block points. They enhance pedestrian safety by increasing the lateral separation between pedestrians and moving traffic, shortening crossing distances, slowing turning vehicles, and visually narrowing the roadway; they may also be used to provide space for the boarding and alighting of buses and other transit vehicles.
CANOPY OR MARQUEE
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a structure, other than an awning, made of cloth, metal or other material with frames attached to a building and/or carried by a frame supported by the ground or sidewalk.
CANOPY OR MARQUEE SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, any sign attached to or constructed in or on a canopy or marquee.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 51
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
CAPACITY
For the purposes of Article 7: Concurrency Management System, capacity refers to the ability or availability of a public facility or service to accommodate users, expressed in an appropriate unit of measure, such as gallons per day or average daily trip ends.
CAPACITY, AVAILABLE
For the purposes of Article 7: Concurrency Management System, available capacity represents a specific amount of capacity that may be encumbered by, reserved by, or committed to future users of a public facility or service.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a sign on which the copy may be manually changed from time to time by use of changeable letters or panels. [See "Electronic reader board," which may be allowed subject to restrictions.
CHANGE IN USE
The change in the use of a structure or land from one use to another use listed in Table 4.2.2.C, Principal Use Table.
CHARTER
The Charter of the City of Apopka as found in Part I of the Code or Ordinances.
CHICANE
A traffic calming measure that involves offset curb extensions that deflect the path of moving vehicles with added horizontal curves in a street. They are used on streets to slow traffic for safety.
CITY
The City of Apopka, Florida.
CITY CLERK
The City Clerk of the City of Apopka, Florida.
CITY COUNCIL
The elected legislative governing body of the City of Apopka, Florida.
CITY ADMINISTRATOR
The City Administrator of the City of Apopka, Florida.
CITY STAFF
City officers and employees and agents of the City of Apopka who have responsibilities for administering and enforcing the provisions of this LDC delegated to them by the Director.
CLUBHOUSE (AS ACCESSORY TO A RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT, GOLF. OR TENNIS FACILITY)
A building or room used for social or recreational activities by occupants of a residential development, or members of a club (e.g., golf course clubhouse) or occupants of a residential or other development.
CO / CO’D
For the purpose of Article 7: Concurrency Management System only, CO/CO’D is an abbreviation for a certificate of occupancy, or for the structures for which a certificate of occupancy has been approved.
Land Development Code Page 10 52 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
CODE OF ORDINANCES
The City of Apopka, Florida, Code of Ordinances.
COMMERCIALLY DEVELOPED PARCEL
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a parcel of property on which there is at least one walled and roofed structure used, or designed to be used, for other than residential or agricultural purposes.
COMMON OPEN SPACE
An area of land, or water, or combination of land and water, which is preserved in perpetuity for the use or enjoyment of residents. Common open space may contain such structures and improvements as are desirable and appropriate for the common benefit and enjoyment of residents.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
The Community Development Department is responsible for the planning functions of the City, and for administering this LDC. (See 2.3.4, Community Development Department).
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR
The Director and person in charge of the City’s Community Development Department.
COMMUNITY GARDEN (AS AN ACCESORY USE)
An accessory use consisting of a private or public facility for cultivation of fruits, flowers, vegetables, or ornamental plants by more than one person, household, family, or non-profit organization for personal or group use, consumption, or donation.
COMMUNITY INFORMATION PANEL SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a sign of any type erected by the city for the benefit of the public on city property that provides way-finding information, events occurring at city properties, or other public service information. Community information panel shall only use an electronic reader board.
COMMUNITY RECREATION FACILITY (AS ACCESSORY TO A RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT)
A private recreational facility for use solely by the residents and guests of a particular residential development, including residential subdivisions, multifamily, townhome, two-family, and mixed-use developments.
COMPLETE STREET
A street or roadway that is planned, designed, constructed, operated, and maintained to safely and comfortably accommodate people of all ages and abilities, including pedestrians, cyclists, transit users, motorists, and freight and service operators.
COMPLETE STREETS ELEMENTS
Design features that contribute to a safe, convenient, and comfortable travel experience for all users, including but not limited to such features as: sidewalks; shared use paths; bicycle lanes; automobile lanes; paved shoulders; street trees and landscaping; planting strips; curbs; accessible curb ramps; bulb-outs; crosswalks; refuge islands; pedestrian and traffic signals, including countdown and accessible signals; signage; street furniture; bicycle parking facilities; public transportation stops and facilities; transit priority signalization; traffic calming devices; narrow vehicle lanes; raised medians; roadway diets; and dedicated transit lanes.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 53
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
COMPOSTING, SMALL-SCALE
An enclosed area at least 100 square feet in area that contains a compost tumbler or similar apparatus designed for the purpose of converting household kitchen and yard waste into fertilizer.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
The comprehensive plan of the City of Apopka, Florida, including the elements or portions thereof, as adopted and amended by ordinance of the City Council in accordance with Sec. 163.3161, Fla. Stat., the Community Planning Act.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AMENDMENT
See Ch. 163, Fla. Stat.
CONDOMINIUM
A form of ownership from the inside wall inward and customarily constructed as part of a group of three or more units attached by a common wall and located on land that is owned by the condominium management.
CONFORMING USE
Any lawful use of a building, structure, or parcel of land that complies with the provisions of this LDC.
CONICAL ZONE
For the purpose of Sec. 3.6.11, AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District, a zone commencing at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extending to a distance of 15,000 feet from the airport reference point. The conical zone does not include the instrument and noninstrument approach zones and transition zones.
CONNECTIVITY INDEX
For purposes of this LDC, a metric that evaluates the street connections in a single-family or two-family residential subdivision (see Sec. <>).
CONSTRUCTION
The erection of any structure or any preparations (including land disturbing activities) for the same.
CONSTRUCTION-RELATED BUILDING, STRUCTURE, OR USE
A temporary structure, facility, or space associated with the staging, management, and security of new construction—including an office building, security building, storage buildings, construction waste and recycling receptacles, temporary sanitation facilities, outdoor storage, and employee parking areas—and located on or adjacent to the construction site.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a sign individually or jointly erected and maintained on the premises while undergoing construction by an architect, contractor, developer, finance organization, subcontractor or materials vendor upon which property such individual is furnishing labor, services and/or material.
COPY
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, wording, symbol, image, or message on a sign surface either in permanent or removable letter form.
Land Development Code Page 10 54 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
COUNTY
Orange County, Florida.
CULTURAL RESOURCE
For the purpose of Sec. 3.8.6, H-O: Historic Overlay District only, cultural resource is defined as a site, object, structure, building or district listed on the city's survey of historic resources in the future land use element of the Apopka comprehensive plan.
DECORATIVE LIGHTING
Light fixtures used for decorative effects, like accent lights for buildings.
DEMOLITION
For the purpose of Sec. 3.8.6, H-O: Historic Overlay District only, demolition is defined as the tearing down or razing of 25 percent or more of a structure's external walls.
DESIGN FLOOD
The flood associated with the greater of the following two areas: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.]:
(1)Area with a floodplain subject to a 1-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year; or
(2)Area designated as a flood hazard area on the community’s flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated.
DESIGN FLOOD ELEVATION
The elevation of the “design flood,” including wave height, relative to the datum specified on the community’s legally designated flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO, the design flood elevation shall be the elevation of the highest existing grade of the building’s perimeter plus the depth number (in feet) specified on the flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO where the depth number is not specified on the map, the depth number shall be taken as being equal to 2 feet. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.]
DEVELOPER
Any person who engages in or proposes to engage in a development or development activity either as the owner or as the agent of an owner of land.
DEVELOPMENT OR DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY
For the purposes of Sec. 6.6 Floodplains, any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, tanks, temporary structures, temporary or permanent storage of equipment or materials, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavations, drilling operations or any other land disturbing activities. For all other purposes, “Development or development activity” has the meaning of development found in Ch. 380, Fla. Stat.
DEVELOPMENT ORDER
An order granting, denying, or granting with conditions an application for approval of a development project or activity. A distinction is made between development order, which encompasses all orders and permits, and three distinct types of development orders: preliminary development order, final development order, and development permit.
Preliminary development order:
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 55
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
Any preliminary approval which does not authorize actual construction, mining, or alterations to land and/or structures. A preliminary development order may authorize a change in the allowable use of land or a building, and may include conceptual and conditional approvals where a series of sequential approvals are required before action authorizes commencement of construction or land alteration. For purposes of this LDC preliminary development orders include FLUM amendments, comprehensive plan amendments which affect land use or development standards, general and site specific map amendments, planned developments, a special exception permits, and preliminary plans for a major development plan.
Final development order:
The final authorization of a development project; the authorization which must be granted prior to issuance of any permit required to initiate development. For purposes of this LDC the final development plan approval is the final development order. “
Development permit.
That official city document which authorizes the commencement of construction or land alteration without need for further application and approval. Permits include: all types of construction permits (plumbing, electrical, mechanical, etc., in addition to the building permit itself), grading and clearing permits, tree removal permits, sign permits, etc.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN, MAJOR
See Sec. 2.5.2.A.3.a, Major Development Plan.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN, MINOR
See Sec. 2.5.2.A.3.b, Minor Development Plan.
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE
See Sec. 2.3.3, Development Review Committee (DRC).
DIRECTIONAL OR INSTRUCTIONAL SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a sign providing direction or instruction and located entirely on the property to which it pertains and does not advertise a business, such signs including, but not limited to, directions to restrooms, public telephones, walkways, parking lot entrances, entrance or exit signs.
DIRECTORY SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a sign listing names and/or uses, or location of more than one business, activity or professional office conducted within a building, group of buildings or commercial center. Such sign may contain no other identifying/advertising message than that listed above not intended to be read from public right-of-way.
DISTRIBUTION EQUIPMENT
For the purpose of Sec. 5.2, Landscaping and Buffer Standards, the water emitters on irrigation systems, including but not limited to sprinklers, rotors, spray heads and microirrigation devices.
DISTRICT
For the purpose of Sec. 3.8.6, H-O: Historic Overlay District only, district is defined as a geographically definable area, urban or rural, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures, objects, or areas, which are united historically or esthetically by plan or physical
Land Development Code Page 10 56 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
development. A district may be comprised of individual resources which are separated geographically but are linked by association or history.
DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY
A facility used to provide products or services to customers who remain in their vehicles, whether through a window or door in a building, a machine in a building or detached structure (e.g., ATM), or via a mechanical device (e.g., a pneumatic tube system). In addition to the pick-up window or door, drive-through service facilities also may include remote menu boards and ordering stations. Use types that commonly have drive-through service include banks, fast food restaurants, and drugstores.
DRIVEWAY AND SIDEWALK PERMIT
See Sec. 2.5.4.E, Driveway and Sidewalk Permit.
EASEMENT
A grant by a landowner to another landowner or to the public, for the right to occupy or use designated land for specific purposes, such as access, drainage, conservation, the location of public improvements, or other specified purpose. An easement does not constitute fee simple ownership of the land.
EDUCATIONAL FACILITY
For the purpose of Sec. 3.6.11, AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District any structure, land, or use that includes a public or private kindergarten through 12th grade school, charter school, magnet school, college campus, or university campus. The term does not include space used for educational purposes within a multitenant building.
ELECTRIC AWNING SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, an internally illuminated fixed space frame structure with translucent, flexible reinforced covering designed in awning form and with graphics or copy applied to the visible surface of the awning.
ELECTRIC SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, any sign containing electric wiring.
ELECTRIC VEHICLE (EV) LEVEL 1, 2, OR 3 CHARGING STATION
A vehicle parking space served by an electrical component assembly or cluster of component assemblies (battery charging station) designed and intended to transfer electric energy by conductive or inductive means from the electric grid or other off-board electrical source to a battery or other energy storage device within a vehicle that operates, partially or exclusively, on electric energy.
A Level 1 charging station is a slow-charging station that typically operates on a 15-or 20amp breaker on a 120-volt Alternating Current (AC) circuit.
A Level 2 charging station is a medium-speed-charging station that typically operates on a 40-to 100-amp breaker on a 208-or 240-volt Alternating Current circuit.
A level 3 charging station is an industrial grade charging station that operates on a high-voltage circuit to allow for fast charging.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 57
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
ELECTRONIC READER BOARD
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a sign emitting an illuminated message, image or design created electronically by any light source, LED (light emitting diodes), bare electric bulbs, luminous tubes, fiber optics, or any other combination of light sources creating a message or image. (Also includes electronic message centers, digital display signs, and similar types of electronic signs.)
ENCROACHMENT
For the purpose of Sec. 6.6, Floodplains, only, The placement of fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or other development into a flood hazard area which may impede or alter the flow capacity of riverine flood hazard areas
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA)
A federal agency with the mission to protect human health and the environment.
ERECT A SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, to construct, reconstruct, build, relocate, raise, assemble, place, affix, attach, create, paint, draw or in any other way bring into being or establish; but it shall not include any of the foregoing activities when performed as an incident to the change of message or routine maintenance.
EXEMPT SIGNS
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, signs exempted from normal permit requirements.
EXPANSION
An increase in the size of an existing structure or use, including the physical size of the land, building, parking, and other improvements or structures.
FACE OF SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, the part of a sign that is or may be used for copy.
FACTORY-FABRICATED TRANSPORTABLE BUILDING OR ROOM (TEMPORARY USE)
A building or room constructed in a factory that is designed to arrive at a site ready for occupancy (except for minor unpacking and connection to utilities), and to be readily relocated to another site immediately following its use.
FARMERS’ MARKET (AS A TEMPORARY USE)
A collection of vendors using private or publicly owned property or property owned by a nonprofit organization for the sale of agricultural and horticultural products grown by the vendor, value-added items produced by the vendor from agricultural, horticultural, or forestry products, or for the sale of foods prepared by the vendor. If the farmers’ market occurs once every two weeks or more frequently for all or most of the year, it is considered a principal use. If the farmers’ market occurs only occasionally or periodically for only a limited time period during the year, it is considered a temporary use. Operations generally meeting the definition of a temporary farmers’ market, but that are open fewer than four days per year, shall be construed as a "garage or yard sale (which is a temporary use)."
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY(FEMA)
A federal agency with the mission of helping people before, during, and after disasters.
Land Development Code Page 10 58 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
FIXTURE OR LUMINAIRE
For purposes of Sec. 5.7, Exterior Lighting, a complete lighting unit including the lamps, together with the parts required to distribute the light, to position and protect the lamps, and to connect the lamps to the power supply.
FLASHING SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, any sign which contains an intermittent or flashing light source or which includes the illusion of intermittent or flashing light by means of animation or an externally mounted intermittent light source. Automatic changing signs, such as public service, timetemperature-date signs or electronically controlled message centers, are not classed as flashing signs.
FLEA MARKET, TEMPORARY
The temporary and occasional collection of vendors using stalls, booths, or tables on property owned by a public agency or a not-for-profit organization for the sale of merchandise, collectibles, crafts, antiques, and other items, excluding automobiles, automobile parts, and non-portable household appliances.
FLORIDA FRIENDLY LANDSCAPE
A landscape that incorporates the best management practices and philosophies promoted by programs such as Florida Yards and Neighborhoods/Environmental Landscape Management. The programs promote quality landscapes that conserve water, utilize water wise principles, protect the environment, are adaptable to local conditions, and are drought tolerant.
FLOOD DAMAGE-RESISTANT MATERIALS
Any construction material capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.]
FLOOD HAZARD AREA
The greater of (1) the area within a floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year, and (2) the area designated as a flood hazard area on the community’s flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.]
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM)
The official map of a community on which FEMA has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community; as defined by FEMA.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY
The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that contains the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (if applicable), the water surface elevations of the base flood, and supporting technical data. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.]
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR
The office or position designated and charged with the administration and enforcement of Section 6.6, Floodplains of this LDC (may be referred to as the Floodplain Manager).
FLOODPLAIN PERMIT
See Sec. 2.5.4.C, Floodplain Permit.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 59
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
FLOODWAY
The channel of a river or other riverine watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.]
FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT ANALYSIS:
An engineering analysis of the impact that a proposed encroachment into a floodway is expected to have on the floodway boundaries and base flood elevations; the evaluation shall be prepared by a qualified Florida licensed engineer using standard engineering methods and models.
FLORIDA BUILDING CODE (FBC)
The family of codes adopted by the Florida Building Commission, including: Florida Building Code, Building; Florida Building Code, Residential; Florida Building Code, Existing Building; Florida Building Code, Mechanical; Florida Building Code, Plumbing; Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas.
FLORIDA FISH AND WILDLIFE CONSERVATION COMMISSION
A Florida state agency. In Article 6, only, this term specifically refers to the office of environmental services, Vero Beach, Florida Fish and Wildlife Commission, or its successors.
FOOT CANDLE
A unit of measure of the intensity of light falling on a surface. It is often defined as the amount of illumination that the inside surface of a one-foot-radius sphere would be receiving if there were a uniform point source of one candela in the exact center of the sphere. One foot candle is equal to one lumen per square foot.
FREESTANDING SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, any type of sign supported by structures that are placed on or anchored in the ground, structurally independent of any building or other structure, and intended to be permanent. All freestanding signs shall be monument signs except as otherwise allowed by this article.
FRONTAGE (BUILDING)
For the purpose of Article 5: Signs only, the ground floor horizontal distance of a building, or portion thereof occupied by a tenant. It is measured along a ground floor wall which faces onto a public open space, such as a courtyard or plaza; or is adjacent to a public street, or adjacent to a driveway or parking lot which serves that use. If any building frontage does not consist of one straight line, the frontage of any offset portion shall be projected, for computation purposes, to the extension of the line of the most forward face of the building.
FRONTAGE (STREET)
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, the length of the property line of any one parcel along a public right-of-way on which it borders.
FULL CUT-OFF
A light fixture constructed and installed in such a manner that all light emitted by it, either directly from the lamp (bulb) or a diffusing element, or indirectly by reflection or refraction from any part of the fixture, is projected below the horizontal plane of the fixture.
Land Development Code Page 10 60 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE
For the purpose of Sec. 6.6., Floodplains, only, a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, including only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities; the term does not include long term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
GARAGE OR CARPORT
A structure used or designed for the parking and storage of motor vehicles or boats. A garage is an enclosed building whereas a carport is a roofed structure open on one or more sides. Garages and carports are commonly attached to and considered part of a dwelling or other principal building, but may exist as a detached accessory structure.
GARAGE SALE
The temporary and occasional use of the premises of a dwelling for the sale, open to the public, of new or used personal property.
GREENHOUSE OR HOOPHOUSE
A structure, primarily of glass, in which temperature and humidity can be controlled for the cultivation or protection of plants. Hoophouses are similar to greenhouses, but are often temporary in nature and constructed of plastic.
GREEN ROOF
A roof of a structure that is partially or completely covered with vegetated landscape built up from a series of layers. Green roofs are constructed for multiple reasons – as spaces for people to use, as architectural features, to add value to property or to achieve particular environmental benefits (for example, stormwater capture and retention, improved species diversity, insulation of a building against heat gain or loss, and energy conservation). Vegetation on green roofs is planted in a growing substrate (a specially designed soil substitution medium) that may range in depth, depending on the weight capacity of the structure’s roof and the aims of the design.
GROUND COVER
For the purpose of Sec. 5.2, Landscaping and Buffer Standards, the low growing plants, other than turfgrass, used to cover the soil and form a continuous, low mass of foliage.
GUIDE SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a sign which shows route designations, destinations, directions, distances, services, points of interest and other geographical, historical, recreational or cultural information.
HANDICAP SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a sign required by law for the welfare of the handicapped. Such signs include the official handicapped symbol and caption, "Parking by Disabled Permit Only" and displayed in accordance with Florida Department of Transportation standards.
HARDSCAPE
For the purpose of Sec. 5.2, Landscaping and Buffer Standards, the areas such as patios, decks, driveways, in-ground swimming pools, fences, paths, decorative paving, and sidewalks that do not require irrigation.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 61
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
HEIGHT OF SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, the vertical distance measured from the highest point of the sign to the grade of the adjacent street or the surface grade beneath the sign, whichever is less.
HELIPAD (AS AN ACCESSORY USE)
A facility located on the roof of an office or other building (like a hospital) that accommodates the landing and taking-off of helicopters.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE
The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls or foundation of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE
For the purpose of Sec. 6.6., Floodplains, only, Any structure that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood hazard area requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 12 Historic Buildings.
HOME GARDEN
An on-site garden planted by an owner or occupant of a single-family detached dwelling unit for the purpose of growing vegetables or fruit for consumption by occupants of the dwelling unit only.
HOME OCCUPATION
Any gainful occupation, profession or business conducted entirely within a single-family detached or two-family dwelling unit, or a building accessory to that use, that is carried on by an occupant of the unit which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for living and residential purposes and does not change the its character. The following shall not be considered a home occupation: beauty shops, barbershops, band instrument or dance instruction, swimming instruction, studio for group instruction, public dining facility or tearoom, antique or gift shop, photographic studio, fortunetelling or similar activity, outdoor repair, food processing, retail sales, nursery school, or kindergarten. Additionally, the provision of group instruction of any type shall not be deemed a home occupation. The giving of individual instruction to one person at a time, such as an art or piano teacher, is a home occupation. In addition, fabrication of articles such as are commonly classified under the terms arts and handicrafts may be deemed a home occupation, as long as no retail sales are made at the home.
HORIZONTAL ZONE
For the purpose of Sec. 3.6.11, AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District, the area within a circle with its center at the airport reference point and having a radius of 10,000 feet. The horizontal zone does not include the instrument and non-instrument approach zones and the transition zones.
HUMAN SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a sign held by or attached to a human being who stands or walks on the ground, on private property, at a business location. A human sign includes a person dressed in costume, both for the purposes of advertising or otherwise drawing attention to an individual, business, commodity, service, activity, or product.
ILLUMINANCE, HORIZONTAL
The intensity of artificial light falling on a horizontal surface, measured in foot candles.
Land Development Code Page 10 62 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
ILLUMINATED SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a sign which is designed or arranged to reflect light from an artificial source, including indirect lighting, neon, incandescent lights and backlighting, and shall also include signs with reflectors that depend upon automobile headlights for an image.
ILLUMINATION
The casting of artificial light onto the ground or another surface.
IMMORAL, INDECENT, OR OBSCENE
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, that which to the average person applying contemporary community standards:
(1)
The predominant appeal of the matter, taken as a whole, is to the prurient interest; i.e., a shameful or morbid interest in sexual conduct, nudity or excretion; and
(2)
The matter depicts or describes in a patently offensive manner sexual conduct; and
(3)
The work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value.
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE
Standard engineering coefficients of permeability may be utilized for mixed surfaces. On lakefront lots, land located across a street and separated from the building site shall not be included in the available land area calculation.
INCIDENTAL SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a small sign, emblem or decal informing the public of goods, facilities or services available on the premises; e.g., a credit card sign or a sign indicating hours of business, not intended to be read from public right-of-way.
INDUSTRIAL PARKS
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a tract of land that is planned, developed and operated as an integrated facility for a number of individual industrial uses, with consideration to transportation facilities (rail and highway), circulation, parking, utility needs, aesthetics and compatibility.
INSTRUMENT APPROACH ZONE
For the purpose of Sec. 3.6.11, AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District, a zone at each end of the instrument runway for instrument landings and take-offs. The instrument approach zones shall have a width of 1,000 feet at a distance of 200feet beyond each end of the runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of 16,00 feet at a distance of 50,200 feet beyond each end of the runway, its center line being the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
INTERPRETATION
See Sec. 2.5.6, Interpretation.
IRRIGATION SYSTEM
A device or combination of devices having a hose, pipe, or other conduit connected directly to any source of water, or a mixture of water and chemicals, is drawn and applied for residential, commercial or agricultural purposes.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 63
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
LAND
“Land” has the meaning given it in Ch. 163, Fla. Stat. (“the earth, water, and air, above, below, or on the surface, and includes any improvements or structures customarily regarded as land”).
LAND USE
“Land use” has the meaning given it in Ch. 163, Fla. Stat. (“the development that has occurred on the land, the development that is proposed by a developer on the land, or the use that is permitted or permissible on the land under an adopted comprehensive plan or element or portion thereof, land development regulations, or a land development code, as the context may indicate”).
LANDFILL
For the purpose of Sec. 3.6.11, AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District, any solid wasteland disposal area for which a permit, other than a general permit, is required by Sec. 403.707 Fla. Stat,(2016 or as amended), and which receives solid waste for disposal in or upon land. The term does not include a land-spreading site, an injection well, a surface impoundment, or a facility for the disposal of construction and demolition debris.
LANDING AREA
For the purpose of Sec. 3.6.11, AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District, the area of the airport used for the landing, take-off or taxiing of aircraft.
LANDOWNER
Any owner of a legal or equitable interest in land, including the heirs, devisees, successors, assigns, and agent or personal representative of the owner. In addition, the holder of an option or a contract to purchase.
LAUNDROMAT (AS ACCESSORY TO A MULTIFAMILY DWELLING, MOBILE HOME PARK, OR CAMPGROUND)
An establishment where coin-operated automatic washing machines, clothes dryers, or dry-cleaning machines are provided for use as an accessory to a principal use.
LETER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC)
For the purpose of Section 6.6., Floodplains, only, an official determination issued by FEMA that amends or revises an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance Study. Letters of Map Change include:
Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA)
An amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective Flood Insurance Rate Map and establishes that a specific property, portion of a property, or structure is not located in a special flood hazard area.
Letter of Map Revision (LOMR)
A revision based on technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood hazard area boundaries and floodway delineations, and other planimetric features
Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F)
Land Development Code Page 10 64 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
A determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer located within the special flood hazard area. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance with the community’s floodplain management regulations.
Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR)
A formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance Study; upon submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a Letter of Map Revision may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM.
LIGHT,WALL PACK
The casting of artificial light onto the ground or another surface.
LIGHT-DUTY TRUCK
For the purpose of Sec. 6.6., Floodplains, only, as defined in 40 C.F.R. 86.082-2, any motor vehicle rated at 8,500 pounds Gross Vehicular Weight Rating or less which has a vehicular curb weight of 6,000 pounds or less and which has a basic vehicle frontal area of 45 square feet or less, which is:
(1)
Designed primarily for purposes of transportation of property or is a derivation of such a vehicle, or
(2)
Designed primarily for transportation of persons and has a capacity of more than 12 persons; or
(3)
Available with special features enabling off-street or off-highway operation and use.
LIMITED FUEL/OIL/GAS DISTRIBUTION
The distribution, for compensation, of fuel oil or bottled gases such as propane or liquid petroleum in containers no greater than five gallons in volume.
LINKS
For purposes of establishing a score under the Street Connectivity Index (see Sec<>) a link represents the stretches of a street that connect the nodes within the subdivision, links external to the subdivision that connect to nodes associated with the subdivision, and the street stubs within the subdivision (serving as temporary dead-end streets).
LOCAL PLANNING AGENCY
“Local planning agency” has the meaning given it in Ch. 163, Fla. Stat. (“the agency designated to prepare the comprehensive plan or plan amendments required by [the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act]”). The Planning Commission serves as the local planning agency for the City.
LOT
A parcel of land that is occupied, or is designed or capable of being occupied, by a principal use or structure, together with any accessory uses or structures, and such accessways, parking areas, yards, and open spaces required under this LDC.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 65
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
LOT OF RECORD
A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been lawfully recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Orange County, Florida, or a unit of land, the deed of which was lawfully recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Orange County, Florida, on or before September 1, 1969.
LOWEST FLOOR
For the purpose of Sec. 6.6., Floodplains, only, the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area of a building or structure, including basement, but excluding any unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, other than a basement, usable solely for vehicle parking, building access or limited storage provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the non-elevation requirements of the Florida Building Code or ASCE 24. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.]
LUMEN
A quantitative unit measuring the amount of light emitted by a light source.
MAINTENANCE
The regular upkeep of mitigated wetlands, or other areas, performed in order to assure goals of an approved mitigation/reclamation plan will be met. This may include a guaranteed survival rate of planted species and/or recruited desirous wetland species, the removal of undesirable invasion species, and a monitoring program.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE
Cash or other surety provided by an applicant to ensure the maintenance of constructed or installed public infrastructure or required private site features pending their acceptance or for a specified time period.
MANSARD
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a sloped roof or roof-like facade architecturally comparable to a building wall.
MANUFACTURED HOME
For the purpose of Sec. 6.6., Floodplains, only, A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is eight (8) feet or more in width and greater than four hundred (400) square feet, and which is built on a permanent, integral chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle" or “park trailer.” [Also defined in 15C-1.0101, F.A.C.]
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
For the purpose of Sec. 6.6., Floodplains, only, a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION, EXISTING
For the purpose of Sec. 6.6., Floodplains, only, a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before September 29, 1978.
Land Development Code Page 10 66 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION, EXPANSION OF
For the purpose of Sec. 6.6., Floodplains, only, the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
MARKET VALUE
For the purpose of Sec. 6.6., Floodplains, only, the price at which a property will change hands between a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither party being under compulsion to buy or sell and both having reasonable knowledge of relevant facts. As used in Sec. 6.6, Floodplains, the term refers to the market value of buildings and structures, excluding the land and other improvements on the parcel. Market value may be established by a qualified independent appraiser, Actual Cash Value (replacement cost depreciated for age and quality of construction), or tax assessment value adjusted to approximate market value by a factor provided by the Property Appraiser.
MARQUEE
See "Canopy."
MARQUEE SIGN
See "Canopy sign."
MASTER SIGN PLAN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a comprehensive sign plan for multiple-occupancy centers, to be reviewed and approved by the city prior to installation of signs, including outparcels.
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE
No feasible or practical alternative exists, as determined by the Director, and all possible efforts to comply with the standards or regulation or minimize potential harmful or adverse impacts have been undertaken by an applicant. Economic considerations may be taken into account but shall not be the overriding factor determining “maximum extent practicable.”
MENU BOARD SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a sign used by a business to advertise prices of items in conjunction with service at a drive-through window.
MESSAGE DURATION
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, the period of time copy is fixed or displayed on the sign face. Message duration is measured in seconds and rounded to the nearest second.
MICROIRRIGATION
The application of small quantities of water directly on or below the soil surface, usually as discrete drops or tiny streams through emitters placed along the water delivery pipes (laterals.) Microirrigation encompasses a number of methods or concepts including drip, subsurface, micro-bubbler, and micro-spray irrigation, previously referred to as trickle irrigation, low volume, or low flow irrigation. These emitters shall not exceed more than 20 gallons per hour (per outlet).
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 67
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
MINIMUM LIVING AREA
The minimum living area of a dwelling as measured by its outside dimensions exclusive of carports, porches, sheds and attached garages.
MINOR REPLAT
A subdivision or resubdivision of a lot or parcel of land which does not require the creation of new street, nor improvements for water, sewer, drainage or other public facilities other than those services normally provided for individual platted lots. All lots shall abut an existing dedicated right-of-way. See Sec. 2.5.2.C, Minor Replat, Minor Replat.
MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT
A development of a tract of land, building, or structure with a variety of complimentary and integrated uses, such as, but not limited to, residential, office, retail, public, or entertainment, in a compact urban form. The mix of uses shall be from separate use categories – rural and agricultural; residential; public, civic, and institutional; commercial, and industrial (see Table 4.2.2.C: Principal Use Table). A combination of two uses from the same category (for example two residential uses or two commercial uses) shall not be deemed a "mixed-use" development. For the purpose of this section, a "mixed use development" may be comprised of several parcels under different ownership, as long as they are approved as a unit and legal documents tying the parcels for the purpose of development are recorded.
MOBILE HOME SPACE
Plot of ground within a mobile home park designed for the accommodation of one mobile home. Related accessory buildings, patios, and cabanas shall also be accommodated.
MODEL SALES HOME/UNIT
A dwelling, dwelling unit, or other marketable unit of a new development that is used for real estate sales or leasing activities associated with the development pending construction of the development and the initial sales of homes or units in the development.
MONUMENT SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a sign that has a solid supporting base equal or greater than the width of the sign face, generally made of stone, masonry, or concrete, with no separations between the sign and base.
MULTIPLE-OCCUPANCY DEVELOPMENTS, COMPLEXES OR CENTERS
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, any nonresidential use, including shopping centers, office parks and industrial parks (i.e., any use other than residential or agricultural), consisting of one parcel or series of contiguous parcels, existing as a unified project, with a building or buildings housing three or more occupants, shared driveway access or shared parking area. Multiple-unit centers may include one primary parcel and may include one or more outparcels.
NAMEPLATE SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a nonelectric flat wall sign identifying only the name and occupation or profession of occupants of premises on which the sign is located.
NATIVE TREES
Those trees and palms which are found indigenous or are an original inhabitant of this area.
Land Development Code Page 10 68 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
NATIVE VEGETATION
Any species of plant considered to be indigenous to Central Florida/Apopka area.
NEW CONSTRUCTION
For the purpose of Sec. 6.6., Floodplains, only, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after September 29, 1978 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
For the purpose of Sec. 6.6., Floodplains, only, a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after September 29, 1978.
NIT
A unit of illuminative brightness equal to one candle per square meter, measured perpendicular to the rays from the source, i.e., as measured from a sign's face.
NODE
For purposes of establishing a score under the Street Connectivity Index (see Sec. <>) a node represents street intersections and cul-de-sac heads within the subdivision.
NONCONFORMING LOT OF RECORD
Any lot of record that lawfully existed before March 6, 2019, or subsequent amendment thereto, but does not comply with the lot standards applied by this LDC.
NONCONFORMING SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, any advertising structure or sign which was lawfully erected and maintained prior to such time as it came within the purview of this section and any amendments thereto and which fails to conform to all applicable regulations and restrictions of this article.
NONCONFORMING SITE FEATURE
Any off-street parking, landscaping, or perimeter buffer that lawfully existed before March 6, 2019, or subsequent amendment thereto, but does not comply with the off-street parking, landscaping, or perimeter buffer standards applied by this LDC, or subsequent amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE
Any building or other structure that lawfully existed before adoption of this LDC, or subsequent amendment thereto, but does not comply with the standards applied by this LDC, or the subsequent amendment, that govern its size, height, coverage, setbacks, and other locational aspects.
NONCONFORMING USE
Any use of land or a building, sign, or other structure that lawfully existed before March 6, 2019, or subsequent amendment thereto, but does not comply with the use standards applied by this LDC, or the subsequent amendment. If the land or structure is vacant or unused before adoption of this LDC, or a subsequent amendment, it shall be conclusively presumed that any use of the land or structure is subject to the provisions of this LDC, or the subsequent amendment.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 69
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
NONCONFORMITY
A nonconforming use, structure, lot of record, sign, or site feature.
NON-INSTRUMENT APPROACH ZONE
For the purpose of Sec. 3.6.11, AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District, a zone at each end of all non-instrument runways on the airport for non-instrument landing and take-offs. The non-instrument approach zone shall have a width of 500 feet at a distance of 200 feet beyond each end of the runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of one thousand seven hundred (1,700) feet at a distance of 10,200 feet beyond each end of the runway, its center line being the continuation of the center line of the runway.
NOTICE OF VIOLATION
An initial notice indicating an alleged violation of this LDC. See Sec. 9.5.1.B, Notice of Violations.
NOTIFICATION SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a sign used to identify a new business or development site and is installed prior to any other signage.
OBSTRUCTION
For the purpose of Sec. 3.6.11, AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District, any existing or proposed object, terrain, or structure construction or alteration that exceeds the federal obstruction standards contained in 14 C.F.R. part 77, subpart C. The term includes:
(a)
Any object of natural growth or terrain;
(b)
Permanent or temporary construction or alteration, including equipment or materials used and any permanent or temporary apparatus; or
(c)
Alteration of any permanent or temporary existing structure by a change in the structure’s height, including appurtenances, lateral dimensions, and equipment or materials used in the structure.
OBJECT
For the purpose of Sec. 3.8.6, H-O: Historic Overlay District only, object is defined as a material thing of functional, esthetic, cultural, historical, or scientific value that may be, by nature of design, movable, yet related to a specific setting or environment.
OCCUPANT/OCCUPANCY
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, any nonresidential or agricultural use.
OFF-PREMISE SIGN (ALSO "BILLBOARD")
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a sign structure advertising an establishment, merchandise, service or entertainment, which is not sold, produced, manufactured or furnished at the property on which such sign is located; e.g., "billboards" or "outdoor advertising."
OFF-SITE DIRECTIONAL SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a sign which provides directional assistance to an establishment which is not directly related to or associated with the property on which the sign is located.
Land Development Code Page 10 70 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
OFFICE PARK
A development on a tract of land that contains a number of separate office buildings, accessory and supporting uses, and open space designed, planned, constructed and managed on an integrated and coordinated basis.
ORDINANCE
A legislative enactment of the City.
ORDINARY MAINTENANCE AND REPAIRS
Work done on a building or structure to correct any deterioration or decay of, or damage to, the building or structure, or any part thereof, and restore the building or structure as nearly as practical to its condition before the deterioration, decay, or damage.
ORIGINAL APPEARANCE
For the purpose of Sec. 3.8.6, H-O: Historic Overlay District only, original appearance is defined as that appearance (except for color) which, to the satisfaction of the director, closely resembles the appearance of either (1) the feature on the building as it was originally built or was likely to have been built, or (2) the feature on the building as it presently exists so long as the present appearance is appropriate, in the opinion of the director, to the style and materials of the building.
OUTDOOR DISPLAY OF MERCHANDISE (AS ACCESSORY TO A RETAIL SALES USE OR WHOLESALE SALES)
The placement of products or materials for sale outside the entrance of a retail or wholesale sales establishment.
OUTDOOR SEATING (AS ACCESSORY TO AN EATING OR DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT)
The provision of on-site outdoor seating or entertainment areas by an eating or drinking establishment where food or beverages are served for consumption or where outdoor entertainment takes place. The accessory use also may include outdoor seating areas on public sidewalks in front of the establishment.
OUTDOOR STORAGE (AS AN ACCESSORY USE)
Outdoor storage as an accessory use is the keeping, in an unroofed area on the site of a principal use, of any goods, material, merchandise, or vehicles associated with the principal use in the same place for more than 24 hours. Delivery vehicles shall not be used to avoid outdoor storage standards. If a trailer or truck or delivery vehicle is not unloaded and remains on a site for more than 24 hours, it is deemed to be outdoor storage and shall be regulated as such. This use does not include a junkyard or salvage yard or the display and storage of vehicles as part of an automobile, recreational vehicle, trailer, or truck sales or rental use.
OUTPARCEL
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a secondary platted lot(s) of land within a multiple-occupancy center. Secondary lots typically support freestanding structures with one or two establishments.
OWNER
See “landowner.”
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 71
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
OWNER OF RECORD
The owner of a lot of record reflected on the current Orange County tax roll.
PARCEL
See “lot.”
PARK TRAILER
For the purpose of Sec. 6.6., Floodplains, only, a transportable unit which has a body width not exceeding fourteen (14) feet and which is built on a single chassis and is designed to provide seasonal or temporary living quarters when connected to utilities necessary for operation of installed fixtures and appliances. [Defined in Sec. 320.01, Fla. Stat.]
PARKING FACILITY (AS AN ACCESSORY USE)
An off-street, hard-surfaced, ground level area—or a structure composed of one or more levels or floors—that is used exclusively for the temporary storage of motor vehicles associated with the principal use of the lot (for residents, employees, customers, visitors, etc.).
PERSON
For all other parts of this LDC except Article 9: Enforcement, “person” means any individual, corporation, government agency, business trust, partnership, two or more persons having a joint interest, or any other legal entity. For the purposes of enforcing this LDC in accordance with Article 9: Enforcement, “person” includes any individual, corporation, government agency, government official, business trust, partnership, two or more persons having a joint interest, or any other legal entity. Persons subject to the remedies and penalties established in Article 9: Enforcement, for violating this LDC shall include: an architect, engineer, builder, contractor, developer, agency, or any other person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, causes, or maintains a condition that results in or constitutes a violation of this LDC; or an owner, any tenant or occupant, or any other person who has control over, or responsibility for, the use or development of the land on which the violation occurs.
PIER
A platform extending from a shoreline over water and supported by piles or pillars, used to secure, protect, and provide access to boats.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT
A type of zoning district map amendment involving the classification of land to special type of zoning district designed to accommodate generally larger-scale development that is planned and developed as an integral unit in accordance with a PD Plan and PD Agreement, with flexible development standards that illustrate and address land uses, circulation, utilities, parking, setbacks, densities and intensities, land coverage, landscaping and buffers, open space, building form and design, and similar features of the project; An application for development permit for a planned development district is reviewed and decided by the City Council in accordance with Sec. 2.5.1.F, Planned Development.
PLANNING COMMISSION
The Planning Commission of the City of Apopka, Florida.
PLANT SPECIES, PROHIBITED
Those plant species which are demonstrably detrimental to native plants, native wildlife, ecosystems, or human health, safety, and welfare
Land Development Code Page 10 72 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
PLAT
A map or delineated representation of the subdivision of lands, being a complete exact representation of the subdivision and of other information in compliance with the requirement of all applicable provisions of Ch. 177 Part 1,Fla. Stat., Platting, and of any other provisions in this LDC and the City Code of Ordinances.
PLAT VACATION
The vacation of an existing plat or subdivision of land. See Sec. 2.5.2.D, Plat Vacation.
POLE SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a sign supported by at least one upright pole or post which is secured to the ground and the bottom edge of the sign face. [Note: Pole signs are prohibited unless a variance is granted by the planning commission based on criteria established in section 10.02.00.
POLITICAL SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a sign concerning candidacy for public office or urging action on any ballot issue in a forthcoming public election or pertaining to or advocating political views or policies.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION
For the purpose of Sec. 3.6.11, AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District, the local government of any county, municipality, town, village, or other subdivision or agency thereof, or any district or special district, port commission, port authority, or other such agency authorized to establish or operate airports in the state; City of Apopka.
PORTABLE SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a sign that may be hauled or towed from one location to another, is self-supporting and, when placed, is not permanently attached to the ground or a building.
PORTABLE SHIPPING CONTAINER
A large metal or wooden container, typically intended for transport by a large truck, train, or ship, that is used for the temporary storage and or transport of personal property.
PRIMARY PARCEL
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a platted lot or parcel in a multiple-occupancy development providing for major driveway access and shared parking for the project. Typically this lot is the site for one or more "anchor" establishments.
PRIVATE STREET
Any thoroughfare used for vehicular traffic which is not a public street; to include, but not be limited to, roadways in apartment, condominium or office complexes.
PRODUCE STAND (AS AN ACCESSORY USE TO A FARM OR COMMUNITY GARDEN)
A structure used for the sale of agricultural or horticultural or other products, or the sale of fruits, vegetables, plants, or cut flowers, on the site of a farm or community garden.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 73
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER
An individual licensed as a Professional Engineer with up-to-date credentials approved by the Florida Board of Professional Engineers (FBPE).
PROJECTING SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a sign other than a flat wall sign which is attached to and projects from a building wall or other structure.
PROTECTED TREES
Any living tree with a DBH of six inches or greater and which are not otherwise exempt from this LDC, including:
Palms with clear trunks of 4½ feet between the ground and lowest frond.
The needle palm (Rhapidophyllum hystrix).
Those trees so designated by the City Council.
Specimen and historical trees.
PUBLIC-USE AIRPORT
For the purpose of Sec. 3.6.11, AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District, an airport, publicly or privately owned, licensed by the state, which is open for use by the public.
PUBLIC STREET
The area of the public right-of-way, either paved or unpaved, which is intended for vehicular traffic, excluding service entrances or driveways.
RAIN SENSOR DEVICE
For the purpose of Sec. 5.2, Landscaping and Buffer Standards, an unobstructed, operational, electrical or mechanical component placed in the circuitry of an irrigation system that is designed to override a sprinkler controller when precipitation has reached a pre-set quantity.
RAINWATER CISTERN OR BARREL
A catchment device to capture rain water from a roof or other surface before it reaches the ground, which may be either above or below ground level.
REAL ESTATE SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a sign erected by the owner or his agent advertising real property upon which the sign is located for rent, for lease or for sale.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
For the purpose of Sec. 6.6., Floodplains, only, A vehicular type portable structure without permanent foundation, which is built on a single chassis; measures 400 square feet or less at the largest horizontal projection; can be towed, hauled or driven, and is primarily designed as temporary living accommodations for recreation, camping, and travel use, and including, but not limited to, travel trailers, truck campers, camping trailers, and self-propelled motor homes.
REGULATORY SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a sign providing notice of traffic laws or regulations.
Land Development Code Page 10 74 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
REUSE / RECLAIMED WATER
For the purpose of Sec. 5.2, Landscaping and Buffer Standards, the product of an advanced treatment process which cleans wastewater. This treatment process produces water ideal for plant irrigation and other commercial/industrial uses.
RELOCATION
The moving of a structure to a new location on its lot or parcel or the relocation of a structure to a new lot or parcel.
RENOVATION
The removal and replacement or covering of existing interior or exterior finish, trim, doors, windows, or other materials with new materials that serve the same purpose and do not change the configuration of space. Renovation includes the replacement of equipment or fixtures.
REPAIR
The restoration to a good or sound condition of materials, systems and/or components of a structure that are worn, deteriorated, or broken using materials or components identical to or closely similar to existing materials or components.
REPEAT VIOLATION
“Repeat violation” has the meaning given it in Ch. 162, Fla. Stat. (“a violation of a provision of [this LDC] by a person who has been previously found through a code enforcement board or any other quasi-judicial or judicial process, to have violated or who has admitted violating the same provision within five years prior to the violation, notwithstanding the violations occur at different locations”).
RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION ENTRANCE SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a sign which designates the name of a subdivision or a multifamily development and is located at or in close proximity to the entrance.
RIGHT-OF-WAY
A portion of land acquired by express or implied dedication or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, water line and other similar public uses.
ROOF LINE
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a horizontal line intersecting the highest point or points of a roof.
ROOF SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a sign erected over, on, or wholly or partially dependent upon the primary roof of any building for support or attached to the roof in any way.
ROTATING SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, any sign or portion of a sign which moves in a revolving or similar manner.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 75
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
RUNWAY
For the purpose of Sec. 3.6.11, AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District, the paved surface of an airport landing strip.
RUNWAY PROTECTION ZONE
For the purpose of Sec. 3.6.11, AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District, an area at ground level beyond the runway end to enhance the safety and protection of people and property on the ground.
SATELLITE DISH OR ANTENNA
A round or parabolic antenna and its supporting structure for the purposes of sending and/or receiving radio or electromagnetic signals.
SEASONAL SALES
A temporary business enterprise that is conducted primarily outdoors and offers for retail sale decorative items that are, by their nature, in particular demand during a relatively short peak season— including, but not limited to, Christmas trees, pumpkins, and flowers and plants.
SIGN PERMIT
An application for a permit for a sign reviewed and decided by the Director. See Sec. 2.5.4.B, Sign Permit.
SITE
For the purpose of Sec. 3.8.6, H-O: Historic Overlay District only, site is defined as the location of a significant event, activity, building, structure, or archaeological resource where the significance of the location and any archaeological remains outweighs the significance of any existing structures. For all other purposes, site is defined as any lot or lots of record, or contiguous combination thereof, under the same ownership.
SHOPPING CENTER
Generally, a group of retail stores and/or service establishments with a minimum of 10,000 square feet of gross floorspace and providing off-street parking on the property. For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a group of commercial establishments planned, constructed and managed as a total entity, with customer and employee parking provided on-site. Includes multiple-occupancy centers.
SIGHT TRIANGLE
A triangular-shaped portion of land established at street intersections in which nothing is erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight distance of motorists entering or leaving the intersection as established in the last edition of the Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design, Construction, and Maintenance for Streets and Highways, Florida Department of Transportation, unless specified herein.
SIGN
Any writing, pictorial presentation, number, illustration or decoration, flag, banner or pennant, or other device which is used to announce, direct attention to, identify, advertise or otherwise make anything known. The term "sign" shall not be deemed to include the terms "building" or "landscaping" or any architectural embellishment of a building not intended to communicate information.
Land Development Code Page 10 76 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
SIGN STRUCTURE
Any construction used or designed to support a sign.
SNIPE SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, an unauthorized temporary sign posted or attached to posts, trees, utility poles, fences, wire frame, wood stakes or similar support structures for the purpose of advertising an event, service, or product not located on the property for which the sale, service, or event occurs.
SOLAR ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (SMALL-SCALE)
Equipment for the collection of solar energy or its conversion to electrical energy for use on the same property, or for incidental sale to a public utility, when that equipment is accessory to a principal use of the property. Components are typically mounted on the roof(s) of principal or accessory structures, but may be mounted on other parts of structures, or on the ground.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION
A use, designated as a special exception in Table 4.2.2.C: Principal Use Table, that may be appropriate in a particular zoning district, but because of its nature, extent, and external effects, requires special standards and special consideration of its location, design, and methods of operation before it is allowed in the district.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION PERMIT
An application for a development permit reviewed and decided by the City Council in accordance with Sec. 2.5.1.G, Special Exception Permit.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA:
For the purpose of Sec. 6.6. Floodplains, only, an area in the floodplain subject to a 1 percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are shown on FIRMs as Zone A, AO, A1 A30, AE, A99, AH, V1 V30, VE or V. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 202.]
STABLE, PRIVATE (AS AN ACCESSORY USE)
A building or land where horses are, sheltered, fed, or kept for personal use, accessory to an agricultural operation of a single-family detached dwelling.
STACKING LANE
A portion of the vehicular use area on a site that is dedicated to the temporary storage or "standing" of vehicles engaged in drive-through use of the site or development. Parking or storage of vehicles is not permitted within the stacking/standing area
START OF CONSTRUCTION
For the purpose of Sec. 6.6., Floodplains, only, The date of issuance of permits for new construction and substantial improvements, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement is within 180 days of the date of the issuance. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, or the construction of columns.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing, grading, or filling), the installation of streets or walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations, the
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 77
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
erection of temporary forms or the installation of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main buildings. For a substantial improvement, the actual “start of construction” means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 202.]
STATE
The State of Florida.
STOP ORDER
An order issued by the Director, Code Enforcement Officer, Code Enforcement Hearing Officer, or City Attorney, as appropriate that directs the person responsible for a development activity or other act in violation of this LDC to cease and desist such activity or act.
STORAGE SHED
An uninhabitable accessory structure used or designed to be used to provide shelter for or storage of materials, or as a small workshop. Storage sheds may be enclosed or open and may be attached to a principal building or exist as a detached structure.
STREET
For the purpose of Sec. 5.13.10, Complete Streets only, any rights of ways, public or private, including arterials, collectors, local streets, and roadways by any other designation, as well as bridges, tunnels, and any other portions of the transportation network. For all other purposes, a public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property, including publicly owned or controlled streets and permanent easements of record, for ingress and egress, which pass with the land. Street includes lanes, ways, or other means of ingress and egress regardless of the term used to describe it.
STREET BANNER
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a banner sign stretched across and/or hung over a public right-of-way.
STREET MAINTENANCE
For the purpose of Sec. 5.13.10, Complete Streets only, the minor routine upkeep and maintenance of Streets such as mill & overlay, micro abrasion, micro surfacing, crack seal, concrete rehab, curb repair, spot repair, restriping, signal operations, and interim measures on detour routes.
STREET STUB
A street segment, usually relatively short in length, which terminates at the boundary of a subdivision or other development. The purpose of stub streets is to ultimately connect to abutting land when it is developed.
STREET, TEMPORARY DEAD END
A street temporarily having only one outlet for vehicular traffic and intended to be extended or continued in the future.
STREET TREE
A tree planted or existing within or along either side of a street right-of-way
Land Development Code Page 10 78 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
STRUCTURE
“Structure” has the meaning given it in Ch. 380, Fla. Stat. (“anything constructed, installed, or portable, the use of which requires a location on a parcel of land. It includes a movable structure while it is located on land which can be used for housing, business, commercial, agricultural, or office purposes either temporarily or permanently. "Structure" also includes fences, billboards, swimming pools, poles, pipelines, transmission lines, tracks, and advertising signs.”)
STRUCTURE, EXISTING
See “building, existing”
STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY
Any structure to serve a use temporarily, such as a model sales/home unit, the temporary use of a transportable building, or a construction-related building or structure.
SUBDIVIDER
Any person who subdivides land deemed to be a subdivision as defined by this LDC.
SUBDIVISION
The platting of real property into three or more lots, parcels, tracts, tiers, blocks, sites, units, or any other division of land; and includes establishment of new streets and alleys, additions, and resubdivisions; and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the lands or area subdivided.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE
For the purpose of Sec. 6.6., Floodplains, only, damage of any origin sustained by a building or structure whereby the cost of restoring the building or structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the damage occurred. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 202.]
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT
For the purpose of Sec. 6.6., Floodplains, only, any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, alteration, addition, or other improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the structure has incurred "substantial damage," any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either (1) any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or (2) any alteration of a historic structure provided the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. . [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.]
SUBSTANTIAL MODIFICATION
For the purpose of Sec. 3.6.11, AIR: Orlando Apopka Airport District, any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or improvement of a structure when the actual cost of the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or improvement of the structure equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 79
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
SWIMMING POOL (AS AN ACCESSORY USE)
A man-made enclosure at least two feet deep at the deep end with a surface area exceeding 250 square feet, that is filled with water and used for wading or swimming, and that is accessory to a principal use.
SWINGING SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a sign not permanently attached to an upright pole or a wall so as to allow it to move back and forth either by design or by natural forces.
TEMPORARY SHELTER FOR COMMERCIAL DISPLAYS, SALES, AND SERVICES
A retail sales and service establishment’s temporary use of a tent or trailer for promotional displays or sales promotional displays or sales, seasonal activities, carload sales of products, sidewalk sales, and demonstration of products in a parking lot.
TEMPORARY SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a sign designed and constructed, not permitted to be permanently affixed and is intended for a short-term basis only, in accordance with this LDC.
TEMPORARY USE
A use established for a temporary period of time with the intent to discontinue such use on the expiration of the time period.
TEXT AMENDMENT
An amendment to the text of this LDC. See Sec. 2.5.1.C, Text Amendments.
TOTAL ALLOWABLE SIGN AREA
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, the maximum combined sign area that is allowed by this Article for all permanent signs placed on or at any development or parcel, calculated as a summation of the maximum area achievable for the wall sign, freestanding sign, and electronic reader board.
TRACT
See “lot.”
TRAFFIC GENERATING DEVELOPMENT
Development designed or intended to permit a use of the land which will contain more dwelling units or floorspace than the existing use of land, or to otherwise change the use of the land in a manner that increases the generation of vehicular traffic.
TRAILER SIGN
See "Portable sign."
TRANSPLANT TREE
The digging up of a tree from one place on a particular property and planting of the same tree in another place on the same property, or moved [moving] to another property.
TRANSPORTATION PROJECT
Any development, project, program, or practice that affects the transportation network or occurs in the public right-of-way, including any construction, reconstruction, retrofit, signalization operations,
Land Development Code Page 10 80 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
resurfacing, restriping, rehabilitation, maintenance (excluding routine maintenance that does not change the roadway geometry or operations, such as mowing, sweeping, and spot repair), operations, alteration, and repair of any public street or roadway within Apopka (including alleys, bridges, frontage roads, and other elements of the transportation system).
TREE
Any living palm or woody self-supporting perennial plant which normally grows to a mature overall height of a minimum of 15 feet.
TREE CROWN
Main mass of branching of a plant above the ground.
TREES PLANTED FOR HARVEST
All trees which have been planted, or shall be planted, with the bona fide intention at the time of said planting to commercially harvest said trees in the future. Said trees shall include, by way of illustration and not limitation, Christmas trees, pulpwood and saw timber.
TRIP GENERATION
The attraction or production of trips caused by a given type of development as documented in the current Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) "Trip Generation" publication.
UNDERSTORY TREE
Trees with a DBH less than six inches growing beneath large trees or in open fields.
USERS
For the purpose of Sec. 5.13.10, Complete Streets only, all persons that use Streets, including pedestrians, bicyclists, motor vehicle drivers, mobility device users, neighborhood electric vehicle users, and public transportation drivers and riders, of all ages and abilities, including children, youths, families, older adults, and persons with disabilities.
VARIANCE (FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
For the purpose of Sec. 6.6., Floodplains, only, a grant of relief from the requirements of Sec. 6.6 of this LDC, or the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, which permits construction in a manner that would not otherwise be permitted by this ordinance or the Florida Building Code.
VEHICLE SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, any sign affixed to a vehicle.
WALL SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a single-face sign mounted, attached to, affixed to or painted on the exterior wall of a building or structure in a plane parallel to that of the supporting wall.
WARNING SIGNS
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a sign which calls attention to conditions on or adjacent to a highway or street that is potentially hazardous to traffic operations.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 81
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
WATER WISE
Landscape methods which conserve water through design techniques and the use of site appropriate and/or drought tolerant plants.
WATERCOURSE
Any natural or artificial channel, ditch, canal, stream, river, creek, waterway or wetland through which water flows in a definite direction, either continuously or intermittently, and which has a definite channel, bed, banks, or other discernible boundary.
WEEKEND DIRECTIONAL SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, temporary sign located off-site which serves to direct a use, establishment, development, project, commodity, service [or] activity which is not directly related to or associated with the property on which the sign is located.
WETLANDS
Those areas that meet the criteria for wetlands as outlined in the Environmental Resource Permit Applicant's Handbook, St. Johns River Water Management District, as adopted through chapter 40C4.091, FAC.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (SMALL-SCALE)
A facility consisting of one or more rotating wind turbines and related equipment that converts the kinetic energy in wind into mechanical energy. A small-scale wind energy conversion system as an accessory use is intended to primarily reduce on-site consumption of utility power for a home or business.
WINDOW SIGN
For the purpose of Sec. 5.10, Signs, only, a sign that is attached or affixed to a window, or a sign displayed within 24 inches of the inside of a window in such a manner as to be visible from any public place. Merchandise within the premises and visible from the exterior shall not be considered a window sign under this definition.
ZONING DISTRICT
An area delineated on the Official Zoning District Map within which a prescribed set of use and development standards are applied to various types of development.
ZONING DISTRICT MAP
The Official Zoning District Map of the City of Apopka, on which the boundaries of various zoning districts are drawn and which is an integral part of this LDC.
ZONING DISTRICT MAP AMENDMENT, GENERAL
A large-scale change in a zoning district classification(s) that usually establishes broad policies applicable city-wide or to a large area of the City, where the decision can be functionally viewed more as policy setting rather than policy application. See Sec. 2.5.1.D, General Map Amendment.
ZONING DISTRICT MAP AMENDMENT, SITE-SPECIFIC
A change in the zoning district classification(s) applied to land that has an impact on a single or limited number of properties or applicants, where the decision is contingent on a fact or facts arrived at from distinct alternatives considered at the public hearing on the application, and where the decision can
Land Development Code Page 10 82 Apopka, FL
-
Article 10: Definitions and Rules of Measurement
Section 10.4 Definitions
10.3.2 Interpretation of Unlisted Uses and Zoning District Boundaries
be functionally viewed as policy application rather than policy setting. 2.5.1.E, Site-Specific Map Amendment (Rezoning).
ZONING DISTRICT, BASE
A zoning district within which a single set of use, intensity, dimensional, and development standards are applied.
ZONING DISTRICT, OVERLAY
A zoning district superimposed over one or more underlying base zoning districts that imposes standards and requirements in addition to those required by the underlying base zoning district.
ZONING VARIANCE
An application for a development permit reviewed and decided by the Planning Commission in accordance with Sec. 2.5.5.A, Zoning Variance.
Land Development Code Apopka, FL Page 10 83
