CLEWISTON CODE OF ORDINANCES 
____________ 
Published in 2013 by Order of the City Commission 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS AT RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Phillip Roland 
Mayor 
____________ 
James L. Pittman 
Vice-Mayor 
____________ 
Mali Gardner 
Richard Miller 
Julio Rodriguez 
City Commission 
____________ 
Al Perry 
City Manager 
____________ 
Marilyn McCorvey 
City Clerk 
____________ 
Charles Schoech 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Ava Barrett Library Director Ted Byrd Finance Director Ronnie Ford Golf Course Superintendent Don Gutshall Police Chief Lance Ramer Recreation Director Travis Reese Community Development Director Sean Scheffler Public Works Director Tommy Perry City Engineer  
City Department Directors 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Mali Gardner 
Mayor 
____________ 
Michael Atkinson 
Vice Mayor 
____________ 
Melanie McGahee 
Kristine Petersen 
Julio Rodriguez 
City Commission 
____________ 
Wendell Johnson 
City Manager 
____________ 
Mary K. Combass 
City Clerk 
____________ 
Gary Brandenburg 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Natasha Hayes Library Director Shari Howell Finance Director Aaron Angell Police Chief Vacant Recreation Director Travis Reese Community Development Director Sean Scheffler Public Works Director Tommy Perry City Engineer Danny Williams Utilities Director  
City Department Directors 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Clewiston, Florida. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1999 Code, as supplemented through March 16, 2009, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Commission. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1999 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1 LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE INDEX LDCi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Alyce A. Whitson, Senior Code Attorney, and Stephanie C. Benesh, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Marilyn McCorvey, City Clerk, Charles Schoech, City Attorney, Don Gutshall, Chief of Police, and Travis Reese, Community Development Director, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Clewiston, Florida. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Clewiston, Florida. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Clewiston, Florida. 2013. 
ORDINANCE NO. 2013-05 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY COMMISSION OF THE CITY OF CLEWISTON, FLORIDA, ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF CLEWISTON, FLORIDA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION Of PROVISIONS OF SAID CODE; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SAID CODE; AND PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE. 
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BY THE CITY COMMISSION OF THE CITY OF CLEWISTON, FLORIDA, AS FOLLOWS: 
    Section 1. The Clewiston Code of Ordinances, published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 110, each inclusive, is hereby adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before November 19, 2012, and not included in the Code of Ordinances, or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are hereby repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal, provided for in section 2 hereof, shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code of Ordinances or any ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 and a term of imprisonment not exceeding 60 days or both a fine and a term of imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies including but not limited to abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, administrative adjudication and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code of Ordinances, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code of Ordinances, so that reference to the Code of Ordinances includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after November 19, 2012, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code of Ordinances shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code of Ordinances. 
    Section 7. This Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its passage and approval, consistent with all requirements of general law. 
PASSED on first reading at July Session of the City Commission held on July 15, 2013. 
PASSED AND ADOPTED on second and final reading at August Session of the City Commission held on August 19, 2013. 
ATTEST: CITY OF CLEWISTON, FLORIDA ;sigl; _____ ;sigl; _____ Marilyn McCorvey, City Clerk Phillip Roland, Mayor (MUNICIPAL SEAL)  
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Municipal Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord./Res. No. Date Adopted Include/Omit Supp. No. 2013-01  2-18-2013 Include 1 2013-02  3-18-2013 Include 1 2013-04  7-15-2013 Include 1 2013-05  8-19-2013 Include 1 2013-06  9-16-2013 Include 1 2014-01  9-15-2014 Include 2 2015-01  4-20-2015 Include 3 2015-02  7-20-2015 Omit 3 2015-03 10-19-2015 Include 3 2016-01  3-21-2016 Include 3 2016-02  6-20-2016 Omit 3 2016-05 10-17-2016 Omit 3 2016-06 10-17-2016 Omit 3 2016-07 11-21-2016 Include 3 2016-08 11-21-2016 Include 3 2016-10  1-23-2017 Omit 3 2016-11  1-23-2017 Include 3 2017-01  3-20-2017 Include 4 2017-02  2-20-2017 Include 4 2017-03  2-20-2017 Include 4 2017-04  3-20-2017 Include 4 2017-05  3-20-2017 Include 4 2017-07  4-17-2017 Include 4 2017-08  5-15-2017 Include 4 2017-09  5-15-2017 Include 4 2017-10  6-19-2017 Include 4 2017-11  6-19-2017 Include 4 2017-15  7-17-2017 Include 4 2017-16  9-18-2017 Include 4 2017-17  9-18-2017 Include 4 2017-18 11-20-2017 Include 4 2017-19 11-20-2017 Omit 4 2017-20 12-18-2017 Include 4 2017-21  1-22-2018 Include 4 2015-14 10-19-2015 Include 5 2016-09  9-19-2016 Include 5 2016-11 11-21-2016 Omitted 5 2018-01  2- 5-2018 Include 5 2018-02  5- 7-2018 Omitted 5 2018-03  6- 4-2018 Omitted 5 2018-04  5-21-2018 Omitted 5 2018-05  8- 6-2018 Omitted 5 2018-06  1- 7-2019 Include 5  
PART I - CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS 
Subpart A - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Charter of the City of Clewiston, Florida, as adopted by Ordinance No. 2012-02, adopted on June 18, 2012, and by referendum on November 6, 2012, which repealed the previous Charter adopted by Ordinance No. 2008-04, pts. 1, 2, adopted August 18, 2008, and by referendum on November 4, 2008, which repealed the former Arts. I-IX, Laws of Fla., ch. 10433(1925) with amendments thereto enacted in 1927, 1929, 1941 and 1947. Amendments to the Charter as adopted by Ordinance No. 2012-02 are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Municipal home rule, F.S. ch. 166. 

ARTICLE I. - CORPORATE EXISTENCE, FORM OF GOVERNMENT AND CHARTER 

Sec. 1.01. - Form of government. 
    The City of Clewiston, Florida shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the name of the City of Clewiston, Florida and, as such, shall have perpetual succession. The City of Clewiston shall hereafter continue to exist as a "Commission-Manager" form of government. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 1.02. - City boundaries. 
    The boundary description of the City is on file in the office of the City Clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL POWERS 

Sec. 2.01. - General. 
(a)  The City of Clewiston shall have all the governmental, corporate and proprietary powers to enable it to conduct municipal government, perform municipal functions, and render municipal services as provided by the Constitution of the State of Florida and by Section 166.021 of the Florida Statutes and may exercise any power for municipal purposes except as expressly prohibited by law or this Charter. 
(b)  The City of Clewiston may use a corporate seal; may sue and be sued; may contract and be contracted with; may implead and be impleaded in all courts in all matters whatsoever; may cooperate with the government of the State of Florida or any agency thereof, the federal government or any agency thereof, or any political subdivision of the State of Florida; and shall have all the powers granted to cities by the constitution and laws of the State of Florida together with all the implied powers necessary to carry into execution all the powers granted. 
(c)  The City may own or acquire property within and without its boundaries for any municipal purpose in fee simple or in any lesser interest or estate, by purchase, gift, devise, lease or condemnation; may sell, lease, hold, manage, control and police any property now owned by it or which it may hereafter acquire, and shall have the right to lease or let its property whether inside or outside of the City limits, subject to the limitations hereinafter set out, and may construct, own, lease, operate and regulate public utilities; may assess, levy and collect taxes for general and special purposes on all lawful subjects of taxation; may borrow money on the faith and credit of the City by the issuance and sale of bonds, warrants or notes of the City; may appropriate the money of the City for all lawful purposes; may regulate and control the use, for whatever purpose, of the streets and other public places; may make and enforce all police, health, sanitary and other regulations; may pass such ordinances and resolutions as may be expedient for the protection and maintenance of good government, peace and welfare of the City, for the performance of the functions thereof, and for the order and security of its residents; may provide suitable penalties for the violations of any ordinance enacted by the City of Clewiston; and, except as prohibited by the constitution and laws of this state, or as restricted by this Charter, the City may exercise and shall have all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges, authorities and immunities, of every name and nature whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 2.02. - General powers adopted. 
    The enumeration of the particular powers of this Charter shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive, but in addition to the powers enumerated herein or implied hereby or appropriate to the exercise of such powers, the City shall have and may exercise all powers of local self-government and all other powers which, under the constitution and laws of the State of Florida, it would be competent for this Charter specifically to enumerate. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
ARTICLE III. - THE CITY COMMISSION 

Sec. 3.01. - Number, selection and term. 
    The legislative and governing body of the City shall consist of five Commission members and shall be known as the "City Commission of the City of Clewiston, Florida." The members of the City Commission holding office on the effective date of this Charter shall continue in office until the expiration of their terms and until their successors are qualified and elected. At each general election, three (3) Commissioners shall be elected; the two (2) candidates receiving the greatest number of votes shall be deemed elected for four-year terms, and the candidate receiving the next greatest number of votes shall be deemed elected for a two-year term. Any person who is a resident of the City of Clewiston, who has qualified as an elector of this state, and who registers in the manner prescribed by general law and ordinance of the City shall be a qualified elector of the City and shall be entitled to vote at all elections of the City. The City Commission shall by ordinance prescribe the rules and regulations governing all elections to be held under this Charter, provided that the provisions of such ordinances shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this Charter and the Constitution of Florida. Any matter or thing pertaining to elections held under this Charter that is not contained herein and covered hereby and is not contained and covered by any City Ordinance shall be governed by the general laws of the State of Florida pertaining to elections. No person shall be eligible for election as City Commissioner who is not a qualified elector of the City of Clewiston. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 3.02. - Qualification of Commission members. 
    In addition to any other qualifications prescribed by law, each Commission member shall meet the conditions of this Charter and shall reside within the City limits while in office. Any member of the City Commission ceasing to possess any of the qualifications specified in this section, or convicted of a felony while in office, shall immediately forfeit such position. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 3.03. - Compensation and benefits. 
    Compensation and benefits for Commission members shall be as established by City Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 3.04. - Organization. 
    During the first regular meeting in December of each general election year, the City Commission shall hold an organization meeting, and from their number appoint by majority vote, the Mayor and Vice Mayor. The Mayor shall have all the powers and duties as a Commission member, including the power to vote, and shall preside at the meetings of the Commission, represent the City in intergovernmental relationships, appoint with the advice and consent of the Commission the members of citizen advisory boards, committees, and commissions, and perform other duties as specified by the Commission. The Mayor shall be recognized as head of the government for all ceremonial purposes and by the Governor for the purpose of military law. The Vice Mayor shall serve in the absence of the Mayor and shall have all the powers and duties thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 3.05. - Vacancies, forfeiture and filling of vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancies. The office of a Commission member or office of the Mayor shall become vacant upon such person's death, acceptance of a resignation by the City Commission, removal from office in any manner authorized by law or forfeiture of office. 
(b)  Forfeiture. A member of the City Commission shall forfeit his or her office if such person: 
(1)  During his or her term of office lacks any qualification at any time for the office prescribed by this Charter or by law; 
(2)  Violates any express prohibition of this Charter; 
(3)  Is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude; or 
(4)  Fails to attend two (2) consecutive regular City Commission meetings without being excused by the City Commission. 
(c)  Filling of Vacancies. In the event that a vacancy occurs in the City Commission due to the death, disability, disqualification, resignation or removal of a City Commissioner, the remaining Commissioners, by a majority vote, shall appoint a qualified person to fill such vacancy until the next general election, at which time an election shall be held to fill the vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any. Any person appointed shall be qualified for the office as required by this Charter. 
Sec. 3.06. - Powers of the City Commission. 
    Except as this Charter provides otherwise, all legislative powers of the City shall be vested in the Commission. The Commission shall provide for the exercise of these powers and for the performance of all duties and obligations imposed on the City by law. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 3.07. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Holding Other Office. Except where authorized by law, members of the City Commission shall not hold any other City office or City employment during their terms, and no former member of the City Commission shall hold any compensated appointive City office or City employment until one (1) year after the expiration of his or her term as a member of the City Commission. No member of the City Commission shall, during the term for which elected or appointed and for one (1) year thereafter, be appointed City Manager. 
(b)  Appointments and Removals. Neither the City Commission nor any of its members shall in any manner dictate the appointment or removal of any City administrative officer or employee that the City Manager or any subordinates are empowered to appoint. 
(c)  Interference with Administration. The City Commission and its members shall deal with City employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the City Manager through the City Manager, and neither the City Commission nor its members shall give orders to any such employee, either publicly or privately, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. However, the prohibition against interference with administration does not prevent Commission members from making inquiries of department directors for the purpose of obtaining information needed by them in the discharge of their duties, including constituent requests. Information provided to one Commission member should be shared with the entire Commission as warranted. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 3.08. - Meetings of City Commission. 
    The City Commission shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting each month and as many additional meetings as it deems necessary to transact the business of the City. The City Commission shall fix, by ordinance, the date and time of the regular meetings. Special meetings of the City Commission shall be held on the call of the Mayor or a majority of the City Commission members. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 3.09. - Conflict of interest and abstention. 
(a)  Conflict of Interest. No member of the City Commission, or any other officer, whether elected, appointed, paid or unpaid, shall participate in a vote or decision on a matter which would inure to the officer's special private gain or loss or to the special private gain or loss of any principal by whom said officer is retained, or to the parent or subsidiary of a corporate principal by whom said officer is retained or of a relative or business associate of said public officer, except in accordance with Florida law. 
(b)  Abstention. No member of the City Commission may abstain from voting on any question before the City Commission, except where a declared conflict of interest exists. A silent vote shall be recorded as an affirmative vote in favor of the motion pending before the City Commission in the official minutes of the City of Clewiston. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
State Law reference- Voting conflicts, F.S. § 112.3143(3). 
ARTICLE IV. - CITY ELECTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Florida Election Code, F.S. chs. 97-106. 

Sec. 4.01. - Elections. 
(a)  Election Schedule. The general election for the election of City Commissioners will be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of each even numbered year, or as determined by the Hendry County Supervisor of Elections in conformance with the General Election Laws of Florida. The City Commission may order a special election for ordinances, bond issues, charter amendments, recall or other purposes deemed appropriate by the City Commission. The City Commission will fix the time and place for such special elections and arrange with the Hendry County Supervisor of Elections to provide all means for holding same. 
(b)  Publicizing City Elections. All municipal elections shall be publicized in a manner consistent with the requirements of the present and all future amended editions of the Florida Election Code. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 4.02. - Filing for office and eligibility to file. 
(a)  Each candidate for an elective office shall meet the following qualifications: 
(1)  Be a citizen of the United States who is a registered elector of Hendry County Florida, and who resides within the City of Clewiston. 
(2)  Shall have resided, for at least twelve (12) months preceding the date of the election, within the corporate limits of the City. 
(b)  No employee of this City shall continue in such position after filing for an elective office provided for in this Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
ARTICLE V. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 5.01. - Bond. 
    The City Commission shall require bonds of all municipal officers and employees who receive and/or pay out any monies of the City. The amount of such bonds shall be determined by the City Commission and cost thereof shall be borne by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.02. - City Manager. 
(a)  Appointment and Qualifications. The City Commission shall appoint, by a majority vote of its total membership, a City Manager who shall serve as the chief administrative and executive officer of the City, and be responsible to the City Commission for the administration of all the affairs of the City. The City Manager shall be chosen by the City Commission on the basis of education, executive and administrative training, experience and ability, and need not, when appointed, be a resident of the City of Clewiston; but, each City Manager, upon appointment must become, within three (3) months, a resident of the City of Clewiston. The City Commission shall fix the initial compensation received by the City Manager and the compensation may be amended from time to time as determined by the City Commission. The performance of the City Manager shall be evaluated at least once a year by the City Commission. 
(b)  Powers and Duties. The City Manager shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To ensure that all laws, provisions of this Charter, ordinances and other acts of the City Commission are faithfully executed. 
(2)  To appoint or terminate department directors, subject to City ordinance and personnel policy and with prior notice to each of the City Commissioners. 
(3)  To appoint, supervise, discipline, demote, suspend or remove any City employee when deemed necessary for the good of the City, subject to City ordinances, resolutions and City personnel policies. 
(4)  To direct, supervise and be responsible for the administration of all departments, divisions, offices and positions of the City government, and to delegate to subordinate officers and employees those powers which are necessary or expedient to the proper management, control and function of such departments, divisions, offices and positions. 
(5)  To attend all meetings of the City Commission. 
(6)  To keep the City Commission fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the City and to submit for its consideration an annual budget. 
(7)  To perform such other duties as may be prescribed under this Charter or as may be required by ordinance, resolution, or vote of the City Commission. 
(8)  To purchase services, supplies, materials and equipment subject to City ordinances and resolutions; provided that such purchases are otherwise in conformance with the requirements of this Charter and general law. No contract shall be let for the construction of public improvements except in accordance with the directions of the City Commission. 
(9)  To sign such contracts, bonds and agreements of the City as required by this Charter or ordinances of the City or as directed by the City Commission. 
(10)  To be responsible for the collection of all revenues and monies due the City and maintenance of proper records of such collections. 
(11)  To disburse funds budgeted and appropriated by the City Commission and to maintain proper records of such disbursements. 
(12)  To maintain a uniform system of accounts in which shall be entered all financial transactions of the City. Shall establish and require the maintenance of a uniform system of accounting for each administrative department, division, office or position of the City. 
(13)  To designate a qualified city administrative officer to assume and exercise the powers and duties of his or her office during temporary absence or disability. The person so selected shall be designated "Acting City Manager." During the temporary absence or disability of the City Manager, the City Commission may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another qualified administrative officer of the City to serve as acting City Manager until the return to duty of the City Manager. No member of the City Commission shall serve as acting City Manager. 
(c)  Removal of the City Manager. The City Manager shall serve at the pleasure of the City Commission and may be removed with or without cause subject to the provision of an employment agreement, if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.03. - City Clerk. 
    There shall be a City Clerk who serves as a Director of the City. The City Clerk, or a designated representative, shall give notice of the Commission meetings, shall attend all meetings in person, shall keep minutes of its proceedings, shall authenticate by signature and record in full, all minutes in a book kept for that purpose. The City Clerk shall authenticate by signature and is custodian of this Charter, all ordinances, resolutions, and other City documents and shall perform such other duties as required by law or the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.04. - Police department. 
    There shall be established and maintained a Police Department to preserve order within the City and to secure the residents of said City from violence, and the property therein, from injury or loss. The Chief of Police shall be the chief administrative officer of the Police Department, and shall appoint and remove the employees of the department. The Chief of Police shall be fully responsible to the City Manager for the administration of the department and for the carrying out and enforcement of the resolutions and ordinances of the City Commission. The Chief of Police serves as a Director of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.05. - Finance Department. 
    There shall be established and maintained a Finance Department for the custody and disbursement of City funds and monies. The Director of Finance shall be the chief financial officer of the City. The Finance Department shall render to the City Manager, a complete and composite statement of receipts, deposits and disbursements on a monthly basis. The Director of Finance shall assist all departments with their budgetary functions and maintain a general accounting system; audit and approve all bills before payment; and shall serve as chief purchasing officer of the City unless allowed to delegate this function by the City Manager. The Director of Finance shall appoint and remove the employees of said department and shall perform other duties as may be required by the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.06. - City Attorney. 
(a)  Appointment and Qualifications. The City Commission shall appoint a competent, duly qualified, licensed and practicing attorney in the State of Florida, who shall serve as the City Attorney. The City Attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the City Commission. 
(b)  Duties. The City Attorney shall be required to: 
(1)  Serve as a legal counsel to the City and render legal advice to the City Commission and City Manager; 
(2)  Represent the City in litigation and legal proceedings as directed by the City Commission and City Manager; and 
(3)  Review and provide opinions as requested by the City Commission or City Manager on contracts, legal instruments and ordinances of the City. 
(c)  Compensation. The City Attorney shall receive compensation as may be determined by the City Commission. 
(d)  Additional Attorneys. The City Attorney, with approval of the City Commission, may select additional attorneys to act for the City Attorney and the City in its representation and litigation. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.07. - City Engineer. 
(a)  Appointment and Qualifications. The City Commission shall appoint or hire a competent, duly qualified, registered and practicing professional engineer in the State of Florida who shall serve as City Engineer. The City Engineer shall have a principal area of knowledge in civil engineering. The City Engineer shall serve at the pleasure of the City Commission. 
(b)  Duties. The City Engineer shall be required to serve as engineering advisor to the City Manager and City Commission, and perform such other duties as may be required by the City Manager or City Commission. 
(c)  Special Engineering Services. The City Manager, with the approval of the City Commission, shall have the right to retain special engineering services at any time deemed necessary and appropriate. 
(d)  Compensation. The City Engineer shall receive compensation as may be determined by the City Commission. 
(e)  Term City Engineer. The term "City Engineer" may refer to an individual or firm. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.08. - Other departments. 
    The City Manager may, with ratification of the City Commission, create new departments, abolish or consolidate offices and departments, may divide and subdivide the administration of any department, except those specifically established by this Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.09. - Personnel policies. 
    Personnel rules shall be prepared by the City Manager and presented to the City Commission for approval by resolution. The adopted rules shall establish the City as an equal opportunity employer and shall govern the equitable administration of the personnel system of the City. The adopted rules shall provide for the following requirements, among others: 
(a)  A personnel classification, pay and benefit plan for all City employment positions. 
(b)  A plan for working hours, attendance policy and regulation, and provision for sick leave, vacation and designated holiday leave. 
(c)  Procedures providing due process for the hearing and adjudication of employee complaints. 
(d)  Additional practices and procedures necessary to the beneficial and equitable administration of the City's personnel system. 
(e)  A plan for written evaluation on an annual basis for all City employees by their immediate supervisors including evaluation of the City Manager by the City Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
ARTICLE VI. - MUNICIPAL FINANCE 

Sec. 6.01. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the City shall begin on the first day of each October and end on the last day of September of the succeeding year. All funds collected by the City during any fiscal year, including both current and delinquent revenues, shall belong to such fiscal year, and, except for funds derived to pay interest and create a sinking fund on the bonded indebtedness of the City, may be applied to the payment of expenses incurred during such fiscal year, except as provided in this Charter. Any revenues uncollected at the end of any fiscal year and any unencumbered funds actually on hand shall become resources of the next succeeding fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 6.02. - Submission of budget. 
    On or before the fifteenth day of August of each year, unless the City Commission has granted an extension, the City Finance Director shall file with the City Manager who shall submit to the City Commission a proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year and the budget message. The City Commission shall hold the required public hearings and review the proposed budget and make any appropriate changes prior to adopting the final budget. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
State Law reference- Adoption of budget and millage rate, F.S. § 205.065. 
Sec. 6.03. - Budget. 
(a)  Content. The budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all City funds and activities and, except as required by law or this Charter, shall be in such form as the City Manager deems desirable or the City Commission may require. A budget message explaining the budget both in fiscal year and in terms of the work programs shall be submitted by the City Manager with the budget. The budget message shall outline the proposed financial policies of the City for the ensuing fiscal year; describe the important features of the budget; and indicate any major changes from the current year in financial policies, expenditures and revenues, with reasons for such changes. It shall also summarize the City's debt position and include such other material as the City Manager deems desirable. The budget shall begin with a clear, general summary of its contents; and shall show in detail all estimated income, indicating the proposed property tax levy, and all proposed expenditures, including debt service, for the ensuing fiscal year. The proposed budget expenditures shall not exceed the total of estimated income and unencumbered funds from previous years. The budget message shall be so arranged as to show comparative figures for actual and estimated income and expenditures of the current fiscal year and actual income and expenditures of the preceding fiscal year, compared to the estimate for the budgeted year. The budget shall include in separate sections: 
(1)  A clear, general summary of contents; 
(2)  A consolidated statement of receipts and expenditures of all funds listed and itemized individually; 
(3)  An analysis and itemization of all estimated income of the City from surplus, miscellaneous income and taxes, with miscellaneous income sub-classified by source; 
(4)  Tax levies, rates and collections for the preceding, current and projected year; 
(5)  An itemized statement for pending and proposed new capital projects, including but not limited to the amounts to be appropriated from the budget, the amounts to be raised by the issuance of bonds, and the amount required for the operation and maintenance of the new projects; 
(6)  The amount required for interest on the City's debts, for sinking funds and for maturing serial bonds; 
(7)  The total amount of the City's outstanding debts, with a schedule of maturity on bond issues in an attachment; 
(8)  An itemized estimate of the expenses of operating each department, division, and office or agency; 
(9)  Anticipated net surplus or deficit for the ensuing fiscal year of each utility owned or operated by the City and the proposed method of its disposition, and subsidiary budgets for each such utility giving detailed income and expenditure information attached as appendices to the budget; 
(10)  A contingency reserve fund, which at the time of the adoption of the budget, will be no less than ten percent (10%) of the proposed expenditures for the major operating funds, not including any reserve funds required by grants, leases or other debt instrument; 
(11)  Such other information as is required by City Commission or deemed desirable by the City Manager. 
(b)  At a regular or special meeting the City Commission may adopt the budget with or without amendment. In amending the budget, it may add or increase any programs or amounts and may delete or decrease any programs or amounts, except expenditures required by law or for debt service or for estimated cash deficit, provided that no amendment to the budget shall increase the authorized expenditures to an amount greater than the total of estimated income plus funds available from prior years. 
(c)  The City Commission shall adopt the budget by resolution. Adoption of the budget shall constitute appropriations of the amounts specified therein as expenditures from the funds indicated. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
State Law reference- Adoption of budget and millage rate, F.S. § 205.065. 
Sec. 6.04. - Amendments after adoption. 
(a)  Supplemental Appropriations. If, during the fiscal year, the City Manager certifies that there are revenues available for appropriation in excess of those estimated in the budget, the City Commission may make supplemental appropriations to fund other appropriations as desired. 
(b)  Emergency Appropriations. At any time in any fiscal year the City Commission may, pursuant to this section, make emergency appropriations to meet a pressing need for public expenditure, for other than regular or recurring requirements, affecting life, health, property or the public peace. 
(c)  Reduction of Appropriations. If, at any time during the fiscal year, it appears probable to the City Manager that the revenues available will be insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, the City Manager shall report to the City Commission the estimated amount of deficit, any remedial action taken and recommendations as to any other steps to be taken. The City Commission shall then take such further action that it deems necessary to prevent or minimize any deficit. 
(d)  Transfer of Appropriations. At any time during the fiscal year, the City Manager may transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance within a department of the City to other programs within the same department. Upon written request of the City Manager, the City Commission may transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance from one department to another. 
(e)  Limitations. No appropriation for debt service may be reduced or transferred, and no appropriation may be reduced below any amount required by law to be appropriated or by more than the amount of the unencumbered balance. 
(f)  Effective Date. The supplemental appropriations, the emergency appropriations, the reduction of appropriations, and the transfer of appropriations between departments authorized by this section shall be made effective immediately upon adoption of the appropriate resolution or budget amendment. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 6.05. - Capital program. 
    The City Manager shall submit a five-year capital program as an attachment to the annual budget. The program, as submitted, shall include: 
(a)  A clear, general summary of its contents; 
(b)  A list of all capital improvements which are proposed for the five (5) fiscal years succeeding the budget year, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for such improvements; 
(c)  Cost estimates, method of financing and recommended time schedules for each such improvement; and 
(d)  The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired. 
The above information may be revised and extended each year with regard to capital improvements still pending or in the process of construction or acquisition. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 6.06. - Purchasing. 
    The City Commission may, by ordinance, confer upon the City Manager general authority to contract for expenditures without further approval of the City Commission for all budgeted items not exceeding limits set by the City Commission. All contracts for expenditures involving more than the set limit must be expressly approved in advance by the Commission. All contracts or purchases involving more than the limits set by the City Commission shall be awarded to the lowest bidder whose submittal is among those most responsive to the needs of the City after there has been opportunity for competitive bidding as provided by law or ordinance; provided that the City Commission, or City Manager, when authorized to contract for the City, shall have the right to reject any and all bids. Emergency contracts as authorized by law and this Charter may be negotiated by the City Commission, or City Manager, if given authority by the City Commission, without competitive bidding. Such emergency shall be declared by the City Manager and approved by the City Commission or may be declared by the City Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 6.07. - Administration of budget. 
    No payment shall be made or obligation incurred against any allotment or appropriation except in accordance with appropriations duly made and unless the City Manager or the City Finance Director first certifies that there is a sufficient unencumbered balance in such allotment or appropriation, and that sufficient funds therefore are or will be available to cover the claim or meet the obligation when it becomes due and payable. Any authorization of payment or incurring of obligation in violation of the provisions of this Charter will be void and any payment so made, illegal. Such action shall be the cause for removal of any officer who knowingly authorized or made such payment or incurred such obligations and such person shall also be liable to the City for any amount so paid. However, this prohibition shall not be construed to prevent the making or authorizing of payments or making of contracts for capital improvements to be financed wholly or partly by the issuance of bonds, time warrants, certificates of indebtedness or certificates of obligation, or to prevent the making of any contract or lease providing for payments beyond the end of the fiscal year, provided that such action is made or approved by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 6.08. - Depository. 
    All monies received by any person, department or agency of the City for, or in connection with, the affairs of the City shall be deposited promptly in the City depository or depositories, which shall be designated by the City Commission in accordance with such regulations and subject to such requirements as to security for deposits and interest thereon as may be established by ordinance and Florida Law. Procedures for the withdrawal of money or the disbursement of funds from the City depositories shall be prescribed by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 6.09. - Financial report. 
    The City Manager shall submit to the City Commission at its regular meeting each month the financial condition of the City by budget item, budget estimate versus accruals for the preceding month and for the fiscal year to date. The financial records of the City will be maintained on an accrual basis to support this type of financial management. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
ARTICLE VII. - CITIZEN BOARDS AND COMMITTEES 

Sec. 7.01. - Authority. 
    The City Commission shall create, establish or appoint, as may be required by the laws of the State of Florida, such citizen boards and committees as it deems necessary to carry out the functions and obligations of the City. The City Commission shall, by ordinance, prescribe the purpose, composition, functions, duties, accountability and tenure of each board, Commission and committee, where such are not prescribed by law. Individuals may be appointed to serve on more than one (1) board, Commission or committee. The City Commission may, by ordinance, consolidate the functions of the various boards, Commissions or committees of the City. The City Commission may appoint certain ad hoc committees by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 7.02. - Qualifications. 
    Members of all boards, Commissions and committees must be qualified voters and be residents of the City of Clewiston for at least six (6) months preceding the date of appointment, be knowledgeable in the affairs of the City and be knowledgeable in the functions and activities provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 7.03. - General. 
(a)  Open Meetings. All meetings of any board, Commission or committee created, established or appointed by this Charter or the City Commission shall be open to the public, unless otherwise permitted by law and shall be subject to both current and future laws of the State of Florida concerning public meetings. 
(b)  Appeals to City Commission. An appeal may be taken to the City Commission from any decision of any board, Commission, committee or other body except from decisions where the appeal is otherwise prescribed by law. 
(c)  Compensation. Subject to the provisions of any law of the State of Florida or this Charter to the contrary, all members of any board, Commission, committee or other body will serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for any necessary expenses as a result of their work. 
(d)  Minutes. All boards, Commissions or committees of the City shall keep and maintain minutes of any proceedings held and shall submit minutes of such proceedings to the City Clerk. 
(e)  Exclusion of City Officers and Employees. Neither officer of the City nor any person who holds a compensated appointive position with the City shall be appointed to any board, Commission or committee created or established by this charter other than in an ad hoc advisory committee. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
ARTICLE VIII. - GENERAL AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 8.01. - Rearranging and renumbering. 
    The City Commission shall have the power, by ordinance, to renumber and rearrange all articles, sections and paragraphs of this Charter or any amendments thereto as it shall deem appropriate, and upon the passage of any such ordinance a copy thereof, certified by the City clerk, shall be forwarded to the Secretary of State for filing. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 8.02. - Existing rights, obligations, duties, relationships and power. 
    All right, title and interest in property, uncollected taxes due, claims, judgments, decrees, liens, suits, actions and choices in action held or owned by the existing City shall pass to and are hereby vested in the City as continued under this Charter. All rights, obligations, duties and relationships now existing by law or agreements between the City and other governmental units shall be unaffected and shall remain in full force and effect. No debt or obligation of the City shall be impaired as a result of the adoption of this Charter and all such debts and obligations shall pass to and be binding upon the City, re-organized and continued by this Charter. The powers and authority existing pursuant to any charter act of the Special Laws of Florida continue in effect. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 8.03. - Rights of officers and employees. 
    Nothing in this Charter, except as otherwise specifically provided, shall affect or impair the rights, privileges or immunities of those who are City officials or employees at the time of the adoption of this Charter. Elected officials shall continue to hold their offices for the terms prescribed by the Charter of the City in effect on the date of their election. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 8.04. - Effect on existing laws. 
    All ordinances, portions thereof, resolutions, contracts, bonds, obligations, rules and regulations now in force under the City government of Clewiston, and not in conflict with the provisions of this Charter, shall remain in force under this charter until altered, amended or repealed by the City Commission after the Charter takes effect. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 8.05. - Severability. 
    If any section or part of this Charter is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not invalidate or impair the validity, force or effect of any other section or part of a section of this Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 8.06. - Effective date of ordinance. 
    Introduced and read by title only this 21st day of May, 2012. 
    Passed and adopted after the public hearing this 18th day of June, 2012. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, 6-18-2012) 
Subpart B - RELATED LAWS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- This Subpart B contains the special acts of the legislature relating to the city which do not expressly amend the Charter. Section numbers in this subpart have been assigned by the editors to facilitate indexing, but the source of each section is indicated in parentheses following the section. Standard legislative provisions such as general repealers, severability clauses, provisions calling for referenda on the individual acts and effective dates have not been printed in Subpart B. The original acts and any amendments to the acts are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. Laws of Fla., ch. 61-2018 regarding issuance of bonds and extraterritorial powers has been editorially deleted as the full authority for the issuance of bonds is contained in F.S. § 166.101 et seq., and other pertinent sections of Florida Statutes regarding bonds and extraterritorial power is continued in the Charter, § 2.01. 
State Law reference- Status of certain special acts, F.S. § 166.021(4). 

Sec. 1.01. - Validation of incorporation. 
(1)  That the City of Clewiston, in Hendry County, Florida, a municipal corporation heretofore created and organized under and by virtue of the provisions of Laws of Fla., ch. 10433(1925), and laws amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto, shall be and is hereby determined, deemed and declared to have been duly and validly incorporated on and after the first day of October, A.D. 1931. 
(2)  That each and every act and all proceedings heretofore taken, done and performed in the creation, organization and governmental functioning of the City of Clewiston be and the same hereby are validated, ratified and confirmed in all respects. 
(3)  That all tax levies, assessments and special assessments and the collection thereof heretofore made by the City of Clewiston and all tax sale certificates or other evidences of liens covering such tax levies, assessments and special assessments heretofore issued or made by said City of Clewiston, be, and the same hereby are, ratified, validated and confirmed in all respects. 
(Laws of Fla., ch. 19744(1939), §§ 1-3) 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
LAWS OF FLORIDA 
    This is a listing of the Laws of Florida found in the Charter and Related Laws. 
Laws of Fla. 
Chapter Year Section Section 
this Charter/ 
Related Laws 10433 (1925) Char. (note) R.L. § 1.01 19744 (1939) 1-3 R.L. § 1.01  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
    This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Ordinance 
Number Date Section Section 
this Charter 2012-02  6-18-2012 2 1.01, 1.02 2.01, 2.02 3.01-3.04 3.06-3.09 4.01, 4.02 5.01-5.09 6.01-6.09 7.01-7.03 8.01-8.06 11- 6-2012(Ord.) Char. (note)  
Subpart A - GENERAL ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Clewiston Code of Ordinances," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1960, § 1-1; Code 1982, § 1-1; Code 1999, § 1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction; definitions. 
    In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules and definitions shall be observed, unless the content indicates otherwise: 
    Charter. The term "charter" means the charter of the City of Clewiston, Florida, as printed in Part I, subpart A of this volume. 
    City. The term "city" means the City of Clewiston, Florida, and shall extend to and include its officials, board, committees, commissions, officers and employees. 
    City commission. Whenever the term "city commission" is used, it shall be construed to mean the city commission of the City of Clewiston, Florida. 
    Code. The term "Code" means the Clewiston Code of Ordinances. 
    Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this Code or any ordinance of the city, the day of the act, event or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, in which event the period shall run until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday nor legal holiday. When the period of time is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Fla. R. Civ. P. 1.090(a). 
    County. The term "county" means the County of Hendry. 
State Law reference- Boundaries of Hendry County, F.S. § 7.26. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring an officer or the head of a department of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it is to be construed to authorize the officer or head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the authorized or required act, unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
    F.S. Whenever the abbreviation "F.S." is used, it shall refer to the latest edition or supplement of the Florida Statutes. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 1.01(2). 
    Gender. The masculine includes the feminine and neuter and vice versa. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 1.01(2). 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing and a word importing the plural number may extend and be applied to a single person or thing. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 1.01(1). 
    Person. The term "person" includes individuals, children, firms, associations, joint ventures, partnerships, estates, trusts, business trusts, syndicates, fiduciaries, corporations, and all other groups or combinations. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 1.01(3). 
    State. The term "state" shall be construed to mean the State of Florida. 
    Street. The term "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public ways in the city and shall embrace all parts thereof within the designated right-of-way. 
    Tense. Terms used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
(Code 1960, § 1-2; Code 1982, § 1-2; Code 1999, § 1-2) 
State Law reference- Definitions in the Florida Statutes, F.S. § 1.01. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of sections of this Code printed in boldface type, italics, or otherwise are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. 
(Code 1960, § 1-3; Code 1982, § 1-3; Code 1999, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - History notes. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. 
(Code 1999, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - References to chapters or sections. 
    All references in this Code to chapters or sections are to the chapters and sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1999, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - References and editor's notes. 
    References and editor's notes following certain sections of this Code are inserted as an aid and guide to the reader and are not controlling or meant to have any legal effect. 
(Code 1999, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of the Clewiston Code of Ordinances, 1999, and of ordinances existing at the time of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1999, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-8. - Code does not affect prior offenses, penalties, contracts, rights. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(Code 1999, § 1-8) 
State Law reference- No bill of attainder, ex post facto law, or any law impairing the obligation of contracts, shall ever be passed, Fla. Const., art. I, § 10. 
Sec. 1-9. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(2)  Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy of taxes or for an annual budget or the amendment thereof; 
(3)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the city or excluding territory as a part of the city; 
(4)  Any ordinance granting any franchise, permit or other right; 
(5)  Any ordinance approving, authorizing or otherwise relating to any contract, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument; 
(6)  Any ordinance accepting, dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating or repairing any street or public way or providing for any specific public improvement; 
(7)  Any ordinance prescribing traffic or parking regulations for specific locations; 
(8)  Any ordinance prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and making assessments therefor; 
(10)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(11)  Any ordinance zoning or rezoning specific property or granting variances or special exceptions; 
(12)  Any ordinance providing for benefits, personnel policies or compensation of officers and employees; 
(13)  Any ordinance regarding elections; 
(14)  Any ordinance adopting or amending the comprehensive plan of the city; 
(15)  Any ordinance levying fees, rates, charges or fines; 
(16)  Any temporary or special ordinance; 
(17)  Any administrative ordinance; and 
all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein and are on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1982, § 1-10; Code 1999, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-10. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1960, § 1-4; Code 1982, § 1-4; Code 1999, § 1-10) 
State Law reference- Repealed statutes not revived by implication, F.S. § 2.04. 
Sec. 1-11. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the city commission. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Clewiston Code of Ordinances is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Clewiston Code of Ordinances is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered _____, which said section reads as follows:...." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1982, § 1-6; Code 1999, § 1-11) 
Sec. 1-12. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city commission or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code and shall also include all amendments to the charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ through _____." The inserted section numbers will indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code; and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1999, § 1-12) 
Sec. 1-13. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city commission that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1960, § 1-5; Code 1982, § 1-5; Code 1999, § 1-13) 
Sec. 1-14. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the city commission, which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
(Code 1982, § 1-7; Code 1999, § 1-14) 
State Law reference- Falsifying public records, F.S. § 839.13. 
Sec. 1-15. - General penalty; continuing violations; violation as public nuisance. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code, or in any ordinance or resolution of the city, or rule or regulation or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the city under authority duly vested in him or it, any act is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared unlawful and no specific penalty is provided for the violation thereof, the violation of any such provision of this Code or of any such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties provided in this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or of any ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order of the city or its authorized agents shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be, by the city, abated, as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Code 1982, § 1-8; Code 1999, § 1-15) 
State Law reference- Penalty for violation of ordinances, F.S. § 162.22. 
Sec. 1-16. - Additional court costs for law enforcement education. 
(a)  Pursuant to F.S. § 938.15, there is hereby assessed an additional court cost of $2.00 against every person convicted for violation of any city ordinance. In addition, $2.00 shall be deducted from every bond estreature or forfeited bail bond related to any ordinance violation. However, no such assessment shall be made against any person convicted for violation of any ordinance relating to the parking of vehicles. 
(b)  All such assessments shall be collected by the appropriate court and shall be remitted to the city for expenditures for criminal justice education degree programs and training courses as provided in F.S. § 938.15. 
(Code 1982, § 1-9; Code 1999, § 1-1; Ord. No. 85-8, § 1, 10-14-1985; Ord. No. 86-6, § 1, 7-14-1986) 
State Law reference- Authority to levy, F.S. § 938.15. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal powers, F.S. § 166.021. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Corporate seal adopted, described. 
    A corporate seal for the city is hereby adopted and shall be described as a circular seal and imprint with the words and figures, "Clewiston, Florida, America's Sweetest Town" in the outer margin; contained within an inner circle of sugar cane stalks are the following: 
(1)  In the upper right portion is an outline of Lake Okeechobee with a star designating the location of the city and with a largemouth bass jumping from the lake. 
(2)  In the lower right portion is one coconut palm tree and one sabal palm tree. 
(3)  In the lower portion is a shield which has on its face a sugar mill and seven stalks of sugar cane. 
(4)  In the lower left portion is one coconut palm tree and one sabal palm tree. 
(5)  In the upper left portion is the silhouette of an ani bird perching on a branch. 

(Code 1999, § 2-1; Ord. No. 2009-02, pts. 1, 2, 3-16-2009) 
State Law reference- Designation and use of official seal, F.S. § 166.043. 
Sec. 2-2. - City commission compensation and benefits. 
(a)  Compensation for all commission members, except the mayor, shall be paid at $400.00 per month. The mayor shall be paid at $600.00 per month. 
(b)  All commission members, including the mayor, shall be entitled to participate in the city's health insurance, life insurance, and dental insurance programs under the same terms and conditions as all city employees. Provided, however, that the provision of insurance to commissioners shall be subject to their eligibility, and life insurance death benefits for each commissioner shall not exceed the amount of $160,000.00. 
(Code 1999, § 2-2; Ord. No. 2009-02, pts. 1, 2, 3-16-2009; Ord. No. 2013-02, § 1, 3-18-2013) 
Secs. 2-3-2-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARDS, COMMITTEES, COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-23-2-47. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Community redevelopment agency, F.S. § 163.356. 

Sec. 2-48. - Created. 
    The community redevelopment agency (CRA) is hereby created and established and shall be known as the City of Clewiston Community Redevelopment Agency, the purpose of which shall be to function in the area, as more fully delineated in appendix A, and to provide for the redevelopment, conservation, rehabilitation or combination thereof of such areas in the city. 
(Code 1999, § 2-11; Ord. No. 2009-02, pts. 1, 2, 3-16-2009) 
Editor's note- Appendix A is not set out herein, but is on file as an attachment to Ordinance No. 2010-02, as amended, in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 2-49. - Membership. 
    The Clewiston Community Redevelopment Agency (CRA) for the area within its jurisdiction, as said area may be amended from time to time, shall have a board of commissioners, which shall consist of the five members of the city commission. All of the rights, powers, privileges, duties and immunities of a CRA vested in such an agency by F.S. ch. 163, pt. III are hereby vested in the city commission. 
(Code 1999, § 2-12; Ord. No. 2009-02, pts. 1, 2, 3-16-2009) 
State Law reference- Authority to designate city commission as agency, F.S. § 163.357. 
Sec. 2-50. - Duties. 
(a)  The community redevelopment agency (CRA) shall develop and administer a community redevelopment plan as per F.S. § 163.360. 
(b)  The CRA shall create and administer a trust fund in accordance with F.S. § 163.387. 
(c)  The monies to be allocated to and deposited into the fund shall be used to finance redevelopment within the community redevelopment area, and shall be appropriated by the CRA. The CRA shall utilize the funds and revenues paid into and earned by the fund for community redevelopment purposes as permitted by law. 
(d)  The fund shall exist for the duration of the community redevelopment undertaken by the CRA pursuant to its adopted community redevelopment plan, as approved by the city commission, and to the extent permitted by F.S. § 163.387. Monies shall be held in the fund for the city and on behalf of the CRA, and disbursed from the funds as provided by F.S. § 163.387, and the CRA. 
(Code 1999, § 2-13; Ord. No. 2009-02, pts. 1, 2, 3-16-2009) 
Sec. 2-51. - Limitations. 
    The Clewiston Community Redevelopment Agency (CRA) shall be the sole community redevelopment agency authorized to operate within the redevelopment area (appendix A). The area of operation, jurisdiction and undertakings of the agency shall not conflict with those of any other community redevelopment agencies, presently existing, or which may be established except as described above. 
(Code 1999, § 2-14; Ord. No. 2009-02, pts. 1, 2, 3-16-2009) 
Editor's note- Appendix A is not set out herein, but is on file as an attachment to Ordinance No. 2010-02, as amended, in the office of the city clerk. 
Secs. 2-52-2-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PURCHASING PROCEDURES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Consultants' competitive negotiations act, F.S. § 287.055. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-01, adopted Feb. 5, 2018, repealed Art. III, §§ 2-76-2-85, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from 1999 Code, §§ 2-26-2-34; Ord. No. 2009-02, pts. 1, 2, adopted Mar. 16, 2009; Ord. No. 2010-07, § 1, adopted Jan. 24, 2011. 

Sec. 2-76. - Purposes and construction. 
(a)  This section is enacted to provide definitions and procedures to ensure that the city obtains goods and services in a manner which maximizes the benefits received for the citizens and government of the city in the most efficient and cost effective manner possible, and shall be liberally construed to effect such purposes. 
(b)  In deciding issues which may arise in the bidding and purchasing activities of the city, decisions shall be based on factors relating to costs and benefits to the city and overall efficiency and effectiveness evaluations relating to a proposed bid or purchase award and contract. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, 2-5-2018) 
Sec. 2-77. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Competitive bidding shall mean the methods of purchasing listed in section 2-79. 
    False claim means a request for change order, request for payment, or a claim in any other form which is either not allowed under the contract or is based on or contains any false information as to quantities, actual costs or other material facts. 
    General services means support services performed by an independent contractor requiring specialized knowledge, experience, or expertise that includes, but is not limited to, pest control, janitorial, laundry, catering, security, lawn maintenance, and maintenance of equipment. 
    Historical under bidder means a contractor which, on at least one previous contract with the city or two or more contracts with other governmental agencies, has submitted change order requests for nonowner instigated increases in the contract price based on quantities, site conditions, unrequested delays, or the like which cumulatively would have increased the total contract price for a project by five percent or more if allowed. 
    Irresponsible contractor or vendor means a contractor or vendor which has, under a previous contract with the city, failed to fully perform its obligations in accordance with the contract terms, or on two or more government contracts received negative evaluations from the project's engineer or architect. 
    Local business means a vendor has its headquarters located in the city or a place of business located in the city where it will produce the goods or perform the services to be purchased, or owners of a business who live in, have a permanent residence in, and pay taxes in the city. 
    Professional services means any services where the city is obtaining advice, instruction, or specialized work from an individual, firm, or corporation specifically qualified in a particular area. The term "professional services" does not include those services procured pursuant to F.S. § 287.055. 
    Unlicensed contractor means a direct contractor which does not itself have either a general contractor's license or the specific licenses required by the city and state for all phases of the subject project for which it proposes to contract. 
    Unqualified contractor or vendor means a contractor who is determined to be unlicensed or incompetent or who has selected subcontractors for a particular project which are unlicensed or incompetent; or a vendor which provides products and goods which are inferior or do not meet specifications for a project. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, 2-5-2018) 
Sec. 2-78. - Purchasing thresholds. 
(a)  Purchases in amounts of over $5,000.00 but not exceeding $25,000.00 may be effected without advertising, but will require written quotes, including fax transmissions and/or emails from prospective vendors which may be obtained by the using department. At least three written quotes shall be obtained if practicable. Purchases less than $5,000.00 may be by documented verbal quote. In all instances, the city finance director shall have the right to require adequate documentation to ensure that bids are fairly acquired and that a competitive environment is maintained. 
(b)  Purchases exceeding $25,000.00 shall require public advertising in a newspaper of local circulation and advertising by posting in two conspicuous places in the city limits. Purchases shall be made according to the requirements for the method of purchasing used under section 2-79. 
(c)  The city shall require that successful bidders provide bid bonds, performance bonds, labor and/or material bonds, or other appropriate types of bonds at the commission's discretion. In connection with any awarded contract in excess of $25,000.00 for material, equipment, work or services, ten percent of the contract amount shall be withheld subject to final approval by the city commission of material, equipment, work or services provided under the terms of such contract. 
(d)  The city commission's approval shall be required for award of all contracts for material, equipment, work or services in excess of $75,000.00 for all budgeted items, and in excess of $25,000.00 for non-budgeted items. Budgeted purchases of $75,000.00 or less may be approved by the city manager, if approved in writing in advance by the finance director and the city attorney. In all instances the purchasing methods of section 2-79 must be used for all purchases in excess of $5,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, 2-5-2018) 
Sec. 2-79. - Purchasing methods/competitive bidding. 
(a)  Professional services. The provisions contained in F.S. § 287.055 (commonly known as the Consultant's Competitive Negotiation Act, "CCNA"), shall apply herein for the procurement of all architecture, professional engineering, landscape architecture, or registered surveying and mapping services for projects that exceed the specified statutory dollar thresholds. For projects that are less than the CCNA statutory thresholds, county staff may utilize any process they deem most appropriate, including contacting only one firm and entering into a written contract or issuing a purchase order with the firm, subject to the approval of the city commission. 
(b)  Auditing services. Auditing services shall be procured in accordance with F.S. § 218.391. 
(c)  Emergency procurement. 
(1)  In the case of emergencies that require the immediate purchase of commodities, equipment or services, the city manager shall be empowered to secure such commodities, equipment or services without competitive bidding or quotes. In this event, all measures that are reasonably possible under the circumstances shall be taken to assure the maximum cost benefit to the city of the commodities, equipment or services procured. 
(2)  During a declared local state of emergency, the person or persons designated in the declaration is (are) empowered to purchase commodities, equipment or services without competitive bidding. 
(d)  Cooperative procurement. 
(1)  The city may cooperate with other government agencies and governmental associations in the purchase of commodities, equipment and services. 
(2)  When any other government agency or governmental association has competitively procured and awarded a contract for commodities, equipment or services, the city may purchase a commodity, equipment or service from the awarded vendor at the awarded price if the original bid specifications and award allow it and if the competitive procurement was conducted within the past three years. Such purchases shall be made without competitive procurement by the city and without any dollar limit provided that funding has been appropriated and approved by the city commission. Cooperative procurement is not permitted for construction services or professional services as described in the CCNA. 
(e)  Sole source. A contract may be awarded, except as otherwise provided for under state law, for a supply, service, material, equipment or construction item(s) without competition when the city manager certifies in writing, after conducting a good-faith review of available sources, that there is only one legally available source for the required supply, service, material, equipment or construction item(s). 
(f)  Single source. A contract may be awarded, except as otherwise provided for under state law, for a supply, service, material, equipment or construction item(s) without competition when the city manager certifies in writing after conducting a good faith review of available resources, that there is only one economically feasible source for the purchase in order to meet functional or performance requirements. 
(g)  Requests for proposals. 
(1)  The request for proposals method of procurement is used when it is not practicable to specifically define the commodities or contractual services which are needed. The city can describe the project but the methods or means to accomplish the desired outcome cannot be easily defined. There may be several methods available to accomplish a task, and the city is considering all the available options. 
(2)  The city manager, in consultation with staff from other departments with expertise, shall outline needs and objectives that will make up the scope of services to be addressed by the proposers. 
(3)  Proposers shall be ranked by a selection committee and presentation may be made to the selection committee and/or the commission. 
(h)  Requests for qualifications. The request for qualifications method of procurement is used in the recruitment of qualified professional services or construction management services. 
(1)  The city manager shall outline specific needs and objectives that will make up the scope of services to be addressed by the proposers. The purchasing manager shall prepare the criteria and develop the request for qualifications. 
(2)  Proposers shall be ranked by a selection committee and presentations may be made to the selection committee and/or commission for consideration. 
(i)  Invitation to bid. The invitation to bid method of procurement should be utilized when the city is capable of establishing precise specifications for a commodity or defining with specificity a scope of services for the commodities or contractual services sought. Through this process, vendors are able to compete on a cost basis for like items or services. The selection will be based upon the lowest priced responsible and responsive bidder and the factors in section 2-80. 
(j)  Invitation to negotiate. The invitation to negotiate method of procurement should be utilized when the scope of a project is not clearly defined and the city has determined that negotiations may be necessary to receive the best value. The invitation shall invite vendor input on the scope, schedule, and process for initiating the project. This method of procurement may be used in areas experiencing constant change in the marketplace and the city wants the opportunity to obtain current, up-to-date goods or services at the time of contracting. 
(k)  Recent city competitive procurements. The city may contract for commodities and equipment with the selected vendor under a previous city competitive procurement if the competitive procurement was conducted within the past three years. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, 2-5-2018) 
Sec. 2-80. - Factors for bid awards. 
    In awarding contracts for the procurement of goods and services for the city, the following factors shall be considered: 
(1)  The bid or cost amount. 
(2)  Analysis of a bidder's product or service quality. 
(3)  For a person or entity which has previously provided similar goods or services to the city: 
a.  The person or entity's performance of all such prior contracts, with emphasis on its competence and responsibility and the quality of the product or service provided; and 
b.  Evaluation of that person or entity's performance by the city employee and/or consultant with oversight responsibilities for such previous projects. 
(4)  For a person or entity which has not previously provided similar goods or services to the city: 
a.  Recommendations and comments from other of its clients regarding its performance, whether such comments are written or verbal; and 
b.  Evaluation of that person or entity's performance on any other contracts with the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, 2-5-2018) 
Sec. 2-81. - No property rights in city bids. 
    No person or other entity shall be deemed to have any property right or other interest, claim or cause of action with regard to providing services or goods to the city, regardless of whether such person is licensed or unlicensed to provide such goods or services or whether such person or other entity submits a low bid under any bidding procedure, which may be undertaken by the city, except such rights that a person or other entity may have under the specific terms of a properly executed contract with the city, which such person or other entity has not breached, and such rights as may be provided by this section. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, 2-5-2018) 
Sec. 2-82. - Unqualified or irresponsible contractor or vendor. 
    The city may disqualify a person or entity from eligibility to provide a service or product to the city at any time during a bidding purchasing process upon a determination by the city that such person or entity is an unqualified or irresponsible contractor or vendor, or has been an historical under bidder, or has filed a false claim with city or any other governmental entity. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, 2-5-2018) 
Sec. 2-83. - Protests and appeals. 
(a)  Bid protests. The protest period shall end upon award of the contract or seven days after the announcement of the award. 
(b)  Who may file a protest. Any actual or prospective bidder, proposer, offerer or contractor who is aggrieved in connection with a solicitation or award of a contract may file a protest with the city clerk. 
(c)  Form of protest. A protest must be in writing and filed with the city clerk, 115 W. Ventura Avenue, Clewiston, FL 33440. A protest must state all grounds upon which the protesting party asserts that the solicitation or award was improper. Issues not raised by the protesting party in the protest are deemed waived and may not be raised on appeal. The protesting party may submit with the protest any documents or information deemed relevant. 
(d)  Procedures. 
(1)  The city manager shall attempt to settle or resolve protests. The city manager shall render a decision, in writing, within seven calendar days following receipt of the protest. 
(2)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city manager may appeal to the city commission within seven calendar days from the date of the city manager's decision. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, 2-5-2018) 
Sec. 2-84. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-85. - Local vendor preference. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    General services means support services performed by an independent contractor requiring specialized knowledge, experience, or expertise that includes, but is not limited to, pest control, janitorial, laundry, catering, security, lawn maintenance, and maintenance of equipment. 
    Local business means the vendor has its headquarters located in the city; or the vendor has a permanent place of business located in the city where it will produce the goods or perform the services to be purchased; or owners of 25 percent or more of the business live in, have a permanent residence in, and pay real estate taxes in the city. Vendors shall affirm their status as a local business on a form provided by the city at the time of submitting their bid or proposal. A vendor who misrepresents its status as a local business will be barred from providing goods or services for the city for a period of one year. 
    Personal property includes, but is not limited to, supplies, equipment, materials and printed matter. 
    Professional services includes any services where the city is obtaining advice, instruction, or specialized work from an individual, firm, or corporation specifically qualified in a particular area. 
(b)  Amount-Services and public equipment property. Except where federal or state law mandates to the contrary, in the purchase of property, general services, or professional services by means of a competitive process, when a qualified and responsive nonlocal business submits the lowest bid, and the bid submitted by one or more qualified and responsive nonlocal business is within ten percent of the bid submitted by the lowest bidder, then the lowest local bidder shall have the opportunity to match the bid made by the lowest qualified and responsive bidder. Should the lowest local business who submitted a bid within ten percent of the lowest bid decline to match the lowest bidder's bid, then, if there were other qualified and responsive local businesses whose bids were within ten percent of the lowest bid, those local businesses, in the order of lowest to highest, shall have the opportunity to match the lowest bid. If a local business matches the lowest bid within ten percent, it will be awarded the job if its bid otherwise satisfies the bidding requirements. In any event, if the nonlocal business that was the lowest bidder certified that it has a drug-free workplace program, in accordance with F.S. § 287.087, in order for a local business to be eligible to match the lowest bidder's bid, it must also have certified that it has a drug-free workplace program. 
(c)  Same-Public works. Except where federal or state law mandates to the contrary, in the purchase of, or contract for, the construction or renovation of public works or utilities improvements, by means of a competitive process, when a qualified and responsive nonlocal business submits the lowest bid, and the bid submitted by one or more qualified and responsive nonlocal businesses is within ten percent of the bid submitted by the lowest bidder, then the lowest local bidder shall have the opportunity to match the bid made by the lowest qualified and responsive bidder. Should the lowest local business who submitted a bid within ten percent of the lowest bid decline to match the lowest bidder's bid, then, if there were other qualified and responsive local businesses whose bids were within ten percent of the lowest bid, those local businesses, in the order of lowest to highest, shall have the opportunity to match the lowest bid. If a local business that is within ten percent matches the lowest bid, it will be awarded the job if its bid otherwise satisfies the bidding requirements. In any event, if the nonlocal business that was the lowest bidder certified that it has a drug-free workplace program, in accordance with F.S. § 287.087, in order for a local business to be eligible to match the lowest bidder's bid, it must also have certified that it has a drug-free workplace program. 
(d)  Same-Point totals. Except where federal or state law mandates the contrary, in the purchase of personal property, general services, or professional services by means of a letter of interest and competitive selection and negotiation in which objective factors used to evaluate the letters or interest or other submittals received from vendors are assigned point totals, a preference in the amount of ten percentage points of the total points that may be awarded may be given to a local business. 
(e)  Other preferences. The city commission may always compare quality of materials proposed for purchase and compare qualifications, character, responsibility and fitness of all persons, firms, or corporations submitting bids, proposals or quotes for purchase orders. The city commission may waive the provisions of this article to a particular procurement. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, 2-5-2018) 
Secs. 2-86-2-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RETIREMENT SYSTEM[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2013-01, pts. 1-10, adopted Feb. 18, 2013, allowed for the codification of its provisions but did not specify manner of inclusion. At the editor's discretion, pts. 1-6 have been codified as set out herein, including the creation of section numbers and catchlines. 

Sec. 2-106. - [Retirement system created.] 
    There is hereby created a City of Clewiston Employees' Retirement System. Participation shall be mandatory for all employees of the city employed on October 1, 2012, including any new employees hired after that date. Police department employees of the city who are members of the Florida retirement system are not included as participants of this new system. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, pt. 1, 2-18-2013) 
Sec. 2-107. - [Board of trustees.] 
    The city manager is hereby authorized to establish a five-member board of trustees to develop a plan document, subject to ratification by ordinance of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, pt. 2, 2-18-2013) 
Sec. 2-108. - [Plan document and administration.] 
    The city manager may retain such professional and technical assistance as is necessary to develop the plan document and to provide for plan administration. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, pt. 3, 2-18-2013) 
Sec. 2-109. - [Plan contributions.] 
(a)  Initially, there shall not be a mandatory employee contribution. The city may at a future time establish a mandatory employee contribution by ordinance. Employee contributions, if any, shall be picked up in accordance with Section 414(h)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(b)  There shall be a mandatory employer contribution of up to six percent of the employee's compensation. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, pt. 4, 2-18-2013) 
Sec. 2-110. - [Compliance with federal and state law.] 
    It is the intent of the city commission that the retirement system shall comply with rules necessary to maintain qualified plan status as provided by the Internal Revenue Code and shall comply with the provisions of F.S. chapter 112, part VII. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, pt. 5, 2-18-2013) 
Sec. 2-111. - [Appropriation of funds.] 
    The city commission hereby appropriates such funds as are necessary to effectuate the purposes of this article, including, but not limited to, offsetting the administrative cost of the system and providing for an employer contribution. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, pt. 6, 2-18-2013) 
Secs. 2-112-2-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - EMPLOYMENT SCREENING[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Criminal history record checks for certain municipal employees and appointees, F.S. § 166.0442. 

Sec. 2-200. - General provisions. 
(a)  Any individual who is currently being employed, is seeking employment, or is to be appointed to a position of municipal employment or appointment which the city finds is critical to security or public safety shall be subject to employment screening. The employment screening process shall require that each person applying for, or continuing employment in any such position, or having access to any such facility, be fingerprinted. The city shall submit the fingerprints to the Florida Department of Law Enforcement for a state criminal history record check who will forward the fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for a national criminal history record check. The information obtained from the criminal history record checks conducted pursuant to this section may be used to determine an applicant's eligibility for employment or appointment and to determine an employee's eligibility for continued employment. The fingerprinting and associated criminal history record checks shall be in addition to any other background screening which the city may lawfully undertake. The costs of such employment screening pursuant to this section shall be borne by the city. 
(b)  Any private contractor, any employee of a private contractor, vendor, repair person, or delivery person who has access to any public facility or publicly operated facility that the city commission finds is critical to security or public safety shall be subject to employment screening as described in subsection (a) above. The employment screening process shall require that each person having access to any such facility be fingerprinted. The costs of such employment screening pursuant to this section shall be borne by the contractor, vendor, repair person or delivery person. 
(c)  The positions of municipal employment and appointment that are critical to security or public safety are listed in Exhibit A, attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(d)  The public facilities and publicly operated facilities that are critical to security or public safety are listed in Exhibit B, attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(Ord. No. 2017-20, § 1, 12-18-2017) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Alcoholic beverage law, F.S. chs. 562-565, 567, 568. 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    The meanings to be given the various terms contained in this chapter shall be the same meaning as is given like terms in F.S. §§ 561.01, 563.01, 564.01 and 565.01 regulating those selling, dealing in, manufacturing or distributing liquor, wines, beer or any other alcoholic beverages. 
(Code 1960, § 3-1; Code 1982, § 3-1; Code 1999, § 6-1) 
State Law reference- Definitions, F.S. §§ 561.01, 563.01, 564.01 and 565.01. 
Sec. 6-2. - Compliance with zoning; proximity to church or school. 
(a)  No business or occupation for the consumption, sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages shall be conducted unless it is located within a permitted area under the zoning ordinances of the city; provided further, that no such business or occupation shall be located within 500 feet of any established church or the real property that comprises a public or private elementary school, middle school, or secondary school unless the city approves the location as promoting the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community under proceedings as provided in F.S. § 166.041(3)(c). This restriction shall not, however, be construed to prohibit the issuance of temporary permits to certain nonprofit organizations as provided for in F.S. § 561.422. Such restrictions shall not apply to an existing business or occupation, nor to a renewal or transfer of ownership of a state license for the same location notwithstanding that such place of business may be located within 500 feet of an established church or school. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section distance shall be measured by the shortest route of ordinary pedestrian travel along the public thoroughfare from the main entrance of such place of business to the main entrance of the church or the real property that comprises the school. 
(Code 1960, § 3-4; Code 1982, § 3-3; Code 1999, § 6-2) 
State Law reference- Authority to restrict location of beverage establishments, F.S. § 562.45(2). 
Sec. 6-3. - Hours of sale. 
    No alcoholic beverages may be sold, consumed or served or permitted to be served or consumed in any place holding a license under authority of the state department of business and professional regulation, division of alcoholic beverages and tobacco, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., except no alcoholic beverages may be sold for consumption on the premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and noon on Sundays; except that alcoholic beverages may be sold not for consumption on the premises between the hours of 5:30 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday. 
(Code 1960, § 3-5; Code 1982, § 3-4; Code 1999, § 6-3; Ord. No. 82-5, § 1, 2-15-1982; Ord. No. 84-3, § 1, 10-1-1984) 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate hours of sale, F.S. § 562.45. 
Sec. 6-4. - Consuming on municipal property. 
    No person shall possess an open container of alcoholic beverages or a container of alcoholic beverages where the seal has been broken or consume any alcoholic beverage on any property owned or leased by the city, except within the confines of John B. Boy Auditorium and the senior citizen building in Sugarland Park, and at the Clewiston Country Club and Clewiston Golf Course. 
(Code 1960, § 3-6; Code 1982, § 3-5; Code 1999, § 6-4) 
Sec. 6-5. - Consuming in parking areas adjoining premises where sold. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to possess an open container of alcoholic beverages or a container of alcoholic beverages where the seal has been broken or consume any alcoholic beverages in any area available for use by the public for motor vehicle parking purposes where such area adjoins or is adjacent to any establishment where alcoholic beverages are sold or dispensed. 
(Code 1960, § 3-7; Code 1982, § 3-6; Code 1999, § 6-5; Ord. No. 79-3, § 1, 6-18-1979) 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENT AND ENTERTAINMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUSIC OR ENTERTAINMENT FESTIVALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-19. - Purpose. 
    This article is for the purpose of providing necessary regulations of any gathering of groups or individuals for the purpose of listening to, or participation in, entertainment which consists primarily of musical renditions, conducted in the city, in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens and inhabitants of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 11.5-1; Code 1999, § 10-31; Ord. No. 82-3, § 1, 3-15-1982) 
Sec. 10-20. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Music or entertainment festival or festival means the gathering of groups or individuals for the purpose of listening to, or participation in, entertainment which consists primarily of live or prerecorded musical renditions, conducted in the city. 
(Code 1982, § 11.5-2; Code 1999, § 10-32; Ord. No. 82-3, § 1, 3-15-1982) 
Secs. 10-21-10-43. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 10-44. - Required. 
    No person shall promote, sponsor, organize, conduct or sell tickets for any musical or entertainment festival in the city, where more than 750 people will be in attendance, unless he shall first secure from the city commission a special event permit for each festival. 
(Code 1982, § 11.5-3; Code 1999, § 10-33; Ord. No. 82-3, § 1, 3-15-1982; Ord. No. 91-4, pt. 1, 4-1-1991) 
Sec. 10-45. - Application-Prerequisite. 
    A written application for a special event permit shall be submitted to the city commission at least 30 days prior to the time indicated for the commencement of the festival; and such special event permit shall not be issued unless and until the following plans and information are submitted to the city commission, and the following minimum conditions are met: 
(1)  The name, age, street address and mailing address of the person making the application. If the application is made by a partnership, the name and address of all the partners must appear in the application. If the application is made by a corporation, the application must be signed by the president or vice-president and secretary thereof, and must contain the street address of such corporate officers and shall be submitted with the application; 
(2)  A statement of the kind, character, or type of festival which the applicant proposes to conduct, operate or carry on; 
(3)  The legal description of the place where the festival is to be conducted, operated or carried on. The applicant must submit proof of ownership of the place where the festival is to be conducted, or an affidavit signed by the owner of the premises indicating his consent that the site be used for the proposed festival; 
(4)  The applicant shall fully disclose the names and addresses of all persons contributing, investing or having a direct or indirect financial interest in the staging, promoting or conducting of such festival; whether such interest be by virtue of ownership in any corporation staging, promoting or conducting such festival, status as an employee of any person staging, promoting or conducting such festival, or any involvement by which such person stands to gain or lose financially from such festival; 
(5)  The dates and the hours during which the festival is to be conducted; 
(6)  The names of all persons who will perform at such festival; 
(7)  The anticipated number of persons per day expected to attend the festival shall be stated; 
(8)  Written evidence from the city community development director that the proposed festival complies with all city zoning laws; and evidence of compliance with all business tax laws and other applicable city, county and state laws, rules and regulations; 
(9)  Adequate plans for camp construction, sanitation facilities, sewage disposal, garbage and refuse disposal, drainage, insect and rodent control, water supply, and food service. For the purposes of evaluating such plans, the standards established by the rules of the division of health and the state sanitary code shall be considered as minimum requirements. In evaluating plans, the city commission shall also consider the applicability of provisions of F.S. ch. 386 and such other provisions of the law, of the sanitary codes or of local law, as it may deem necessary, in the interest of public health, welfare and safety; 
(10)  An adequate plan for internal security, traffic control, communications, fire protection and emergency services in and around the festival area. Such plans shall be received by, and coordinated with, the chief of police, fire chief and the county ambulance service. The plan shall include a detailed description of the plan of security, traffic control, communications, fire protection and emergency services to be used; and how it is to be implemented; 
(11)  An adequate plan for traffic control and parking facilities outside the festival area approved by the city. No motor vehicle shall be permitted in the performance area, except when necessary to enforce compliance with this section or an emergency; 
(12)  Every applicant planning to conduct or stage a festival after dark, or planning to allow patrons who attend festival to remain on the premises after dark, shall provide an adequate plan for electrical illumination of the parking facilities and festival area to ensure that those areas are lighted at all times; 
(13)  An adequate plan for garbage, trash and rubbish pickup; 
(14)  The plot plan, drawn to scale, shall be submitted with the application, showing the location of performance area and all facilities required by this article; and 
(15)  The applicant shall state the number of tickets printed or to be printed and the name and address of the printer. No more than 5,000 tickets may be printed for any one music festival without special permission from the city commission. The application shall also direct or authorize the printer of the tickets to disclose to the city the number of tickets printed or to be printed. 
(Code 1982, § 11.5-4; Code 1999, § 10-34; Ord. No. 82-3, § 1, 3-15-1982) 
Sec. 10-46. - Same-Fee; purpose of fee. 
    The applicant shall pay the city a permit fee at the time the application is filed. The permit fee shall be equal to ten percent of the sales price of a ticket or admission fee, less any state sales tax, times the number of tickets printed or to be printed. The permit fee assessed is for the purpose of compensating the city commission for the investigation of the application plan, compensating the city for additional law enforcement, additional trash and garbage services and for the necessary public health welfare services required by such music or entertainment festival, for the protection of the public. 
(Code 1982, § 11.5-5; Code 1999, § 10-35; Ord. No. 82-3, § 1, 3-15-1982) 
Sec. 10-47. - Bond or insurance required. 
    Each applicant shall submit a cash, liability, property, surety bond, or liability insurance, with limits of not less than $100,000.00/$1,000,000.00 written by a corporate bonding or insurance company authorized to do business in the state, to indemnify the city, its agents, officers, servants and employees, and the city commission, against any loss, injury or damage of any nature whatsoever arising out of, or in any way connected with, such festival; shall indemnify against loss, injury or damage to both persons and property; such bond or insurance shall further indemnify the city commission and the city and the owners of the property adjoining the festival site. The cash, property or surety bond shall be an amount determined by the city commission. 
(Code 1982, § 11.5-6; Code 1999, § 10-36; Ord. No. 82-3, § 1, 3-15-1982) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Control of animal diseases, F.S. ch. 585; animal care and control, F.S. ch. 828. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - City designated a bird sanctuary. 
(a)  The area included within the corporate boundaries of the city is hereby declared to be a bird sanctuary. 
(b)  The bird sanctuary is created and established for the protection, preservation, and encouragement of birds, bird life, bird eggs, and bird nests within such area. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person at any time to damage, destroy or molest any bird or bird eggs or bird nests within the sanctuary. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry in or upon said bird sanctuary any slingshot, trap or any other similar device used in the taking, destruction or molestation of any bird, bird eggs or bird nests in the sanctuary, with the intent to use such device in violation of this section. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any dog to enter into or upon the bird sanctuary for the purpose of destroying or molesting any birds, bird eggs, or bird nests. 
(Laws of Fla., ch. 22237(1943), §§ 2-5; Code 1960, § 4-3; Code 1982, §§ 4-56-4-60; Code 1999, § 14-1; Ord. No. 2011-03, § 1, 10-17-2011) 
Sec. 14-2. - Diseased animals. 
    No person shall bring into the city or keep within the city limits animals having an infectious or contagious disease. Any animal having such infectious and/or contagious disease must be treated. 
(Code 1960, § 4-6; Code 1982, § 4-1; Code 1999, § 14-2) 
State Law reference- Information concerning infectious, contagious, communicable, etc., animal diseases, F.S. § 585.14; control of animal diseases, F.S. § 585.145. 
Sec. 14-3. - Impoundment; duty of officer. 
    The animal control officer or any police officer shall impound animals in violation of this chapter and the city manager shall be empowered to appoint an animal control officer for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1960, § 4-7; Code 1982, § 4-2; Code 1999, § 14-3) 
Sec. 14-4. - Disturbing neighbors, damaging property or creating unsanitary conditions. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, house, stable or maintain or have in custody any dog, cat, horse or other animal or fowl which, by repeated barking, howling, crowing, cackling, or any other noises or by the destruction or damage of property, or by being maintained under unsanitary conditions, or by causing objectionable flies and odors, all as may be determined by the county health department, creates a nuisance or disturbs the peace, comfort and quiet or infringes on the rights of adjoining neighbors. 
(b)  Form of complaint. Any person who is disturbed in his peace, comfort and quiet, or who has his property destroyed or damaged, or through the ownership, keeping, housing or maintaining of an animal is subjected to a nuisance, in violation of this section, shall have a right to make complaint to the chief of police of the city in the following written form: 
I, or we, ___________ residing at ___________, Clewiston, Florida, do hereby complain that ___________ is the owner or keeps, houses, or maintains or has the custody of ___________ at ___________ in the City of Clewiston, Florida, which animal or fowl, by repeated barking, howling, crowing, cackling, or by other noises, or by destroying or damaging property, or by unsanitary conditions, is creating a nuisance and disturbing the peace, comfort and quiet of the undersigned and adjoining neighbors; and I, or we, request the chief of police of the City of Clewiston to require that said nuisance be abated. 
(c)  Service of complaint; issuance of warrant. Upon receiving such written complaint duly signed, the chief of police shall cause to be served, a copy of such complaint upon the person complained against. If such nuisance is not abated within three days after the service of such complaint upon the party complained against, the complainant shall have the right to take out a warrant directed to the person complained against for the violation of this section. 
(d)  Enforcement. The police department or animal control officer of the city shall not enforce the provisions of this section unless and until the provisions of subsection (b) of this section have been complied with. 
(Code 1960, § 4-24; Code 1982, § 4-3; Code 1999, § 14-4) 
Sec. 14-5. - Classification of dogs. 
(a)  Classification of dogs as aggressive and dangerous. 
(1)  The city shall investigate reported incidents involving any dog that may be aggressive or dangerous and shall, if possible, interview the owner and require a sworn affidavit from any person, animal control officer, or enforcement officer desiring to have a dog classified as aggressive or dangerous. In the event that any animal control officer has sufficient cause to believe that a dog is aggressive or dangerous and that the owner is unable or unwilling to humanely, safely and securely confine the dog, the officer may impound the dog pending the investigation. The owner shall be responsible for payment of all boarding costs and other fees required for the city to care for the dog pending the outcome of the investigation and resolution of any appeal. An owner's refusal to surrender a dog for impoundment pending the investigation shall constitute a violation of this chapter. At the discretion of the city, a dog that is the subject of a an aggressive or dangerous dog investigation may be confined at a licensed facility approved by the city or at the residence of the owner if the city is given adequate assurance by the owner that the dog can be humanely, safely, and securely confined without posing a danger to the public. If the dog remains with the owner pending the outcome of a dangerous dog or aggressive dog investigation and resolution of any appeal, the dog shall be at all times maintained in a securely fenced or enclosed area to prevent the dog from escaping or coming into contact with any person or domestic animal other than a person or domestic animal in the immediate household of the owner. No dog that is the subject of an aggressive or dangerous dog investigation may be relocated or ownership transferred pending the outcome of an investigation or any appeal related to the determination of an aggressive or dangerous dog classification. The owner shall provide the city with the address of where the dog will be maintained pending an investigation and any related hearings. 
(2)  A dog shall not be declared dangerous if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who, at the time, was unlawfully on the property or, while lawfully on the property, was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or its owner or a family member. No dog may be declared aggressive or dangerous if the dog was protecting or defending a human being within the immediate vicinity of the dog from an unjustified attack or assault. 
(3)  A dog that is moved into Clewiston and that has been involved in known previous animal-to-human bites or has been equivalently classified as dangerous in its past jurisdiction(s), shall be subject to investigation and classification by the city. All information, past history and reports from other agencies, organizations or persons may be used to determine the appropriate classification. 
(4)  After its investigation, the city shall make an initial determination as to whether there is sufficient cause to classify the dog as aggressive or dangerous. The city shall provide written notification of sufficient cause finding, to the owner, by registered mail, certified hand delivery (signed receipt) or service of process. The owner shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing before a special magistrate prior to a final determination of the classification. If the owner decides to appeal the initial determination, the owner shall file a written request with the city for a hearing before the special magistrate within seven calendar days from the date of receipt of the notification of the sufficient cause finding and if requested, the hearing shall be held as soon as possible, no sooner than five calendar days and not more than 21 calendar days after receipt of the request from the owner. Said written request must be accompanied by an appeal bond and any applicable fees for the care and boarding of said dog (due through the fifth day following the date of the request for hearing). The appeal bond and any other applicable fees shall be established by the city commission by resolution. The appeal bond shall be remitted to the city in the form of a money order, a certified check, a cashier's check, or a bank check payable to the city. The city shall provide notice of the hearing to the owner by U.S. mail, electronic mail, facsimile, certified mail or certified hand delivery. If the owner after seven calendar days from the delivery of the "notice of intent to classify/sufficient cause notice," has not filed a written request for a hearing, the determination of the city shall become final. 
(5)  Once a hearing date is set, failure to appear before the special magistrate may, at the special magistrate's discretion, result in the dismissal of the hearing with prejudice. In such instances, the process will proceed and the dog shall be classified as aggressive or dangerous. 
(6)  Once a dog is classified as aggressive or dangerous, the city shall provide written notification to the owner by registered mail, certified hand delivery (signed receipt) or service of process. The owner may then file a written request for a hearing in the county court to appeal the classification within ten business days after receipt of the written determination of aggressive or dangerous dog classification. If the city allows the owner to maintain possession of the dog during a dangerous dog or aggressive dog appeal, the owner must confine the dog in a securely fenced or enclosed area to prevent the dog from escaping or coming in contact with any person or domestic animal other than a person or domestic animal in the immediate household of the owner, pending a resolution of the appeal. Pending resolution of an aggressive or dangerous dog appeal, the dog shall at all times wear a muzzle when it is off the owner's property and must be restrained by a substantial leash not exceeding six feet in length and under the control of a competent person 
(b)  Aggressive dog mandates and responsibilities. 
(1)  [Mandates.] Within 14 days after a dog has been classified as aggressive or an aggressive dog classification is upheld on appeal, the aggressive dog shall be implanted with an approved electronic animal identification device (EAID) at the owner's sole expense and the aggressive dog shall be spayed/neutered unless a licensed veterinarian has examined the dog and certified in writing, that at such time spaying/neutering the classified dog will endanger its health because of infirmity, disability, illness or other medical consideration. However, the dog will be spayed/neutered as soon as its health permits. If there is a disagreement concerning the health status for sterilizing an aggressive dog, the city may have the animal care and control staff/contract veterinarian examine the dog to determine its eligibility for sterilization. If the disagreement cannot be resolved, the city and the owner shall agree on a third veterinarian to examine the animal for sterilization eligibility. The cost of the third veterinarian shall be split evenly between the city and the owner. The opinion of the third veterinarian shall govern. 
(2)  Responsibilities for owner. An aggressive dog shall at all times wear a muzzle when it is off the owner's property and must be restrained by a substantial chain or leash not exceeding six feet in length and under the control of a competent person. The muzzle must be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration but must prevent it from biting any person or domestic animal. Dogs that have been classified as aggressive shall not be brought to a dog park, public park or public beach that allows dogs. 
(c)  Dangerous dog mandates and responsibilities. 
(1)  Mandates for owner. Within 14 days after a dog has been classified as dangerous or a dangerous dog classification is upheld by the county court on appeal, an owner of a dangerous dog shall comply with all of the following: 
a.  Provide the division with a certificate of rabies vaccination. 
b.  A special dangerous dog tag supplied by the city shall be purchased annually and affixed to the dog's collar to be worn at all times. The fee shall be established by the city commission by resolution. 
c.  The dog shall be implanted with an approved electronic animal identification device (EAID) at the owner's sole expense. 
d.  The owner of a dangerous dog shall provide the city with two color photographs of the dog (front view and side view) that clearly identify the classified dog. Each photograph shall be at least three inches by three inches. 
e.  A dangerous dog must be spayed/neutered unless a licensed veterinarian has examined the dog and certified in writing, that at such time spaying/neutering the classified dog would endanger its health because of infirmity, disability, illness or other medical consideration. However, the dog will be spayed/neutered as soon as its health permits. If there is a disagreement concerning the health status for sterilizing a dangerous dog, the city may have the animal care and control staff/contract veterinarian examine the dog to determine its eligibility for sterilization. If the disagreement cannot be resolved, the city and the owner shall agree on a third veterinarian to examine the animal for sterilization eligibility. The cost of the third veterinarian shall be split evenly between the city and the owner. The opinion of the third veterinarian shall govern. 
(2)  Responsibilities for owner. 
a.  The owner shall immediately notify the city when a dangerous dog: 
1.  Is loose, unconfined or lost/stolen; 
2.  Has bitten a human being or attacked another domestic animal; 
3.  Is sold, given away, or dies; or 
4.  Is moved to another address. 
b.  Prior to a dangerous dog being sold or given away, the owner shall provide the name, address and phone number of the new owner to the city. The new owner shall execute a document to be supplied by the city, acknowledging that the owner is aware of the dangerous dog classification, and that the owner shall comply with the requirements of this section. The new owner must comply with all of the requirements of this chapter. If the animal is moved out of the city to another jurisdiction within the state, the owner is required to abide by F.S. ch. 767. The animal control authority at the new location must be notified by the owner of a dog classified as dangerous, that the dog is in its jurisdiction. 
c.  While on the owner's property, a dangerous dog must be securely confined indoors or securely confined outdoors in an enclosed and locked structure, suitable to prevent the entry of any person other than adult members of the immediate household and constructed to prevent the dog from escaping. Such structure shall have secure sides and a secure top and bottom to prevent the dog from escaping over, under or through the structure. The enclosure shall provide a humane existence for the dog and protection from the elements. 
d.  When being transported, a dangerous dog must wear a muzzle and be safely and securely restrained within a vehicle. 
e.  The owner shall prominently display a sign at least ten inches by ten inches at the owner's expense, on his/her premises at all entry points warning children and adults that there is a dangerous dog on the property. 
f.  A dangerous dog shall at all times wear a muzzle when it is not securely confined indoors or securely confined outdoors in an enclosed and locked structure on the owner's property. A dangerous dog may be off the owner's premises or out of its enclosure if it is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash not exceeding six feet in length and under the control of a competent person. The muzzle must be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration but must prevent it from biting any person or domestic animal. 
g.  A dangerous dog shall not be used as a guard dog as defined in this chapter. 
h.  Dogs that have been classified as dangerous shall not be used for hunting purposes. 
i.  Dogs that have been classified as dangerous shall not be brought to a dog park or public park or public beach that allows dogs. 
j.  When any person or domestic animal other than the owner or a person or domestic animal in the immediate household of the owner visits the premises where the dangerous dog is maintained, the owner shall secure the dangerous dog in an enclosed and locked structure to prevent such person or domestic animal from coming into contact with the dangerous dog. 
k.  Dogs that have been classified as dangerous shall not be brought to any nonresidential establishment other than a veterinary office or other facility where the dangerous dog is being treated, trained or boarded. 
l.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, a dangerous dog may be cared for at a boarding facility or by a pet sitter if the boarding facility or pet sitter acknowledges in writing that the dog is a dangerous dog and agrees to comply with this chapter. 
The city shall have the authority to make inspections to ensure that the provisions cited herein are complied with. 
An owner of a dangerous dog shall have the option to have said dog humanely euthanized at his/her sole expense by the city or licensed veterinarian if the owner is unable to comply with the requirements cited herein. 
(3)  Violations. 
a.  The city is responsible for investigating alleged violations of this section after a dog is classified as aggressive or dangerous. A citation may be issued to the owner of any aggressive or dangerous dog alleged to be in violation of this section. The investigating officer may issue such citation upon the receipt of one sworn affidavit of complaint. This affidavit shall specify the address or location of the alleged violation, the nature, time and date(s) of the act, the name and address of the owner, if known, and a description of the dog. In the event that a third or subsequent citation is issued to the owner for violation of this section, the owner shall be required to appear in court. 
b.  An animal care and control officer may impound a dangerous dog if the owner fails to comply with the dangerous dog mandates and responsibilities cited herein. A dangerous dog impounded under this section may be redeemed by the owner upon the owner's compliance with the dangerous dog mandates and responsibilities and payment of any boarding fees, impound fees, or other applicable fees established by the city by resolution. If the owner does not comply with the dangerous dog mandates and responsibilities and redeem the dangerous dog within 14 days of the date the dog was impounded, the dog shall be humanly euthanized by the city. 
(d)  Vicious dog. 
(1)  Upgrading dangerous dog to vicious dog. If a dog that has previously been declared dangerous attacks or bites a person or a domestic animal, when unprovoked, the dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by the city, placed in quarantine, if necessary, for the proper length of time or impounded and held ten business days after the owner is given written notification by certified mail, certified hand delivery (signed receipt) or service of process. The city shall make an initial determination as to whether there is sufficient cause to upgrade the dangerous classification to vicious. 
(2)  Classifying a dog as vicious that has not been previously declared dangerous. If a dog that has not been declared dangerous attacks and causes severe injury or death of any human, the dog shall be immediately confiscated by the city, placed in quarantine, if necessary, for the proper length of time or held for ten business days after the owner is given written notification by certified mail, certified hand delivery (signed receipt) or service of process. The city shall make an initial determination as to whether there is sufficient cause to classify the dog as vicious. A dog that has not been previously declared dangerous shall not be declared vicious if the severe injury or death was sustained by a person who, at the time, was unlawfully on the property or, while lawfully on the property, was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog, the owner, or a person in the immediate household of the owner. 
(3)  Vicious dog classification process. 
a.  The city shall investigate any incident involving any dog that may be vicious and shall, if possible, interview the owner and require a sworn affidavit from any person, animal control officer, or enforcement officer desiring to have a dog classified as vicious. In the event that any animal control officer has sufficient cause to believe that a dog is vicious and that the owner is unable or unwilling to humanely, safely and securely confine the dog, the officer may impound the dog pending the investigation and any appeal if deemed necessary to protect the public. The owner shall be responsible for payment of all boarding costs and other fees required for the city to care for the dog pending the outcome of the investigation and resolution of any appeal. An owner's refusal to surrender a dog for impoundment pending the investigation shall constitute a violation of this chapter. A dog that is the subject of a vicious dog investigation will be confined at a facility approved by the city. No dog that is the subject of a vicious dog investigation may be relocated or ownership transferred pending the outcome of an investigation or any appeal of a vicious dog classification. 
b.  After its investigation, the city shall make an initial determination as to whether there is sufficient cause to classify the dog as vicious. The city shall provide written notification of sufficient cause finding to the owner, by registered mail, certified hand delivery (signed receipt) or service of process. The ten business day time period from date of notification shall allow the owner to file a written request for a hearing before a special magistrate prior to a final determination of the vicious classification. The hearing shall be held no sooner than five calendar days and not more than 21 calendar days after receipt of the request from the owner. The appeal bond, any applicable fees for the care and boarding of said dog (due through the fifth day following the date of the request for hearing) must accompany the owner's written request. The appeal bond and fees shall be established by the board by resolution. The appeal bond shall be remitted to the city in the form of a money order, a certified check, a cashier's check, or a bank check payable to the city. The city shall provide notice of the hearing to the owner by U.S. mail, electronic mail, facsimile, certified mail or certified hand delivery. If the owner fails to appeal within the ten business day period, the dog shall be humanely destroyed. 
c.  Once a hearing date is set, failure to appear before the special magistrate may, at the special magistrate's discretion, result in the dismissal of the hearing with prejudice. In such instances, the process will proceed and the dog shall be classified as vicious. The owner shall be responsible for payment of all boarding costs and other fees as may be required to humanely and safely keep the dog during any appeal procedure. 
(4)  Notice of appeal. The owner may then file a written request for a hearing in the county court to appeal the classification within ten business days after receipt of the written determination of vicious dog classification and the dog will remain confined at a facility designated by the city pending resolution of an appeal. 
(5)  Owner's responsibility, mandates for vicious dogs. Once a dog has been determined to be vicious, and all appeals have been resolved, the owner must remove the dog from city limits immediately, or have it humanly euthanized. 
(e)  Penalties for owners of aggressive dogs. 
(1)  Any owner of a dog that, for the first occasion, kills or severely injures, a domestic animal while off the owner's premises shall be subject to a fine of $500.00. 
(2)  If a dog, for a second time, kills or severely injures a domestic animal while off the owner's premises, the violation shall be presumed to be irreparable or irreversible under F.S. § 162.09(2)(A) and the special magistrate may impose a fine not to exceed $5,000.00. The procedural requirements of F.S. ch. 162 shall be followed. 
(3)  The owner may appeal the fines under this section to County Court following the same procedures as for a vicious dog determination, set forth in subsection (d)(4) of this section (notice of appeal). 
(Ord. No. 2016-11, § 1, 3, 1-23-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-11, § 1, adopted Jan. 23, 2017, repealed former § 14-5, which pertained to vicious dog or domestic animal and derived from Code 1960, § 4-11; Code 1982, § 4-34; Code 1999, § 14-1; Ord. No. 78-5, § 1, adopted June 5, 1978; Ord. No. 79-9, § 2, adopted Jan. 7, 1980. Section 3 of said Ord. No. 2016-11 enacted new provisions pertaining to classification, codified as herein set out in § 14-5 at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 14-6. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Aggressive dog shall mean any dog that, according to the records of the division, has severely injured or killed a domestic animal while off the owner's property. 
    Animal control officer/code enforcement officer shall mean any person employed by the city whose duty it is to enforce codes and ordinances pursuant to F.S. § 162.21, and including city animal care and control officers, code enforcement officers, and city police, and as defined in F.S. § 828.27(1)(b) and other applicable state laws. 
    Dangerous dog shall mean any dog that, according to the records of the city, meets at least one of the following: 
(1)  Has aggressively bitten, attacked, endangered or has inflicted severe injury on a human being on public or private property. 
(2)  Has more than once severely injured or killed a domestic animal while off the owner's property. 
(3)  Has, when unprovoked, chased or approached a person upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, provided that such actions are attested to in a sworn statement by one or more persons and dutifully investigated by city. 
    Guard dog shall mean any type of dog used for the purpose of defending, patrolling or protecting property or life at any nonresidential establishment or which resides on a nonresidential property. The term "guard dog" shall exclude any stock dogs used primarily for handling and controlling livestock or farm animals. 
    Quarantine shall mean the strict confinement, isolation and observation of an animal suspected of having rabies or any other infectious zoonotic disease. 
    Secure enclosure shall mean a locked pen or structure constructed to prevent an animal from escaping over, under or through the enclosure. The enclosure shall have secure sides and a top. 
    Severe injury shall mean any physical injury that results in broken bones, multiple bites or disfiguring punctures/lacerations requiring sutures or reconstructive surgery. 
    Vicious dog shall mean a dog that was previously declared to be a dangerous dog that attacks or bites a person or a domestic animal, or a dog not previously classified as dangerous that cause severe injury or death of any human. 
(Ord. No. 2016-11, § 2, 1-23-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-11, § 2, adopted Jan. 23, 2017, set forth definitions for codification but did not specify manner of inclusion; therefore, said definitions have been incorporated as herein set out in § 14-6 at the editor's discretion. 
Secs. 14-7-14-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOMESTIC ANIMALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-27. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-11, § 1, adopted Jan. 23, 2017, repealed § 14-27, which pertained to definitions and derived from Code 1960, § 4-11; Code 1982, § 4-34; Code 1999, § 14-31; Ord. No. 78-5, § 1, adopted June 5, 1978; Ord. No. 79-9, § 2, adopted Jan. 7, 1980. See art. I for definitions pertaining to ch. 14 generally. 
Sec. 14-28. - Running at large prohibited. 
    No person owning or having possession, charge, custody, or control of any dog or domestic animal shall cause, permit or allow such animal to stray, run, go, or in any manner be at large in or upon any public street, street right-of-way, alley, sidewalk, park or other public property, or on private property of others without the express consent of the owner of such private property. 
(Code 1960, § 4-12; Code 1982, § 4-42; Code 1999, § 14-32; Ord. No. 79-9, § 2, 1-7-1980) 
Sec. 14-29. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-11, § 1, adopted Jan. 23, 2017, repealed § 14-29, which pertained to confinement of certain dogs and domestic animals and derived from Code 1960, § 4-19; Code 1982, § 4-43; Code 1999, § 14-33; Ord. No. 79-9, § 2, adopted Jan. 7, 1980; Ord. No. 2002-06, pt. 1, adopted Oct. 21, 2002. 
Sec. 14-30. - Stray cats. 
    Stray cats are hereby declared to be predatory animals and shall be treated as such, and when found running at large in the city may be captured and impounded. To encourage the extermination of stray cats in the city, any person is hereby authorized to catch any grown or mature stray cat found running at large in the city and deliver the same to the pound. 
(Code 1960, § 4-21; Code 1982, § 4-49; Code 1999, § 14-34; Ord. No. 79-9, § 1, 1-7-1980) 
Secs. 14-31-14-48. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 14-49. - General procedures. 
(a)  The animal control officer or any police officer shall, upon determination that the officer has probable cause to believe that a violation of this chapter constituting a civil infraction has occurred, issue a citation to the person owning, keeping or harboring such animal. The citation must contain: 
(1)  The date and time of issuance. 
(2)  The name and address of the person. 
(3)  The date and time the civil infraction was committed. 
(4)  The facts constituting probable cause. 
(5)  The ordinance violated. 
(6)  The name and authority of the officer. 
(7)  The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay the civil penalty, to contest the citation, or to appear in court as required under subsection (d) of this section. 
(8)  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects to contest the citation. 
(9)  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects not to contest the citation. 
(10)  A conspicuous statement that, if the person fails to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed or fails to appear in court to contest the citation, he shall be deemed to have waived his right to contest the citation and that, in such case, judgment may be entered against the person for an amount up to the maximum civil penalty. 
(11)  A conspicuous statement that if the person is required to appear in county court as mandated by subsection (d) of this section he does not have the option of paying a fine in lieu of appearing in court. 
(b)  If the person does not contest the citation, the civil penalty for violation shall be paid within 72 hours to the animal control department. The civil penalty shall be $15.00 for the first offense within one year, $25.00 for the second offense within one year and $100.00 for the third offense within one year. If the person shall fail to pay such penalty, the animal control officer shall file a complaint against such person with the county court. 
(c)  If the person fails to pay the civil penalty, fails to appear in court to contest the citation, or fails to appear in court as required by subsection (b) of this section, the court may issue an order to show cause upon the request of the city commission. This order shall require such persons to appear before the court to explain why action on the citation has not been taken. If any person who is issued such order fails to appear in response to the court's directive, that person may be held in contempt of court. 
(d)  The city commission may require mandatory court appearances for certain aggravated violations of this chapter resulting in the unprovoked biting, attacking, or wounding of a domestic animal; violations resulting in the destruction or loss of personal property; second or subsequent violations of local animal cruelty laws; or violations resulting in the issuance of a third or subsequent citation to a person. The citation must clearly inform the person of the mandatory court appearance. The city shall maintain records to prove the number of citations issued to the person. Persons required to appear in court do not have the option of paying the fine instead of appearing in court. The commission of a charged infraction at a hearing authorized pursuant to this section must be proven by a preponderance of the evidence. The maximum civil penalty shall not exceed $500.00. 
(e)  The city commission imposes and a surcharge of $15.00 shall be collected upon each civil penalty imposed for the violation of a city ordinance relating to animal control or cruelty. The proceeds from such surcharges shall be used to pay the costs for the training of animal control officers. 
(f)  Any person who willfully refuses to sign and accept a citation issued by an officer is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable as provided in F.S. § 775.082 or 775.083. 
(g)  Notwithstanding subsection (f) of this section, the animal control officer or police officer shall file a complaint against any person in violation of this article where such person has received more than two citations within a one-year period. 
(h)  Notwithstanding subsection (f) of this section, the animal control officer or any police officer may file a claim against any person in violation of this article rather than issuing a citation as set forth in subsection (g) of this section. 
(Code 1960, § 4-25; Code 1982, § 4-35; Code 1999, § 14-51; Ord. No. 79-9, § 2, 1-7-1980) 
State Law reference- Procedure for enforcement of animal control or animal cruelty ordinances, F.S. § 828.27. 
Sec. 14-50. - Entry to property to enforce. 
    The animal control officer shall have the right to enter upon any public or private property, except a building, mobile home or other structure designated and used for residential purposes, for the purpose of enforcing this chapter. If any person refuses entrance to premises in his possession or control to the animal control officer attempting to enforce this chapter, such officer shall contact a law enforcement officer and proceed on such premises with a warrant or other document of authority as necessary to lawfully enter such premises for the purpose of enforcing this chapter. 
(Code 1960, § 4-22; Code 1982, § 4-36; Code 1999, § 14-52; Ord. No. 7-85, § 3, 6-5-1978; Ord. No. 79-9, § 1, 1-7-1980) 
Sec. 14-51. - Interfering with enforcement. 
    It shall be unlawful to interfere with the animal control officer while he is performing his duties, or to take or attempt to take any dog or domestic animal from the animal control officer or from any vehicle used by him to transport such dog or domestic animal, or to take or attempt to take any dog or domestic animal from the impoundment kennel without proper authority. 
(Code 1960, § 4-22; Code 1982, § 4-37; Code 1999, § 14-53; Ord. No. 78-5, § 3, 6-5-1978; Ord. No. 79-9, § 1, 1-7-1980) 
Sec. 14-52. - Impoundment, redemption and disposition of unredeemed animals. 
(a)  Any dog or domestic animal found to be in violation of this chapter by the animal control officer shall be impounded by him at a place maintained or designated for that purpose. The animal control officer shall have the right to enter upon any public or private property in the city, except a building designated and used for residential purposes, for the purpose of the enforcement of this article. Promptly upon the impoundment of any animal, the animal control officer shall give written notice to the owner of such dog or domestic animal, if the owner's name and address is known, and shall post a notice that such dog or domestic animal has been impounded. 
(b)  Any dog or domestic animal which has been impounded shall be released to its owner upon presentation of proof of ownership, and after such dog or domestic animal has been properly vaccinated, licensed, and upon payment of impounding fees and per diem charges, except any dog which has been impounded after biting a person shall not be released to the owner until the provisions of section 14-102 have been complied with. Any impounded dog or domestic animal which is not reclaimed by its owner within five days from the impounding date shall be disposed of in the following manner: 
(1)  Such dog or domestic animal shall be destroyed in such a manner as to cause as little pain as possible to said dog or domestic animal. 
(2)  Such dog or domestic animal, at the discretion of the animal control officer, may be given to an adult who desires to give such dog or domestic animal a home, and who pays for the proper vaccination and license tag, impounding fees and per diem. 
(3)  No dog or domestic animal shall be sold or given to any person by the animal control officer for any type of medical or other research. 
(c)  All dogs or domestic animals destroyed pursuant to this section shall be promptly buried in an authorized place by the animal control officer or shall be promptly cremated in an authorized crematorium. 
(Code 1960, § 4-17; Code 1982, § 4-38; Code 1999, § 14-54; Ord. No. 78-5, § 3, 6-5-1978; Ord. No. 79-9, § 1, 1-7-1980; Ord. No. 87-9, § 1, 9-21-1987) 
Sec. 14-53. - Impoundment fees. 
    The charges for the impoundment and feeding of each dog or domestic animal per day shall be established by resolution and provided in appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1960, § 4-18; Code 1982, § 4-41; Code 1999, § 15-55; Ord. No. 79-9, § 2, 1-7-1980) 
Secs. 14-54-14-101. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RABIES CONTROL 

Sec. 14-102. - Impoundment of animals suspected of rabies and dogs that have bitten a person. 
(a)  Any dog or other domestic animal suspected of having rabies, or having bitten any person or other animal, shall be captured alive and quarantined at the owner's expense, at a place designated by the animal control officer, or placed in the custody of a licensed veterinarian for a period of ten days. If the dog or other domestic animal cannot be captured alive and is killed, or if it dies during the quarantine period, the head of such dog or domestic animal shall be detached without mutilation, and submitted to the county health department without delay. 
(b)  Any dog that has bitten a person and is found not to be rabid after the ten-day quarantine period has passed may be redeemed by the owner of such dog by payment of the fees provided for in section 14-52, plus a fee of $500.00, or an amount approved by the city commission, and provided the chief of police confirms to the city commission that the owner of the dog has established a secure enclosure as defined in section 14-29, and further provided the owner of the dog provides assurances satisfactory to the city commission that such dog will thereafter be confined to such secure enclosure. Any dog, to which this section is applicable, not redeemed within five days after the running of the quarantine period shall be destroyed in a manner provided for in section 14-52(b)(1). However, if the owner of such dog has made application to the city commission for return of the dog, the dog shall not be destroyed unless the city commission determines satisfactory provisions and assurances have not been provided to safeguard the public from such dog. 
(Code 1960, § 4-15; Code 1982, § 4-45; Code 1999, § 14-92; Ord. No. 78-5, § 3, 6-5-1978; Ord. No. 79-9, § 1, 1-7-1980; Ord. No. 87-9, § 2, 9-21-1987; Ord. No. 2002-06, pt. 2, 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 14-103. - Failure to surrender animal for quarantine or destruction. 
    Any person who shall fail to surrender any dog or domestic animal for quarantine or destruction as required herein, when demand is made therefor by the animal control officer or the county health department, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1960, § 4-23; Code 1982, § 4-46; Code 1999, § 14-93; Ord. No. 79-9, § 2, 1-7-1980) 
Sec. 14-104. - Failure to surrender carcass of rabid animal. 
    Any person who, upon demand of the animal control officer or the county health department, shall not surrender the carcass of any dead animal exposed to or suspected of having been exposed to rabies shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1960, § 4-24; Code 1982, § 4-47; Code 1999, § 14-94; Ord. No. 79-9, § 2, 1-7-1980) 
Sec. 14-105. - Reports of bites. 
    It shall be the duty of every person licensed to practice medicine, osteopathic medicine, veterinary medicine or any other person knowing of or in attendance on a case to promptly report to the animal control officer and the county health department every instance in which a person is bitten by a dog or other domestic animal or by a wild animal. 
(Code 1960, § 4-16; Code 1982, § 4-48; Code 1999, § 14-95; Ord. No. 78-5, § 3, 6-5-1978; Ord. No. 79-9, § 1, 1-7-1980) 
Secs. 14-106-14-123. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LIVESTOCK AND FOWL 

Sec. 14-124. - Keeping livestock in specified areas prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any livestock, including any calf, yearling, cow, bull, steer, goat, sheep, hog or horse in any part of the city other than as permitted as provided in chapter 110. Notwithstanding the foregoing prohibition, it shall be lawful for a person to keep a horse temporarily in said area so long as it does not create a health hazard or a nuisance. 
(Code 1960, § 4-1; Code 1982, § 4-14; Code 1999, § 14-111) 
Sec. 14-125. - Keeping domestic fowl prohibited. 
(a)  The term "domestic fowl" means chickens, turkeys, ducks or geese. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep domestic fowl within the city. 
(Code 1960, § 4-5; Code 1982, § 4-15; Code 1999, § 14-112) 
Sec. 14-126. - Displays permitted. 
    This article shall not be construed to prohibit the keeping of livestock or domestic fowl of any kind or nature for exhibition and display purposes during any recognized fair or exposition, nor to prohibit any livestock or domestic fowl being kept for exhibition and display purposes within districts zoned general commercial or industrial under chapter 110; provided that all existing sanitary rules and regulations, and such rules and regulations which may be promulgated by any ordinance or rule or regulation of the city commission or the city manager, shall be observed and carried out by the person maintaining such animal, livestock or domestic fowl. 
(Code 1960, § 4-4; Code 1982, § 4-16; Code 1999, § 14-113) 
Sec. 14-127. - Running at large prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or permit any horses, cattle, sheep, goats, hogs or other livestock or other grazing animals to run at large on the streets or sidewalks of the city, or to be staked so that they can go on the streets or sidewalks of the city, or to lead or ride any such animal or livestock along or upon the streets or parkways in the city. It shall be permissible to lead or ride any such animals or livestock along and over the streets of the city if fastened to a rope, chain or other substantial leading or riding device securely held by a responsible person during all the time that such animals or livestock are being led or ridden along or over the streets of the city. 
(Code 1960, § 4-2; Code 1982, § 4-17; Code 1999, § 14-114) 
Sec. 14-128. - Manner of riding or leading horses. 
    All horses ridden or led on the streets of the city shall obey all traffic laws applicable to motor vehicles. Where more than one horse is being led or ridden on the streets of the city, such horses shall be led or ridden in single file and in such a manner and speed so as not to endanger the life of the rider or leader or other persons or property. 
(Code 1960, § 4-2.1; Code 1982, § 4-18; Code 1999, § 14-115) 
State Law reference- Applicability of traffic laws to animals, animal-drawn vehicles, F.S. § 316.073. 
Sec. 14-129. - Impounding required. 
    It shall be the duty of each and every impounder to lock up and impound any and all horses, mules, cows, calves, goats, sheep and hogs found going at large, either with or without a driver or other attendant, or staked in the streets, and to keep them safely impounded until all penalties, costs, charges and expenses, including advertising, shall have been paid, or until disposed of. 
(Code 1960, § 4-7; Code 1982, § 4-20; Code 1999, § 14-117) 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Building construction standards generally, F.S. ch. 553. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Building official defined. 
    The term "building official" in this chapter means the community development director. 
Sec. 18-2. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate a provision of this chapter, or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of a detailed statement or plan submitted and approved thereunder, or of a permit or certificate issued hereunder, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code, and each day such violation shall be permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Any person within the meaning of this section shall include, but not be limited to, the owner of a building, structure, or premises where anything in violation of this chapter shall be placed or shall exist; or any architect, building contractor, agent, or person employed in connection therewith and who may have assisted in the commission of such violation. 
(Code 1960, § 6-5; Code 1982, § 6-1; Code 1999, § 18-1) 
Secs. 18-3-18-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 18-21-18-43. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 18-44. - Permits required. 
    A permit will be required to do any alteration, construction or repair of a building or structure or make any changes or extensions. 
(Code 1960, § 16-12; Code 1982, § 6-151; Code 1999, § 18-46) 
Sec. 18-45. - Right-of-way protection. 
    Plan drawings accompanying a building permit application shall delineate the ultimate right-of-way line of the abutting roads in accordance with the future traffic circulation map and right-of-way standards of the city, county and state department of transportation, as applicable. The building official shall issue a permit if proposed improvements satisfy the provisions of this Code in relation to the ultimate right-of-way line. 
(Code 1999, § 18-49; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(6-6(b)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 18-46. - Concurrency reservation. 
    Prior to issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall obtain a concurrency reservation in accordance with chapter 90. 
(Code 1999, § 18-50; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(6-6(c)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 18-47. - Eradication of nuisance trees. 
    Each building permit application shall include a statement indicating the extent of removal of nuisance trees existing on the site which will result from the proposed development. 
(Code 1999, § 18-51; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(6-6(d)), 12-19-1994) 
Secs. 18-48-18-67. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS 

Sec. 18-68. - Building code adopted. 
    For the purpose of regulating the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures within the city, there is hereby adopted by reference the Florida Building Code. 
(Code 1982, § 6-4; Code 1999, § 18-71; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(6-4), 12-19-1994) 
State Law reference- Florida building code, F.S. § 553.73. 
Sec. 18-69. - Permit fees. 
    A fee for each building permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing an application, in accordance with the fee schedule in appendix A to this Code. 
Sec. 18-70. - Administrative amendments to Florida Building Code. 
    The following administrative amendments are hereby adopted to the Florida Building Code, Building: 
Add a new Sec. 104.10.1 as follows: 
104.10.1 Modifications of the strict application of the requirements of the Florida Building Code. The building official shall coordinate with the floodplain administrator to review requests submitted to the building official that seek approval to modify the strict application of the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code to determine whether such requests require the granting of a variance pursuant to Section 117. 
Add a new Sec. 107.6.1 as follows: 
107.6.1 Building permits issued on the basis of an affidavit. Pursuant to the requirements of federal regulation for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (44 CFR Sections 59 and 60), the authority granted to the building official to issue permits, to rely on inspections, and to accept plans and construction documents on the basis of affidavits and plans submitted pursuant to Section 105.14 and Section 107.6, shall not extend to the flood load and flood resistance construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
Add a new Sec. 117 as follows: 
117 VARIANCES IN FLOOD HAZARD AREAS 
117.1 Flood hazard areas. Pursuant to section 553.73(5), F.S., the variance procedures adopted in the local floodplain management ordinance shall apply to requests submitted to the building official for variances to the provisions of Section 1612.4 of the Florida Building Code, Building or, as applicable, the provisions of R322 of the Florida Building Code, Residential. This section shall not apply to Section 3109 of the Florida Building Code, Building. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 4, 4-20-2015) 
Secs. 18-71-18-102. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TELEVISION ANTENNAS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Amateur radio antennas preemption, F.S. § 166.0435. 

Sec. 18-103. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Antenna elements means that portion of the outside antenna system for television receiving apparatus or equipment which are electrically connected to the receiver. 
    Antenna mast means that portion of the outside antenna system to which the antenna elements are attached. 
    Antenna system means the combination of any antenna elements, mast and tower or mast support. 
    Tower or mast support means the support or extension required to elevate the antenna mast to a height deemed necessary for adequate operation. 
(Code 1960, § 8-24; Code 1982, § 6-105; Code 1999, § 18-326) 
Sec. 18-104. - Minimum requirements. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to install, either as owner, or as agent, servant or employee of the owner, or as an independent contractor with the owner, or otherwise, any outside antenna system unless the same shall conform to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1960, § 8-25; Code 1982, § 6-106; Code 1999, § 18-327) 
Sec. 18-105. - Materials. 
    Antenna systems shall be made of noncorrosive material and must be of at least the gauge or structural strength set forth in the standards of the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., in accordance with the current issue of such standards. 
(Code 1960, § 8-25; Code 1982, § 6-106(a); Code 1999, § 18-328) 
Sec. 18-106. - Roof installation. 
    Where any antenna system is installed on a rooftop, the same must be mounted on its own platform or on a plate covering two or more rafters or joists, and shall be securely anchored. 
(Code 1960, § 8-25; Code 1982, § 6-106(b); Code 1999, § 18-329) 
Sec. 18-107. - Grounding. 
    Antenna systems shall be adequately grounded for protection against lightning with a proper ground wire. Lightning arresters shall be of a type consistent with the standards of the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., in accordance with the current issue of such standards. Both sides of the line must be adequately protected with proper resisters or neon lamps to remove static charges accumulated on the line and must match transmission line at television frequencies. When lead-in conductors of polyethylene ribbon-type are used, lightning arresters must be installed in each conductor. If a coaxial cable is used for the lead-in, suitable protection may be provided without lightning arresters by grounding the exterior metal sheath. Ground wires must be a minimum of No. 6 aluminum or copper for grounding masts and lightning arresters and must be installed in a mechanical manner with as few bends as possible, maintaining a clearance of at least two inches from any combustible material. Ground straps for grounding masts and attaching arresters to water or other pipes must be an approved fitting. 
(Code 1960, § 8-25; Code 1982, § 6-106(c); Code 1999, § 18-330) 
Sec. 18-108. - Proximity to streets, electrical lines. 
    No antenna system shall be mounted so as to project over any street, sidewalk, alley or public thoroughfare, or in such a manner as might be a hazard to public safety during periods of hurricane winds. No antenna system shall be mounted closer to any such street, sidewalk, alley or public thoroughfare nor closer to any electrical transmission lines of high voltage than the vertical distance between the top of the antenna system and the highest support which meets the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1960, § 8-25; Code 1982, § 6-106(d); Code 1999, § 18-331) 
Sec. 18-109. - Towers or mast supports. 
    Towers or mast supports constructed of a single pipe or series of pipes telescoped within itself, shall require guy wires at each joint or at such joints as are considered to be adequate for support, within the concepts of accepted engineering practices. 
(Code 1960, § 8-25; Code 1982, § 6-106(e); Code 1999, § 18-332) 
Sec. 18-110. - Guy wires. 
    Guy wires shall be of a noncorrosive material with a tensile strength of at least 600 pounds. The anchor points for guy wires shall be secured to withstand a strain, in the direction of application, of 600 pounds. Guy wires shall be so placed as not to interfere with or pass over any street, sidewalk, alley or public thoroughfare. 
(Code 1960, § 8-25; Code 1982, § 6-106(f); Code 1999, § 18-333) 
Sec. 18-111. - Miscellaneous hardware. 
    Miscellaneous hardware, such as brackets, turnbuckles, thimbles, clips, etc., must be hot-dipped galvanized or similarly treated for weather protection and for protection against corrosion and electrolytic action. Turnbuckles must be protected against turning by threading the guy wire through the turnbuckle or by other similar locking devices. 
(Code 1960, § 8-25; Code 1982, § 6-106(g); Code 1999, § 18-334) 
Sec. 18-112. - Transmission lines. 
    Transmission lines must be of a type consistent with the standards of Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., in accordance with the current issue of such standards and must be kept at least six inches clear of existing telephone or electric wires. Rawl plugs may be used only for support of transmission lines. Standoff insulators must be used at least every ten feet of length in running the transmission line down the building. 
(Code 1960, § 8-25; Code 1982, § 6-106(h); Code 1999, § 18-335) 
Sec. 18-113. - N.E.C., federal regulations; exception. 
    The current issue of the National Electrical Code is hereby adopted and approved as a part of this article as a minimum standard for any item not specifically covered hereby. The antenna system shall fully comply with any pertinent regulations of the Civil Aeronautics Board or the Federal Communications Commission. Provided, the provisions of this division shall not apply to demonstration antenna systems where the duration of their use does not exceed three days; provided, however, they shall be subject to being taken down as provided in section 18-114. 
(Code 1960, § 8-25; Code 1982, § 6-106(i); Code 1999, § 18-336) 
Sec. 18-114. - Dismantling or lowering during hurricane. 
    Upon the approach of a recognized hurricane of which the community has had adequate warning through the United States Weather Service, where it appears that winds of hurricane strength may be expected in gusts, it shall be the duty of each owner of an antenna system to take down or lower such antenna system to such extent as is reasonable and feasible in order to minimize the possibility of damage to or interruption of electrical service lines, and the possibility of such antenna systems becoming electrically charged through contact with power lines. 
(Code 1960, § 8-26; Code 1982, § 6-107; Code 1999, § 18-337) 
Secs. 18-115-18-141. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-142. - Determination. 
    All buildings or structures which have any or all of the following defects shall be deemed dangerous buildings: 
(1)  Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumbline passing through the center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base. 
(2)  Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show 33 percent or more of damage or deterioration of the supporting member or members, or 50 percent of damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or covering. 
(3)  Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used. 
(4)  Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to have become dangerous to life, safety, morals, or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the people of the city. 
(5)  Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living that they are unfit for human habitation, or are likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of those living therein. 
(6)  Those having light, air, and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of human beings who live or may live therein. 
(7)  Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes, or other means of communication. 
(8)  Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure members of the public or property. 
(9)  Those which, because of their conditions, are unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people of this city. 
(10)  Those buildings existing in violation of any provision of this chapter or chapter 38. 
(Code 1960, § 6-7; Code 1982, § 6-174; Code 1999, § 18-521) 
Sec. 18-143. - Nuisances declared. 
    All dangerous buildings within the terms of section 18-142 are hereby declared to be public nuisances, and shall be repaired, vacated, or demolished as provided in this article. 
(Code 1960, § 6-9; Code 1982, § 6-175; Code 1999, § 18-522) 
Sec. 18-144. - Standards for repair, vacation or demolition. 
    The following standards shall be followed in substance by the building official and the building commissioners in ordering repair, vacation, or demolition: 
(1)  If the dangerous building can reasonably be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this article, it shall be ordered repaired. 
(2)  If the dangerous building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated. 
(3)  In any case where a dangerous building is 50 percent damaged, decayed, or deteriorated from its original value or structure, it shall be demolished, and in all cases where a building cannot be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this article, it shall be demolished. In all cases where a dangerous building is a fire hazard existing or erected in violation of the terms of this article or any ordinance of the city or statute of the state, it shall be demolished. 
(Code 1960, § 6-8; Code 1982, § 6-176; Code 1999, § 18-523) 
Sec. 18-145. - Duties of building official. 
    The building official shall carry out the duties assigned by the city manager, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Annual inspection. Inspect or cause to be inspected once annually, all public buildings, schools, halls, churches, theaters, hotels, tenements, commercial, manufacturing, or loft buildings for the purpose of determining whether any conditions exist which render such places dangerous buildings within the terms of section 18-142. 
(2)  Inspection upon complaint. Inspect any building, wall or structure about which complaints are filed by any person to the effect that a building, wall or structure is or may be existing in violation of this article. 
(3)  Fire and police department reports. Inspect any building, wall or structure reported by the fire or police department as probably existing in violation of the terms of this article. 
(4)  Notice. Notify in writing the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent and all other persons having an interest in such building as shown by the deed books and official records in the office of the clerk of the county circuit court of any building found by him to be a dangerous building within the standards set forth in section 18-144, that: 
a.  The owner must vacate, or repair, or demolish such building in accordance with the terms of the notice and this article; 
b.  The occupant or lessee must vacate such building or may have it repaired in accordance with the notice and remain in possession; 
c.  The mortgagee, agent or other persons having an interest in such building as shown by the deed books and official records in the office of the clerk of the circuit court may, at his own risk, repair, vacate, or demolish such building or have such work or act done; 
provided that any person notified under this subsection to repair, vacate, or demolish any building shall be given such reasonable time, not exceeding 30 days, as may be necessary to do, or have done, the work or act required by the notice provided for herein. 
(5)  Orders. Set forth in the notice provided for in subsection (4) of this section, a description of the building or structure deemed unsafe, a statement of the particulars which make the building or structure a dangerous building and an order requiring the same to be put in such condition as to comply with the terms of this article within such length of time, not exceeding 30 days, as is reasonable. 
(6)  Noncompliance. Report to the building commissioners any noncompliance with the notice provided for in subsections (4) and (5) of this section. 
(7)  Testimony at hearings. Appear at all hearings conducted by the building commissioners, and testify as to the condition of dangerous buildings. 
(8)  Notice upon buildings. Place a notice on all dangerous buildings reading as follows: 
"This building has been found to be a dangerous building by the building official. This notice is to remain on this building until it is repaired, vacated, or demolished in accordance with the notice which has been given the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, or agent of this building, and all other persons having an interest in said building as shown by the deed books and official records in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of Hendry County, Florida. It is unlawful to remove this notice until such notice is complied with." 
(Code 1982, § 6-177; Code 1999, § 18-524; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(6-177), 12-19-1994) 
Secs. 18-146-18-173. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF BUILDING COMMISSIONERS 

Sec. 18-174. - Created. 
    There is hereby created a board of building commissioners, consisting of three persons, one of whom shall be a city commissioner, and two of whom shall be persons primarily engaged in building construction work, and who shall be appointed by the city commission. At each biennial organizational meeting of the city commission the terms of the then board members shall expire and the city commission shall appoint a new board. 
(Code 1960, § 6-6; Code 1982, § 6-173; Code 1999, § 18-525) 
Sec. 18-175. - Duties of building commissioners. 
    The building commissioners shall: 
(1)  Notice to owner. Upon receipt of a report of the building official as provided for in section 18-145, give written notice to the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee, agent and all other persons having an interest in such building as shown by the deed books and official records in the office of the clerk of the county circuit court, to appear before them on the date specified in the notice to show cause why the building or structure reported to be a dangerous building should not be repaired, vacated, or demolished in accordance with the statement of particulars set forth in the building official's notice provided for in section 18-145. 
(2)  Hearing. Hold a hearing and hear such testimony as the building official or the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee, or any other person having an interest in said building as shown by the deed books and official records in the office of the clerk of the circuit court shall offer relative to the dangerous building. 
(3)  Findings. Make written findings of fact from the testimony offered pursuant to subsection (2) of this section as to whether or not the building in question is a dangerous building within the terms of section 18-142. 
(4)  Order. Issue an order based upon findings of fact made pursuant to subsection (3) of this section commanding the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee, agent and all other persons having an interest in such building as shown by the deed books and official records in the office of the clerk of the circuit court to repair, vacate, or demolish any building found to be a dangerous building within the terms of this article and provide that any person so notified, except the owners, shall have the privilege of either vacating or repairing such dangerous building; or any person not the owner of such dangerous building but having an interest in such building, as shown by the deed books and official records in the office of the clerk of the circuit court, may demolish such dangerous building at his own risk to prevent the acquiring of a lien against the land upon which such dangerous building stands by the city as provided in subsection (5) of this section. 
(5)  Failure to comply with order. If the owner, occupant, mortgagee, or lessee fails to comply with the order provided for in subsection (4) of this section, within ten days, the building commissioners shall cause such building or structure to be repaired, vacated, or demolished as the facts may warrant, under the standards provided for in section 18-144 and shall, with the assistance of the city attorney, cause the costs of such repair, vacation, or demolition to be charged against the land on which the building existed as a municipal lien or cause such costs to be added to the tax duplicate as an assessment, or to be levied, as a special tax against the land upon which the building stands or did stand, or to be recovered in a suit at law against the owner; provided that, in cases where such procedure is desirable and any delay thereby caused will not be dangerous to the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of the people of this city, the building commissioners shall notify the city attorney to take legal action to force the owner to make all necessary repairs or demolish the building. 
(6)  Report to city attorney. Report to the city attorney the names of all persons not complying with the order provided for in subsection (4) of this section. 
(Code 1960, § 6-11; Code 1982, § 6-178; Code 1999, § 18-526) 
Sec. 18-176. - Duties of the city attorney. 
    The city attorney shall: 
(1)  Prosecute all persons failing to comply with the terms of the notices provided for in section 18-145 and the order provided for in section 18-175. 
(2)  Appear at all hearings before the building commissioners in regard to dangerous buildings. 
(3)  Bring suit to collect all municipal liens, assessments, or costs incurred by the building commissioners in repairing or causing to be vacated or demolished dangerous buildings. 
(4)  Take such other legal action as is necessary to carry out the terms and provisions of this article. 
(Code 1960, § 6-12; Code 1982, § 6-179; Code 1999, § 18-527) 
Sec. 18-177. - Emergency cases. 
    In cases where it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger to life or safety of any person unless a dangerous building as defined by section 18-142 is immediately repaired, vacated, or demolished, the building official shall report such facts to the building commissioners and the building commissioners shall cause the immediate repair, vacation, or demolition of such dangerous building. The costs of such emergency repair, vacation or demolition of such dangerous buildings shall be collected in the same manner as provided in section 18-175. 
(Code 1960, § 6-13; Code 1982, § 6-180; Code 1999, § 18-528) 
Sec. 18-178. - Service where owner absent from the city. 
    In cases, except emergency cases, where the owner, occupant, lessee, or mortgagee is absent from the city, all notices or orders provided for herein shall be sent by registered mail to the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee and all other persons having an interest in such building as shown by the deed books and official records in the office of the clerk of the county circuit court to the last known address of each, and a copy of such notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the dangerous building to which it relates. Such mailing and posting shall be deemed adequate service. 
(Code 1960, § 6-14; Code 1982, § 6-181; Code 1999, § 18-529) 
Sec. 18-179. - Fire department to report suspected violations. 
    The employees of the fire department shall make a report in writing to the building official of all buildings or structures which are, may be, or are suspected to be dangerous buildings within the terms of this article. Such reports must be delivered to the building official within 24 hours of the discovery of such buildings by any employee of the fire department. 
(Code 1960, § 6-16; Code 1982, § 6-182; Code 1999, § 18-530) 
Sec. 18-180. - Police department to report suspected violations. 
    All employees of the police department shall make a report in writing to the building official of any buildings or structures which are, may be, or are suspected to be dangerous buildings within the terms of this article. Such reports must be delivered to the building official within 24 hours of the discovery of such buildings by any employee of the police department. 
(Code 1960, § 6-17; Code 1982, § 6-183; Code 1999, § 18-531) 
Sec. 18-181. - Administrative liability. 
    No officer, agent, or employee of the city shall render himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this article. Any suit brought against any officer, agent, or employee of the city as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this article shall be defended by the city attorney until the final determination of the proceedings therein. 
(Code 1960, § 6-15; Code 1982, § 6-184; Code 1999, § 18-532) 
Sec. 18-182. - Violations; disregarding notices or orders; removing notices. 
(a)  The owner of any dangerous building who shall fail to comply with any notice or order to repair, vacate, or demolish said building given by any person authorized by this article to give such notice or order shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to the penalties provided by section 1-15 and a further sum of $10.00 for each and every day such failure to comply continues beyond the date fixed for compliance. 
(b)  The occupant or lessee in possession who fails to comply with any notice to vacate and who fails to repair such building in accordance with any notice given as provided for in this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to the penalties provided by section 1-15 and a further sum of $10.00 for each and every day such failure to comply continues beyond the date fixed for compliance. 
(c)  Any person removing the notice provided for in section 18-145 shall upon conviction be subject to the penalties provided by section 1-15. 
(Code 1960, § 6-18; Code 1982, § 6-185; Code 1999, § 18-533) 
Secs. 18-183-18-202. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR HABITABLE STRUCTURES AND OUTDOOR AREAS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-203. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned motor vehicle means a vehicle in an evident state of disrepair, and incapable of being moved under its own power, or lacking a current registration tag. 
    Accessory structure means a structure the use of which is incidental to that of the main building and which is attached thereto or located on the same premises. 
    Alter or alteration means any change or modification in construction or change of use as defined in the city building code. 
    Basement means that part of a building located partly or wholly underground. 
    Building means any structure that encloses a space used for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind; a combination of materials to form a construction adapted to permanent or continuous occupancy for use for public, institutional, residence, business, or storage purposes. 
    Building code means the building code adopted by the city. 
    Cellar. See Basement. 
    City means the City of Clewiston or its enforcement officer as designated by the building official charged with the responsibility or enforcing the provisions of this Code. 
    Code enforcement board means the city board of building commissioners. 
    Deterioration means the condition or appearance of a building or parts thereof, characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting, or other evidence of physical decay or neglect, excessive use, or lack of maintenance. 
    Dormitory means a residence hall providing sleeping rooms or a large room containing a number of beds. 
    Dwelling means any building which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants, whether or not such building is occupied or vacant. 
    Dwelling unit means any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating, whether or not such unit is occupied or vacant. 
    Enforcement officer means the person the city manager shall designate as the building official of the city or such other person as the code enforcement officer. 
    Exposed to public view means any premises, or any part thereof, or any building, or any part thereof, which may be lawfully viewed by the public or any member thereof, from a sidewalk, street, alleyway, or from any adjoining or neighboring premises. 
    Exterior of premises means those portions of a building which are exposed to public view and the open space of any premises outside of any building erected thereon. 
    Extermination means the control, elimination, or removal of insects, rodents, or other pests by eliminating their harboring places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest eliminating methods. 
    Fire hazard means anything or any act which increases or may cause an increase of the hazard or menace of fire to a greater degree than that customarily recognized as normal by experts in preventing, suppressing, or extinguishing fire; or which may obstruct, delay or hinder, or may become the cause of an obstruction, a delay, a hazard or a hindrance to the prevention, suppression, or extinguishment of fire. 
    Floor space means the total area of all enclosed space in a building or structure. 
    Garbage means the animal, vegetable, fruit, or other waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food. 
    Habitable room means a space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating, or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces, and similar areas are not considered habitable rooms. 
    Health officer means the director of the health department of the county. 
    Infestation means the existence of insects, rodents, or other pests so as to make the building or premises unpleasant, unsafe, or unsanitary. 
    Major violation means a condition existing on a premises which is below the minimum standards set out by this article and which is dangerous to the health or safety of the occupants, passersby, or persons in contiguous areas; or a series of minor violations which, when considered together, present a hazardous or undesirable condition. 
    Minor violation means a condition which is below the minimum standards set out by this article, but which is not serious enough to be considered a major violation. 
    Mixed occupancy means any building containing one or more dwelling units or rooming units and also having a portion thereof devoted to nondwelling uses. 
    Multiple dwelling means two or more dwelling units whose occupants are living independently of each other and doing their own cooking in the dwelling unit, including flats and apartments. 
    Nuisance or public nuisance means any one or combination of the following: 
(1)  Any public nuisance known in common law or in equity jurisprudence or as provided by the statutes of the state or ordinances of the city. 
(2)  Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to the health or safety of children and others, whether in a building, on the premises of a building, or upon an unoccupied lot. This includes, but is not limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, unused appliances, abandoned motor vehicles, and any structurally unsound fences or structures; lumber, trash, vegetation, such as poison ivy, oak, or sumac, which may prove a hazard for inquisitive persons. Abandoned buildings are attractive nuisances when they are unsecured or unendurable and when, by reason of abandonment or neglect, they contain unsound walls or flooring, unsafe wiring, fire hazards, or other unsafe conditions as further defined herein. Unsafe conditions may include such neglect of security that opportunities for criminal activity persist to the danger and detriment of the neighborhood. 
(3)  Physical or unsanitary conditions, or conditions so lacking of illumination or ventilation as to be dangerous to human life or detrimental to the health of persons on or near the premises where the condition exists. 
(4)  Major or minor violations of this article which cumulatively impact upon premises to the point whereby conditions endanger human life or substantially and detrimentally affect the safety or security of occupants, nearby occupants, or passersby. 
(5)  Whatever renders air, food, water, or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the health of human beings. 
(6)  Fire hazards. 
    Operator means any person who has charge, care or control of a premises or a part thereof, whether with or without the knowledge or consent of the owner. 
    Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and any person, group of persons, company, association, or corporation in whose name tax bills on the property are submitted. It shall also mean any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others shall have: 
(1)  Legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
(2)  Charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner, executor, executrix, administrator, trustee, guardian of the estate of the owner, mortgagee, or vendee in possession, or assignee of rents, lessee, or other person in control of a building; or their duly authorized agents. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this article, and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he were the owner. It is his responsibility to notify the actual owner of the reported infractions of these regulations pertaining to the property which apply to the owner. 
    Placarded means the placement of a notice on a dangerous building in accordance with the code. 
    Plumbing means all of the following supplies, facilities, and equipment: gas pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bath tubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, catchbasins, vents and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer, or gas lines and water pipes and lines; sanitary drainage or storm drainage facilities, the venting system and the public or private water supply systems, within or adjacent to any building structure, or conveyance; also, the practice and materials used in the installation, maintenance, extension, or alteration of stormwater, liquid waste, gas or sewerage, and water supply systems of any premises to their connection with the public disposal or other acceptance terminal. 
    Premises means a lot, plot, or parcel of land, including the buildings or structures thereon. 
    Public areas means an occupied open space adjoining a building and on the same property that is maintained accessible to the public. 
    Public nuisance. See Nuisance. 
    Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, abandoned appliances, and solid market and industrial wastes. 
    Repair means the replacement of existing work with the same kind of material used in the existing work, not including additional work that would change the structural safety of the building, or that would affect or change required exit facilities, a vital element of an elevator, plumbing, gas piping, wiring, or heating installations, or that would be in violation of a provision of law or ordinance. The term "repair" shall not apply to any change of construction. 
    Residential occupancy means a building in which sleeping accommodations are provided. Such buildings include the following: dwellings, multiple dwellings, lodgings, houses, roominghouses, and dormitories as defined by the city building code. 
    Rooming unit means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes. 
    Roominghouse means a dwelling used, or intended to be used, for the furnishing of sleeping accommodations for pay or other considerations to transient or permanent guests. 
    Rubbish means combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage. 
    Sanitary sewer means any sanitary sewer owned, operated, and maintained by the city and available for public use for the disposal of sewage. 
    Sewage means waste from a flush toilet, bathtub, sink, lavatory, dishwashing or laundry machine, or the water-carried waste from any other fixture or equipment or machine. 
    Skirting means the technique by which the space beneath the structure is effectively screened from view and protected from invasion of small animals which might establish a habitat, create sanitation problems, or cause physical destruction of electrical, mechanical, or structural components. 
    Stairway means one or more flights of stairs and the necessary landings and platforms connecting them to form a continuous and uninterrupted passage from one story to another in a building or structure. 
    Story means that portion of building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. 
    Structure means a combination of any materials, whether fixed or portable, forming a construction, including buildings. 
    Supplied means paid for, furnished, or provided by or under control of, the owner or operator. 
    Ventilation means the process of supplying and removing air by natural or mechanical means to or from any space. 
    Violator means any owner, operator, or legally responsible person who owns or maintains property in violation of city codes. Owners are ultimately responsible for controlling conditions and uses on their property. 
    Washroom means an enclosed space containing one or more sinks, tubs, showers, or basins and which also includes toilets, urinals, or fixtures serving similar purposes. 
    Water closet compartment means an enclosed space containing one or more toilets which may also contain one or more lavatories, urinals, and other plumbing fixtures. 
    Weathering means deterioration, decay, or damage caused by exposure to the elements. 
    Yard means an open space or grade between a building or structure and the adjoining lot lines unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a building or structure from the ground upward. 
    Yard area means the yard and that portion of property extending to the street driving surface, including easements and rights-of-way, regardless of the placement of a fence. 
(Code 1982, § 6-377; Code 1999, § 18-551; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-204. - Purpose. 
    The overall purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, and welfare by establishing a minimum standard governing the maintenance, appearance, and condition of residential and mobile home parks, commercial, office, institutional, and industrial premises within the city limits, and to other physical components and conditions essential to make the aforesaid facilities fit for occupancy use and safety to life and property from fire, nuisances and other hazards, and to conserve and maintain the viable housing stock in accordance with basic standards; to minimize the degree to which the economic value of adjacent property is adversely affected or impaired; or to reduce or eliminate those factors which contribute to neighborhood blight. 
(Code 1982, § 6-366; Code 1999, § 18-552; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-205. - Enforcement officer. 
    The city manager shall designate the building official or such other person or persons to administer all inspections, regulations, enforcement, and hearings concerning violations of the minimum standards code. 
(Code 1982, § 6-367; Code 1999, § 18-553; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-206. - Applicability; existing buildings and structures. 
    The provisions of this article apply to every building or structure irrespective of when such building or structure was constructed, altered, or repaired. Alterations, repairs, or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing building without requiring the entire building to comply with all the requirements of this article pursuant to the following conditions: 
(1)  If, within any period of 12 months, alterations or repairs costing in excess of 50 percent of the then physical value of the building are made to an existing building, such building shall be made to conform to the requirements of the city building code applicable to a new building. 
(2)  If an existing building is damaged by fire or otherwise in excess of 50 percent of its then physical value before such damage is repaired, it shall be made to conform to the requirements of the city building code applicable to a new building. 
(3)  If the cost of such alterations or repairs within any 12-month period or the amount of such damage as referred to in subsection (2) of this section is more than 25 but not more than 50 percent of the then physical value of the building, the portions to be altered or repaired shall be made to conform to the requirements of the city building code applicable to a new building to such extent as the building official may determine. 
(4)  Repairs and alterations, not covered by the preceding subsections of this section, restoring a building to its condition previous to damage or deterioration, or altering it in conformity with the provisions of the city building code or in which manner as will not extend or increase an existing nonconformity or hazard, may be made with the same kind of materials as those of which the building is constructed. 
(5)  For the purpose of this article, the physical value of the building or structure, as hereinafter defined, shall be determined by the assessed value of the structure as recorded on the most recent certified tax roll. 
(Code 1982, § 6-368; Code 1999, § 18-554; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-207. - Hardship waivers and appeals. 
    Where the literal application of the requirements of this article would appear to cause undue hardship on an owner or tenant and the violation is a minor violation as defined in this article, the board of building commissioners may waive or modify the requirements for compliance. When it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of this article or any of the regulations therein has been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the owner of such building or structure or his duly authorized agent may appeal the decision of the building official to the board of building commissioners in writing within 20 days after receipt of written notice of the violation. 
(Code 1982, § 6-369; Code 1999, § 18-555; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-208. - Maintenance required. 
    All buildings or structures, both existing and new, and all parts thereof shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by this article in a building when erected, altered, or repaired shall be maintained in good working order. 
(Code 1982, § 6-370; Code 1999, § 18-556; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-209. - Higher standard to prevail in case of conflict with other ordinances or laws. 
    In any case where the provisions of this article impose a higher standard than set forth in any other applicable ordinances or state or federal laws, then the standard as set forth herein shall prevail, but if the provisions of this article impose a lower standard than any other applicable ordinances, state or federal laws, then the higher standard contained in any such ordinance or law shall prevail. 
(Code 1982, § 6-371; Code 1999, § 18-557; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-210. - Liability. 
    Any officer or employee of the city or member of the board of building commissioners charged with the enforcement of this article in the discharge of his duties shall not thereby render himself liable personally, and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. 
(Code 1982, § 6-372; Code 1999, § 18-558; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-211. - Enforcement of and compliance with other ordinances. 
    Compliance with this article shall not constitute a defense against any violation of any other ordinance of the city, nor shall any provision of this article relieve any owner or operator from complying with other city ordinances or any official from enforcing any such ordinances. 
(Code 1982, § 6-373; Code 1999, § 18-559; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-212. - Right of entry; inspections. 
(a)  When the enforcement officer has reasonable cause to believe that there exists any violation of this Code, the enforcement officer shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons that have charge or control of such property and request entry. 
(b)  If such building, structure, or premises is occupied by the owner, the enforcement officer shall first present proper credentials and request entry from the owner. 
(c)  If such building, structure, or premises is occupied by a person other than the owner or such person representing the actual owner, the enforcement officer shall first present proper credentials, then inform the occupant that an inspection will be scheduled and a reasonable effort will be made to inform the owner or the owner's representative of the scheduled inspection, affording the owner or owner's representative the opportunity to be present for the inspection. 
(d)  If entry is refused, the enforcement officer shall, with the concurrence of the chairperson of the board of building commissioners, have every remedy provided by law to secure entry. However, in cases of emergency where extreme hazards are known to exist which involve the potential loss of life or severe property damage, the limitations set forth in this section shall not apply. 
(e)  When the enforcement officer shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care, or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the enforcement officer for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1982, § 6-374; Code 1999, § 18-560; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-213. - Procedure where violation is discovered. 
(a)  When the code enforcement officer has determined that there are reasonable grounds to believe there has been or is a violation of any provision of this article, the code enforcement officer shall give notice of such violations or alleged violations to the person responsible for the correction thereof. 
(b)  Notice content shall: 
(1)  Be in writing. 
(2)  Include a description of the real estate or address sufficient for identification. 
(3)  Specify the violation by code citation and factual description and the remedial action required. 
(4)  Include a schedule as to the time allowed for completion of the required improvements necessary to bring the building into compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(c)  Notice service. 
(1)  The written notice referred to in this section shall be considered adequately delivered by depositing the notice in the United States Post Office, addressed to the owner at the last known address with the postage prepaid thereon, certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(2)  The time given to comply with minor violations as defined in this article shall not exceed 120 days. The time given to comply with major violations shall not exceed 45 days. 
(3)  Any violation not corrected in the time and manner specified in the notice pursuant to this section may be referred to the board of building commissioners created pursuant to section 18-174. Major or cumulative minor violations which are deteriorating into hazardous or nuisance conditions may also be subject to proceedings under chapter 26. 
(Code 1982, § 6-375; Code 1999, § 18-561; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-214. - Hearings. 
    Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this article, or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, may request a hearing on the matter before the board of building commissioners pursuant to section 18-175. 
(Code 1982, § 6-376; Code 1999, § 18-562; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Secs. 18-215-18-236. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HOUSING STRUCTURES 

Sec. 18-237. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to protect the public health, safety, morals, and welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the maintenance, appearance, and living conditions of housing structures. Through the sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire, nuisances and other hazards, the viable housing stock shall be conserved and maintained to at least the basic, adequate standards essential to make housing fit for occupancy and use. The basic viability of neighborhoods shall be protected by minimizing blight and nuisance conditions. This division imposes certain responsibilities and duties upon owners and operators of property, authorizes inspections and hearings regarding the conditions on property and violations of this division, and provides for remedial measures including repair, vacation, and demolition of structures or nuisance conditions. This division is hereby declared to be remedial and essential for the public interest, and it is intended that this division be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes stated herein. 
(Code 1982, § 6-389; Code 1999, § 18-581; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-238. - Applicability. 
(a)  Every building used in whole or in part as a dwelling unit or as two or more dwelling units, or as roominghouses or boardinghouses, shall conform to the requirements of this division irrespective of the primary use of such building, and irrespective of when such building may have been constructed, altered, or repaired. 
(b)  This division establishes minimum standards for occupancy, and does not replace or modify standards otherwise established for construction, replacement, or repair of buildings except such as are contrary to and less stringent than the provisions of this division. 
(c)  No owner or operator shall let for occupancy by any person any premises, dwelling, dwelling unit, roominghouse, or building which contains major violations as defined in this division. 
(Code 1982, § 6-390; Code 1999, § 18-582; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-239. - Violations. 
    Procedures for enforcement of this division shall be as provided generally in sections 18-213 and 18-214 regarding notices and hearings. Procedures for enforcement of premises unfit for occupancy and/or subject to demolition are supplementary as provided in division 5 of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 6-391; Code 1999, § 18-583; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-240. - Administration and inspections. 
    Administration of and inspections for the purposes of this division are as provided generally in sections 18-205 through 18-214. 
(Code 1982, § 6-392; Code 1999, § 18-584; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-241. - Minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities. 
    No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let or sublet to another for occupancy, any dwelling or dwelling unit designed or intended to be used for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking, or eating therein, nor shall any vacant dwelling building be permitted to exist which does not comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Sanitary facilities. Every dwelling unit shall contain not less than a kitchen sink, lavatory, tub or shower, and a water closet, all in good working condition and properly connected to an approved water and sewer system. Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition free from defects, leaks, and obstructions. 
(2)  Location of sanitary facilities. All required plumbing fixtures shall be located within the dwelling unit and be accessible to the occupants of same. The water closet, tub or shower, and lavatory shall be located in a room affording privacy to the user and shall be accessible from habitable rooms, hallways, corridors, or other protected or enclosed areas. 
(3)  Hot and cold water supply. Every dwelling unit shall have an adequate supply of both hot and cold water connected to the kitchen sink, lavatory, and tub or shower. All water shall be supplied through an approved distribution system connected to a potable water supply. 
(4)  Water heating facilities. Every dwelling unit shall have water heating facilities which are properly installed and maintained in a safe and good working condition and are capable of heating water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than 110 degrees Fahrenheit. Apartment houses may use a centralized water heating facility capable of heating an adequate amount of water as required by the standard plumbing code to not less than 110 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(5)  Heating facilities. 
a.  Every dwelling unit shall have heating facilities which are properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working conditions, and are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, and bathrooms in every dwelling unit located therein to a temperature of at least 68 degrees Fahrenheit (20 degrees Celsius) at a distance three feet above floor level under minimum winter conditions. 
b.  Where a central heating system is not provided, each dwelling unit shall be provided with facilities whereby heating appliances may be connected. 
c.  Unvented fuel burning heaters shall be prohibited except for gas heaters listed for unvented uses and the total input rating of the unvented heaters is less than 30 BTU per hour per cubic foot of room content. Unvented fuel burning heaters shall be prohibited in bedrooms. 
(6)  Kitchen facilities. Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen equipped with the following minimum facilities: 
a.  Food preparation surfaces impervious to water and free of defects which would trap food or liquid. 
b.  Shelving, cabinets, or drawers for the storage of food and cooking and eating utensils, all of which shall be maintained in good repair. 
c.  Freestanding or permanently installed cookstove. Portable electric cooking equipment shall not fulfill this requirement. Portable cooking equipment employing flame shall be prohibited. 
d.  Mechanical refrigeration equipment for the storage of perishable foodstuffs, with the exception that nothing herein shall preclude a written agreement between an owner and tenant that the tenant will furnish mechanical refrigeration equipment and/or a cookstove as required in this section. It shall be an affirmative defense available to an owner charged with a violation of this section if such an agreement exists. 
(7)  Garbage disposal facilities. Every dwelling unit shall have adequate garbage disposal facilities or garbage storage containers of a type and location approved by the applicable governing body. 
(8)  Fire protection. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for occupancy, any building or structure which does not comply with the applicable provisions of the fire prevention code of the applicable governing body. 
(9)  Smoke detector systems. Every dwelling unit shall be provided with an approved listed smoke detector, installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and listing. When activated, the detector shall provide an audible alarm. The detector shall be tested in accordance with and meet the requirements of UL 217, Single and Multiple Station Smoke Detectors. 
(Code 1982, § 6-393; Code 1999, § 18-585; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-242. - Minimum requirements for ventilation. 
(a)  Windows, skylights. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which can be easily opened, or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room. 
(1)  The total of openable window area in every habitable room shall equal a total at least 45 percent of the minimum window area size or minimum skylight-type window size, as required by this chapter, or shall have other approved, equivalent ventilation. 
(2)  Yearround mechanical ventilating air conditioning systems may be substituted for windows, as required herein, in rooms other than rooms used for sleeping purposes. Window type air conditioning units are not included in this exception. 
(b)  Bathroom. Every bathroom shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms. No window or skylight shall be required in adequately ventilated bathrooms equipped with an approved ventilating system. 
(Code 1982, § 6-394; Code 1999, § 18-586; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-243. - Electric lights and outlets. 
(a)  Where there is electric service to the building structure, every habitable room or space shall contain at least two separate and remote receptacle outlets (receptacles rendered inaccessible by appliances fastened in place or by large appliances occupying dedicated space shall not be considered as these required outlets), and a wall or ceiling lighting outlet controlled by a switch shall be provided. Every hall, water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room or furnace room shall contain at least one ceiling-mounted or wall-mounted lighting fixture. In addition to the lighting fixture in every bathroom and laundry room, there shall be provided at least one receptacle outlet. Any new bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection. 
(b)  Every common hall and inside stairway in every building, other than one-family dwellings, shall be adequately lighted at all times with an illumination of at least one foot-candle intensity at the floor in the darkest portion of the normally travelled stairs and passageways. 
(Code 1982, § 6-395; Code 1999, § 18-587; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-244. - Minimum requirements for electrical systems. 
    Every electrical outlet and fixture, all wiring and equipment shall be installed, maintained, and connected to a source of electric power in accordance with the provisions of the electrical code adopted by the city. 
(Code 1982, § 6-396; Code 1999, § 18-588; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-245. - General requirements for the exterior and interior of structures. 
(a)  Foundation. The building foundation system shall be maintained in a safe manner and be capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. 
(b)  Skirting. Existing skirting shall be maintained free from broken or missing sections, pieces, or cross members. Skirting shall be securely attached and sized from the ground to the lower outside perimeter of the structure. 
(c)  Replacement skirting. Replacement or new skirting shall be constructed of materials intended for exterior use and properly sized and mounted to prevent free access to the crawl space of the structure. Crawl space access grilles or door and ventilation grilles shall be sized according to the local code requirements. 
(d)  Exterior walls. All siding material shall be kept in repair. Every exterior wall shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards, unsealed cracks and any other condition which might admit rain or dampness to the interior portion of the walls or to the occupied spaces of the building. 
(e)  Roofs. Roofs shall be structurally sound and maintained in a safe manner and have no defects which might admit rain or cause dampness in the walls or interior portion of the building. All portions, additions, or sections of a roof, including, but not limited to, fascia, eaves, soffits, sheathing, rafter tails, barge rafters, vent screening, gutters, downspouts, roof jacks, lead or metal flashing, shall be complete with all trim strips, moldings, brackets, braces, and supports in accordance with common building practices. No items shall display signs of deterioration, abuse, or improper installation that could be construed to affect the purpose of that item or cause damage to the immediate area or roof structure that could allow dampness or admit rain to the interior of that building. 
(f)  Means of egress. Every dwelling unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress with a minimum ceiling height of seven feet leading to a safe and open space at ground level. Stairs shall have a minimum head room of six feet, eight inches. 
(g)  Stairs, porches, and appurtenances. Every inside and outside stair, porch, and any appurtenance thereto shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. 
(h)  Protective railings. Protective railings shall be required on any unenclosed structure over 30 inches from the ground level. 
(i)  Windows. Every window shall be substantially weathertight, watertight, and rodentproof, and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair. 
(j)  Windows to be glazed. Every window sash shall be fully supplied with glass window panes, or an approved substitute, which are without open cracks or holes. 
(k)  Window sash. Window sash shall be properly fitted and weathertight within the window frame. 
(l)  Windows to be openable. Every window required for light and ventilation for habitable rooms shall be capable of being easily opened and secured in position by window hardware. 
(m)  Exterior doors. 
(1)  Every exterior door, basement or cellar door, and hatchway shall be substantially weathertight, watertight, and rodentproof, and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair. 
(2)  Every exterior door shall be provided with properly installed hardware that is maintained to ensure reasonable ease of operation to open, close, and secure as intended by the manufacturer of the door and the attached hardware. 
(n)  Exterior door frames. Exterior door frames shall be properly maintained. Weatherstripping and thresholds, as required, are to be weathertight, rodent and insect restrictive when the door is in a closed position. Exterior door jambs, stops, headers, and moldings shall be securely attached to the structure and maintained in good condition without splitting or deterioration that would minimize the strength and security in a closed position. 
(o)  Screens. Dwelling units which do not have a central air conditioning system shall have screens on all exterior openable windows and doors used or required for ventilation. Screens on windows and doors shall be stretched and fitted and maintained without open rips or tears. Screens on porches, balconies, or other appurtenances shall be maintained in good repair. Screen enclosures, such as those of swimming pools, shall be maintained in good repair or, where not required for security, the screens may be removed. 
(p)  Protective treatment. All exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. All siding shall be weather resistant and watertight. All masonry joints shall be sufficiently tuck pointed to ensure water and air tightness. 
(q)  Accessory structures. Garages, storage buildings, and all other accessory structures shall be maintained and kept in good repair and sound structural condition. 
(r)  Interior floors, walls, and ceilings. Every floor, interior wall, and ceiling shall be substantially rodentproof, shall be kept in sound condition and good repair, and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. Every toilet, bathroom, and kitchen floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be substantially impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(s)  Structural supports. Every structural element of the dwelling shall be maintained structurally sound and show no evidence of deterioration which would render it incapable of carrying normal loads. 
(t)  Protective railings for interior stairs. Interior stairs and stairwells more than three risers high shall have handrails located in accordance with the requirements of the building code. Handrails or protective railings shall be capable of bearing normally imposed loads and be maintained in good condition. 
(u)  Interior doors. Every existing interior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame and shall be capable of being opened and closed by being properly and securely attached to jambs, headers, or tracks as intended by the manufacturer of the attachment hardware. 
(v)  Interior door hardware. Every interior door shall be provided with proper hardware, securely attached and maintained in good condition. Hasp lock assemblies are not permitted on the exterior side of the door of habitable rooms. 
(w)  Bathroom doors. Privacy of bathrooms shall be afforded by doors complete with privacy hardware intended by the manufacturer for that purpose. 
(x)  Maximum dwelling space requirements. 
(1)  Required space in dwelling unit. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor space for the first occupant thereof and at least 100 additional square feet of floor area per additional occupant. The floor space shall be calculated on the basis of the total area of all habitable rooms. 
(2)  Required space in sleeping rooms. In every dwelling unit, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 60 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupancy shall contain at least 30 square feet of floor space for each occupant thereafter. 
(3)  Minimum ceiling height. Habitable (space) room shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet, measured to the lowest projection from the ceiling. If any room in a building has a sloping ceiling, the prescribed ceiling height for the room is required in only one-half of the room area. No portion of the room measuring less than five feet from the finished floor to the finished ceiling shall be included in any computation of the minimum room area. 
(y)  Occupancy of dwelling unit below grade. No basement or cellar space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit unless: 
(1)  The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and surface runoff water and are insulated against dampness; 
(2)  The total window area in each room is equal to at least the minimum window area size as required in this article; 
(3)  Such required minimum window area is located entirely above the grade of the ground adjoining such window area; and 
(4)  The total of openable window area in each room is equal to at least the minimum as required in this article, except where there is supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation. 
(Code 1982, § 6-397; Code 1999, § 18-589; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-246. - Sanitation requirements. 
(a)  Sanitation. Every owner of a multiple dwelling shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or common areas of the dwelling and premises thereof. 
(b)  Cleanliness. Every owner is responsible to require every tenant of a dwelling unit to keep in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit, and premises thereof which the tenant occupies or which is provided for this particular use. 
(c)  Garbage disposal. Every owner is responsible to require every tenant of a dwelling or dwelling unit to dispose of all garbage and any other organic waste which might provide food for rodents and dispose of all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the garbage disposal facility or garbage/rubbish container. All garbage/rubbish containers placed outdoors shall be required to have wind resistant lids. 
(d)  Care of premises. It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of a residential building, structure, or property to utilize the premises of such residential property for the open storage of any abandoned motor vehicle or appliance, icebox, refrigerator, stove, glass, building material, building rubbish or similar items. It shall be the duty and responsibility of every such owner and occupant to keep the premises of such residential property clean and to remove from the premises all such abandoned items as listed in this subsection, including, but not limited to, weeds, dead trees, trash, garbage, etc., upon notice pursuant to this division. 
(e)  Extermination. Every occupant of a single dwelling and every owner of a building containing two or more dwelling units shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests within the building or premises, with the exception that extermination of wood-destroying organisms shall, in all cases, be the sole responsibility of the building owner. 
(f)  Use and operation of supplied plumbing fixtures. Every owner and occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof. 
(Code 1982, § 6-390; Code 1999, § 18-590; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-247. - Roominghouses. 
(a)  Compliance exceptions. No person shall operate a roominghouse, or shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any rooming unit in any roominghouse, except in compliance with the provisions of this division as modified in this section. 
(b)  License required. No person shall operate a roominghouse without the required state and city licenses. 
(c)  Sanitary facilities. At least one toilet, washbasin, and bathtub or shower, properly connected to a water and sewer system in good working condition, shall be supplied for each 15 guests or major portion thereof for each sex. 
(d)  Water heater required. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot water at all times. 
(e)  Required living space. Every roominghouse shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor space for the first occupant thereof and at least 100 additional square feet of floor space per additional occupant. 
(f)  Minimum floor space for sleeping purposes. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor space and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one person shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor space for each occupant thereafter. 
(g)  Exit requirement. Every rooming unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to safe and open space at ground level, as required by the laws of the governed area of the state. 
(h)  Sanitary conditions. The owner and operator of every roominghouse shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors, and ceilings, and for maintenance of a sanitary condition in every other part of the roominghouse; and each shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises where the entire structure or building is leased or occupied by the operator. 
(Code 1982, § 6-399; Code 1999, § 18-591; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-248. - Occupant responsibility. 
(a)  Nothing in this division shall be interpreted or construed to relieve any occupant of a dwelling unit from any obligation placed or required by federal or state law or city ordinance. 
(b)  No occupant of a dwelling unit shall commit any act of vandalism, malicious mischief, or willful destruction of the property belonging to the owner, nor shall such occupant intentionally litter or cause any accumulation of trash or debris in or about the dwelling unit or any common areas appurtenant thereto. 
(c)  Any person violating the provisions of subsection (b) of this section may be prosecuted as provided in section 1-15, or may be subject to proceedings under chapter 26. 
(Code 1982, § 6-400; Code 1999, § 18-592; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Secs. 18-249-18-274. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COMMERCIAL, OFFICE, INSTITUTIONAL, AND INDUSTRIAL BUILDINGS 

Sec. 18-275. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to protect the public health, safety, morals, and welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the maintenance, appearance, and condition of commercial, office, institutional, and industrial premises; to establish minimum standards governing utilities, facilities, and other physical components and conditions essential to make such facilities fit for occupancy and use; to fix certain responsibilities and duties upon owners and operators; to authorize and establish procedures for the inspection of commercial, office, institutional, and industrial premises; to fix penalties for violations of this division, and to provide for the repair, demolition, or vacation of commercial, business, or industrial premises. This division is hereby declared to be remedial and essential for the public interest, and it is intended that this division be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes as stated herein. 
(Code 1982, § 6-411; Code 1999, § 18-611; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-276. - Applicability. 
    Every commercial, office, institutional, or industrial establishment and the premises on which it is situated in the city, used or intended to be used accordingly, shall comply with the provisions of this division, whether or not such building shall have been constructed, altered, or repaired before or after the enactment of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and irrespective of any permits or licenses which shall have been issued for the use or occupancy of the building or premises for the construction or repair of the building, or for the installation or repair of equipment or facilities prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. This division establishes minimum standards for the initial and continued occupancy; any use therein shall be nevertheless regulated by and subject to the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1982, § 6-412; Code 1999, § 18-612; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-277. - Violations. 
    Procedures for violations of this division shall be as provided generally in sections 18-213 and 18-214 regarding notices and hearings. Procedures for violations rendering premises unfit for occupancy and/or subject to demolition are supplementary as provided in division 5 of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 6-413; Code 1999, § 18-613; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-278. - Administration and inspections. 
    Administration of and inspections for the purposes of this division are as provided generally in division 1 of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 6-414; Code 1999, § 18-614; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-279. - Duties and responsibilities of owners and operators. 
(a)  All parts of the premises under the control of any owner or operator shall be kept in clean and sanitary condition and the occupant shall refrain from performing any acts which would render other parts of the premises unclean or unsanitary or which would obstruct the owner or operator from performing any duty required under this article or maintaining the premises in clean and sanitary condition. 
(b)  Every owner and operator shall be responsible for the elimination of infestation in and on the premise subject to his control. 
(c)  Every owner and operator shall be responsible for willfully or maliciously causing damage to any part of the premises. 
(d)  Every owner and operator shall maintain all plumbing fixtures in a clean and sanitary condition, and they shall not deposit any material in any fixture or sewer system which would result in stoppage of or damage to the fixture or sewer system. 
(e)  Where the owner would not otherwise know of a defect of any facility, utility, or equipment required to be furnished hereunder and the same is defective or inoperable, each operator affected thereby shall, upon learning of such defect, provide notice to the owner or person in charge of the premises. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to provide a defense to any owner violating this division. Owners are presumed responsible for their properties; however, in such circumstances, operators may be held jointly and severally liable, as well as owners. 
(Code 1982, § 6-415; Code 1999, § 18-616; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-280. - Specific maintenance. 
(a)  The exterior of every structure or accessory structure (including fences, signs, and storefronts) shall be maintained in good repair and shall be substantially weathertight, watertight, and shall be made impervious to the adverse effects of weather and be maintained in sound condition and good repair. All surfaces shall be maintained free of broken glass, loose shingles, crumbling stone or brick, excessive peeling paint or other conditions reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance. 
(b)  All reconstruction of walls and sidings shall conform to the requirements of the city building code and shall be finished in a manner such that the materials used will not be of a kind that by their appearance, under prevailing appraisal practices and standards, will depreciate the value of neighboring and adjoining premises. 
(c)  Floors, interior walls, and ceilings of every structure shall be structurally sound and maintained in good repair. 
(d)  Floors shall be considered to be structurally sound and in good repair when capable of safely bearing imposed loads and shall be maintained at all times in a good condition so as to be smooth, clean, free from open cracks, breaks, and other hazards. 
(e)  Walls and ceilings shall be considered to be in good repair when clean, free from open cracks, breaks, loose plaster, and similar conditions. Walls shall be provided with paint, paper sealing material or other protective covering so that the walls and ceilings shall be kept clean, free of visible foreign matter, sanitary, and well-maintained at all times. 
(f)  All roofs shall have a suitable covering free of holes, cracks, or excessively worn surfaces, so as to prevent the entrance of moisture into the structure and provide reasonable durability. Roofs, fascia, eaves, soffits, gutters, downspouts, and flashing shall be maintained in a safe manner and have no defects which might admit rain or cause dampness in the walls or interior portion of the building. 
(g)  Every lavatory and water closet shall be in good working condition and properly connected to an approved water and sewer system. Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free from defects, leaks, and obstructions. Washroom and water closet compartment floors shall be surfaced with water resistant materials and shall be kept in a dry, clean, and sanitary condition at all times. 
(h)  Supporting structural members are to be kept structurally sound, free of deterioration, and capable of bearing imposed loads safely. 
(i)  Every washroom and water closet compartment shall be provided with permanently installed artificial lighting fixtures with a switch and wall plate so located and maintained that there is no danger of short circuiting from water, from other bathroom facilities, or from the splashing of water. 
(j)  All occupied premises shall be properly connected to and be provided with electric power through safely insulated conductors conforming to the National Electrical Code. 
(k)  All wiring and equipment shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of the National Electrical Code. Flexible cords shall not be permitted as a substitute for the fixed wiring of a structure. No ceiling or wall fixture shall be used for supplying power to equipment other than that for which they are designed. 
(l)  The owner and/or operator shall each have the duty and full responsibility of providing garbage storage containers. 
(m)  Inflammable or combustible liquids or other materials may not be stored on the premises unless they are of a type approved for storage by the regulations of the city and fire marshal, and then only in such quantities and in such fireproof storage containers as may be prescribed by the regulations of such department. 
(n)  Adequate runoff drains shall be provided and maintained in accordance with the appropriate provisions of the ordinances of the city to eliminate any return or excessive accumulation of stormwater. 
(o)  Sources of infestation and all nuisance conditions shall be abated, or they shall be subject to enforcement actions as provided in division 5 of this article. 
(p)  Foundation walls shall be kept structurally sound, free from defects and damage, and capable of bearing imposed loads safely. 
(q)  Operating chimneys and all flue and vent attachments thereto shall be maintained structurally sound, free from defects, and so maintained as to capably perform at all times the function for which they were designed. Chimneys, flues, gas vents, or other draft producing equipment shall provide sufficient draft to develop the rated output of the connected equipment, shall be structurally safe, durable, smoketight, and capable of withstanding the action of flue gases. 
(r)  Exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs, and fire escapes shall be provided with banisters or railings properly designed and maintained to minimize the hazard of falling, and the same shall be kept structurally sound, in good repair, and free from defects. 
(s)  All permanent signs and billboards exposed to public view permitted by reason of other regulations or as a lawful nonconforming use shall be maintained in good repair. Any signs which have excessively weathered or faded or those upon which the paint has excessively peeled or cracked shall, with their supporting members, be removed forthwith or put into a state of repair. All nonoperative or broken electrical signs shall be repaired or shall, with their supporting members, be removed forthwith. 
(t)  Windows. 
(1)  Window panes or an approved substitute shall be maintained without open cracks or holes. 
(2)  All windows exposed to public view shall be kept clean and free of marks of foreign substances except when necessary in the course of changing displays. All screening of the interior shall be maintained in a clean and attractive manner and in a good state of repair. 
(u)  All storefronts and walls exposed to public view shall be kept in good repair and shall be substantially weathertight and watertight, shall be made impervious to the adverse effects of weather and maintained in sound condition, and shall not constitute a safety hazard or nuisance. If repairs to a storefront become necessary, such repairs shall be made with the same or similar materials used in the construction of the storefront in such a manner as to permanently repair the damaged areas. Any cornice visible above a storefront shall be kept painted, where required, and in good repair. 
(v)  Any awning or marquee and its accompanying structural members which extend over any street, sidewalk, or any other portion of the premises shall be maintained in good repair and shall not constitute a nuisance or a safety hazard. In the event such awnings or marquees are not properly maintained in accordance with this section, they shall, together with their supporting members, be removed forthwith. If such awnings or marquees are made of cloth, plastic, or of similar material, said cloth or plastic, where exposed to public view, shall be maintained in good condition and shall not show evidence of excessive weathering discoloration, ripping, tearing, or holes. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize an encroachment on streets, sidewalks, or other parts of the public domain. 
(w)  Every structure shall have such unobstructed means of egress leading to open space outside of any building or structure or part thereof, which shall be of number, size, design, and location meeting local and state building codes, housing standards, fire code, and other applicable requirements. 
(Code 1982, § 6-416; Code 1999, § 18-616; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Secs. 18-281-18-308. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - OUTDOOR AREAS 

Sec. 18-309. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to protect the public health, safety, morals, and welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the maintenance, appearance, and condition of outdoor areas; to establish minimum standards for maintenance and prevention of hazardous and unsanitary conditions; to fix certain responsibilities and duties upon owners and operators; to authorize and establish procedures for the inspection of outdoor areas and grounds; and to establish procedures to be followed in the correction of violations. 
(Code 1982, § 6-428; Code 1999, § 18-636; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-310. - Applicability. 
    Every lot, parcel, or tract situated within the city other than those in active agricultural use shall comply with the provisions of this division whether occupied by a structure or vacant with no site improvements. 
(Code 1982, § 6-429; Code 1999, § 18-637; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-311. - Violations. 
    Procedures for handling violations of this division shall be as provided generally in sections 18-213 and 18-214 regarding notices and hearings. Procedures for handling violations rendering premises unfit for occupancy and/or subject to demolition are supplementary as provided in division 5 of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 6-430; Code 1999, § 18-638; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-312. - Administrative and inspections. 
    Administration of and inspections for the purposes of this division are as provided generally in division 1 of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 6-431; Code 1999, § 18-639; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-313. - Duties and responsibilities of owner and/or occupant of lot, parcel, or tract. 
(a)  General maintenance of landscaping and vegetation. 
(1)  Every owner and/or occupant of property within the city shall be required to maintain all yard areas which are covered by grass, ground cover, shrubs, vines, hedges, trees, or palms; and/or nonliving durable material commonly used in landscaping such as rocks, pebbles, or decorative mulch. 
(2)  The owner and/or occupant of all property within the city shall maintain such property free of all debris, deteriorated building materials, rubbish, or any other material which by reason of height, proximity to neighboring structures, physical condition, or peculiar characteristics might cause damage to life or property within the surrounding area. 
(3)  All grass areas and lawns shall be properly maintained and kept free of dead plants, refuse, and debris. 
(4)  The owner and/or occupant of improved property within the city shall maintain all grass and weeds at a height of less than eight inches. 
(5)  The owner of unimproved property within the city shall maintain all grass and weeds at a height of less than 12 inches. 
(6)  The creation of other nuisances or safety hazards, such as vegetation of any sort being allowed to grow in or upon improved streets, gutters, or sidewalks; standing pools of water; holes; excavation; windblown soil or erosion caused by soil left exposed without landscaping, is prohibited. 
(b)  Trash container areas and trash management. 
(1)  All dumpsters, trash cans, and trash container areas shall be maintained in a manner which prevents the accumulation of trash, debris, garbage, refuse, and litter in the vicinity of the receptacle and shall prevent such materials from being blown by the wind to other portions of the site, streets and alleys, and other properties. All containers shall be maintained in good repair in a clean and sanitary condition so as not to create an offensive odor, health hazard, or other nuisance, and shall have the lids closed at all times except when depositing refuse. All garbage shall be deposited in dumpsters, cans, or containers. 
(2)  No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited on any land, public area, street, alley, vacant lot or unoccupied lot, or any watercourse, canal, or ditch within the city any garbage, trash, waste materials, or other noxious, malodorous or offensive material. 
(3)  No owner of private property, or his agent, shall permit or allow any maintaining of dead, fatally diseased or damaged trees, shrubs or branches, or parts thereof, within the city. The city shall have the authority to order removal of any such trees, shrubs, or parts thereof pursuant to the terms of this division. 
(4)  The owner of private property or his agent shall remove trees, branches, shrubs, or parts thereof which overhang or interfere with public sidewalks or rights-of-way, including clear visibility triangles in accordance with provisions set forth in section 102-82. Such owners shall also remove trees or shrubs or parts thereof which obstruct public view of traffic or public safety signs located within public rights-of-way. 
(Code 1982, § 6-432; Code 1999, § 18-640; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Secs. 18-314-18-344. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - NUISANCES OR HAZARDS TO PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, AND WELFARE 

Sec. 18-345. - Public nuisances. 
    Public nuisances are defined in section 18-203 and chapter 100. When nuisance conditions or hazards degenerate or cumulatively impact on structures, dwellings, or other buildings regulated by this article, to the extent that repair, removal, securing, or demolition is necessary for the public health, safety, and welfare, then the city building official or his designee or the board of building commissioners are authorized to order the property owner or city agents to repair, remove, secure, vacate, or demolish such structures according to procedures outlined herein. These powers are hereby declared to be remedial and essential for the public interest, and it is intended that such powers be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes stated herein. 
(Code 1982, § 6-444; Code 1999, § 18-656; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-346. - Applicability. 
    Article V of chapter 98 regarding floodplain protection shall apply to all structures regulated by this article. 
(Code 1982, § 6-445; Code 1999, § 18-657; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-347. - Administration and inspections. 
    Administration of and inspections for the purposes of this division are as provided in sections 18-213 and 18-214. Additional provisions necessary for the demolition or expedient abatement of public nuisances are as provided in this division. 
(Code 1982, § 6-446; Code 1999, § 18-658; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-348. - Procedure for major violations generally. 
    Procedures for handling major violations shall be generally as provided in division 1 of this article, except that, depending upon the degree of danger to the occupants or public, the enforcement officer may cause the notice of violation to warn the property owner that failure to cure such major violations may result in further city or board of building commissioners action to effectuate necessary repairs, removals, securing or vacating, or demolition of structures. 
(Code 1982, § 6-447; Code 1999, § 18-659; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-349. - Procedure for vacating of structures or premises. 
(a)  Notice to vacate. Whenever the building official or his designee or the board of building commissioners shall declare a building unfit for human occupation and constituting a public nuisance, it shall give notice to the occupant of such declaration and placarding of the building as unfit. Such notice shall: 
(1)  Contain all elements required by notices generally by division 1 of this article; 
(2)  State the time and date by which occupants must vacate the building; 
(3)  Further state that if such repairs, reconstruction, alterations, removal or demolition are not voluntarily completed within the stated time as set forth in the notice, the building official shall institute proceedings charging the owner with a violation of this division. 
(b)  Serving of notice. The serving of notice to vacate shall be as follows: 
(1)  By delivery to the owner and the occupant personally, or by leaving the notice at the usual place of abode of the owner and the occupant; or by delivery of a letter by certified or registered mail containing a notice addressed to the owner and the occupant at their last known address with postage prepaid thereon; and 
(2)  By posting, and keeping posted for seven days, a copy of the notice in placard form in a conspicuous place on the premises to be vacated. 
(c)  Vacating of declared building. Any building found to be unfit for human occupancy or occupation, and so designated and placarded by the building official or the board of building commissioners' designee, shall be vacated immediately after notice has been given by the building official or the board of building commissioners' designee to the occupant of the building. 
(d)  Occupancy of building. No building which has been placarded as unfit for human occupancy or occupation shall again be used for human occupancy or occupation until approval is secured from and such placard is removed by the building official or the board of building commissioners' designee. The building official or the board of building commissioners' designee shall remove such placard whenever the defects upon which the placarding action were based have been eliminated. 
(e)  Removal of placard or notice. No person shall deface or remove the placard from any building which has been placarded as unfit for human occupation, except as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(f)  Penalty for violation of this section. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-15. 
(Code 1982, § 6-448; Code 1999, § 18-660; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-350. - Procedure for city work or contracted work to repair/secure. 
    In cases involving nuisance or hazardous conditions which require direct governmental action to abate serious and continuing danger to the public or occupants, including attractive nuisance cases, and where the property owner or operator fails to heed the notices and enforcement efforts made by the city pursuant to division 1 of this article, but where the emergency nature of danger to the public is not so extreme as to warrant dispensing with notice to the property owners, then the city enforcement officials shall proceed to: 
(1)  Comply with the procedures outlined in section 18-349 for vacating property, if necessary, due to dangerous conditions. 
(2)  Give notice, which may be combined with the notice to vacate and/or the building official's statement of violation and notice of hearing, which informs the property owner and occupant that an order will be sought from the board of building commissioners and the city commission for city work or contracted work to repair or secure the property. The notice will prominently inform the property owner that failure to repair the property or follow the board of building commissioners' orders may result in city work which shall be charged as a lien against the property. No notice will describe the conditions found by the enforcement officer to constitute a hazard or nuisance. The notice will generally inform the property owner of the work or repairs to be done which will correct the nuisance or hazardous conditions. 
(3)  If the owner still fails to cure the conditions by the time set for the board of building commissioners' hearing pursuant to the notice detailed in subsection (2) of this section, then the enforcement officer shall submit proof at the board of building commissioners' hearing concerning the dangerousness of the conditions to the public and the property owner's inability or unwillingness to cure such dangers, thus necessitating governmental action to repair or secure the property. The board of building commissioners may render its order requiring the city to perform such work as is necessary to secure the property or to render it safe. The order may also require vacating of the property if such action is necessary and has not already been accomplished. 
(4)  The enforcement officer shall take such action as has been authorized by the board of building commissioners and approved by the city commission to secure the property or render it safe, including the letting of contracts pursuant to city purchasing requirements to repair or remove dangerous conditions and items. The costs and expenses of such work shall be a lien upon the property, which lien may be enforced by suit at law, or upon proceeding in chancery. 
(5)  Liens for such city-contracted work shall be coequal with all state, county, and municipal taxes and shall be superior in dignity to all other liens, titles, and claims until paid. 
(6)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to require city work to be done or to imply a duty by the city to fix conditions which are the legal responsibility of the owner of the property. This section is supplementary to city and board of building commissioners' authority to order the property owner to remedy nuisance conditions. 
(Code 1982, § 6-449; Code 1999, § 18-661; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-351. - Procedure for city or city-contracted demolition. 
    Due to a variety of reasons, including, but not limited to, abandonment, neglect, inadequate property management or obsolescence, the conditions constituting a danger or nuisance to the public cannot be made safe. Factors evidencing a determination that a property cannot be made safe may include, but not be limited to, a history of unsecured or unsecurable dangerous conditions; a history demonstrating the property owner's failure to exercise reasonable control over the property to keep it secure or safe; a history showing that the property has become an attractive nuisance to children or transients; a history showing a proliferation of criminal activity due to dilapidated conditions and lack of management and control over the premises; and a history showing that, notwithstanding the reasonable efforts of enforcement officer personnel and/or the board of building commissioners, the property remains in a condition which is imminently dangerous to the public health, safety, and welfare. In such cases, the enforcement official shall: 
(1)  Proceed with notice to vacate, if such has not already been accomplished. 
(2)  Include with notice to vacate and statement of violation-notice of hearing a statement which fairly informs the property owner and tenants that the hearing before the board of building commissioners may result in an order requiring the property owner or city to demolish the structures on the property with any costs therefor being assessed against the property and constituting a lien thereon. 
(3)  Such notice of requested demolition shall be served not only upon the property owners of record, but shall also be served upon the mortgage holders and lienholders of record as determined by a legally valid property records search. 
(4)  The notice of requested demolition shall describe the conditions found by the enforcement officer, upon consultation with the city attorney, to constitute such a public nuisance pursuant to this section as to make demolition necessary. 
(5)  At the board of building commissioners' hearing, the enforcement officer, together with witnesses, and city attorney, if the case warrants, shall present evidence showing the extent of dangerous conditions affecting the public and the property owner's inability or unwillingness to cure such dangers, and the history according to the factors detailed in this section showing that the property is unsecurable or has not been made safe. The board of building commissioners may render its order requiring the owner or city to demolish, or cause to be demolished the structure which have been proved to be unsafe. The order may also require a vacating of the property if such action is necessary and has not already been accomplished. If the board of building commissioners determines that an order requiring repairs by the property owner through city work is appropriate, the board of building commissioners shall specify what repairs are necessary in order to make the property safe, and by what date said repairs are to be accomplished. 
(6)  The enforcement officer shall take such action as has been authorized by the board of building commissioners and approved by the city commission to demolish the structure or render the premises safe. The premises shall be kept posted with the notice to vacate, and persons violating the notice to vacate may be referred for prosecution pursuant to section 1-15. The costs and expenses of city repair work or demolition shall be a lien upon the property, which lien may be enforced by suit at law or chancery. 
(7)  Liens for such city-contracted work shall be coequal with all state, county, and municipal taxes, and shall be superior in dignity to all other liens, titles, and claims until paid. 
(Code 1982, § 6-450; Code 1999, § 18-662; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Sec. 18-352. - Procedure for emergency city action. 
    In cases involving extreme life-safety hazards which require emergency action on the part of the city to render the premises safe from such public safety hazards, the building official or his designee shall cause the necessary repairs, removals, or demolitions to be done to abate the safety hazards. The property owner shall be given notice as immediately as possible regarding such work, and the fixing of a lien therefor; however, this notice shall not be cause for holding up city work to abate any extreme and imminent public safety hazard. Whether or not the notice is sent prior, during, or after the city work, the notice shall state that the property owners shall have an opportunity to contest the determination to do the emergency work and the charges therefor, upon appeal of such determination within 30 days to the board of building commissioners. When the city work includes demolition of structures, the notice shall also be given to mortgage and lienholders of record. 
(Code 1982, § 6-451; Code 1999, § 18-663; Ord. No. 93-01, pt. 1, 3-15-1993) 
Secs. 18-353-18-377. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MOVING OF BUILDINGS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 18-378-18-397. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 18-398. - Required. 
    No person shall move any existing structure or building over, along or across any highway, street or alley in the city without first obtaining a permit from the city commission. 
(Code 1982, § 6-301; Code 1999, § 18-681; Ord. No. 82-6, § 2, 3-1-1982) 
Sec. 18-399. - Application. 
(a)  To be filed with commission. A person seeking issuance of a permit under this article shall file an application for such permit with the commission. 
(b)  Form. The application shall be made in writing and shall be filed with the city commission. 
(c)  Contents. The application shall set forth: 
(1)  A description of the building or structure proposed to be moved, giving the present street address where located, construction materials, dimensions, number of rooms, condition of the exterior and interior, and a photograph of each side of the building or structure; 
(2)  A legal description of the property from which the building or structure is to be moved; 
(3)  A legal description, street address and the name and the address of the owner of the property to which it is proposed such building or structure be removed; 
(4)  The portion of the lot to be occupied by the building or structure when moved; 
(5)  The highways, streets and alleys over, along or across which the building or structure is proposed to move; 
(6)  The proposed moving date and hours, and the name and address of the person who will actually move the building or structure; 
(7)  The name and address of the owners of the land adjacent to the property to which the building or structure is to be removed; and 
(8)  Any additional information which the commission shall find necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued. 
(Code 1982, § 6-302; Code 1999, § 18-682; Ord. No. 82-6, § 2, 3-1-1982) 
Sec. 18-400. - Deposit for expense to city. 
    Upon receipt of an application for a permit under this article, it shall be the duty of the building official to make an estimate of the expense that will be incurred in removing and replacing any electric wires, streetlamps, streetlights, or pole lines belonging to the city, or any other property of the city the removal and replacement of which will be required by reason of the moving of the building or structure through the city; together with the cost of materials necessary to be used in making such removals and replacements. Prior to the issuance of the permit, the commission shall require of the applicant a deposit of a sum of money equal to twice the amount of the estimated expense. 
(Code 1982, § 6-303; Code 1999, § 18-683; Ord. No. 82-6, § 2, 3-1-1982) 
Sec. 18-401. - General deposit; substitution of bond or insurance policy. 
(a)  Required. An application for a permit under this article shall be accompanied by a cash deposit in a sum determined by the city, as an indemnity for any damage which the city may sustain by reason of damage or injury to any highway, street or alley, sidewalk, fire hydrant, or other property of the city, which may be caused by, or be incidental to, the removal of any building or structure over, along or across any street in the city; and to indemnify the city against any claim of damages to persons or private property; and to satisfy any claims by private individuals arising out of, caused by, or incidental to the moving of any building or structure over, along or across any street in the city. 
(b)  Bond in lieu of deposit. Any person filing an application hereunder may, in lieu of the general cash deposit required in subsection (a) of this section, file with the city commission a bond, approved as to form by the city attorney, executed by a bonding or surety company authorized to do business in the state in an amount determined by the city, conditioned upon the assurance that this and other applicable ordinances and laws will be complied with. Such bond shall run to the city for the use and benefit of any person intended to be protected thereby, and shall be conditioned on the payment for any damages or losses regulating from any malfeasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance or negligence in connection with any of the activities or conditions upon which the permit applied for is granted. 
(c)  Insurance policy in lieu of deposit. Any person filing an application hereunder may, in lieu of the general cash deposit required in subsection (a) of this section, file with the commission a liability insurance policy, issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state, and approved as to form by the city attorney, in the same amount and providing the same protection as would be required for a bond hereunder. 
(Code 1982, § 6-304; Code 1999, § 18-684; Ord. No. 82-6, § 2, 3-1-1982) 
Sec. 18-402. - Prerequisites to issuance of permit. 
(a)  Inspection. The city commission or its appointee shall inspect the building or structure and the applicant's equipment to determine whether the standards for issuance of a permit are met. 
(b)  Standards for issuance. The city commission shall refuse to issue a permit if it finds that: 
(1)  Any application requirement or any fee or deposit requirement has not been complied with; 
(2)  The building or structure is too large to move without endangering persons or property in the city; 
(3)  The building or structure is in such a state of deterioration or disrepair or is otherwise so structurally unsafe that it could not be moved without endangering persons and property in the city; 
(4)  The building or structure is structurally unsafe or unfit for the purpose for which moved, if the removal location is in the city; 
(5)  The applicant's equipment is unsafe, and that persons and property would be endangered by its use; 
(6)  Zoning or other ordinances would be violated by the building's construction in its new location; 
(7)  The building or structure is aesthetically incompatible with the neighborhood to which it is proposed to be moved; or 
(8)  For any other reason persons or property in the city would be endangered by the moving of the building or structure. 
(c)  Designate streets for removal. The applicant shall submit the application and designate highways, streets and alleys over which the building or structure is proposed to be moved. The city commission shall approve the designation of streets, or may change the streets in order to ensure maximum safety to persons and property in the city and to minimize congestion and traffic hazards on public streets. 
(Code 1982, § 6-305; Code 1999, § 18-685; Ord. No. 82-6, § 2, 3-1-1982) 
Sec. 18-403. - Disposition of fees and deposits. 
(a)  Return upon nonissuance. Upon the refusal to issue a permit, the city commission shall return to the applicant all deposits, bonds and insurance policies. Permit fees filed with the application shall not be returned. 
(b)  Return upon allowance for expense. After the building or structure has been removed, the building official shall furnish the city commission with a written statement of all expenses incurred in removing and replacing all property belonging to the city, and of all materials used in the making of the removal and replacement, together with a statement of all damage caused to, or inflicted upon, property belonging to the city; provided, however, that if any wires, poles, lamps or other property are not located in conformity with governing ordinances, the permittee shall not be liable for the cost of removing the same. The city commission shall authorize the building official to return to the applicant all deposits, after deduction of the sums sufficient to pay for all of the costs and expenses and for damage done to property of the city by reason of removal of the building or structure. Permit fees deposited with the application shall not be returned. 
(Code 1982, § 6-306; Code 1999, § 18-686; Ord. No. 82-6, § 2, 3-1-1982) 
Sec. 18-404. - Duties of permittee. 
    Every permittee under this article shall: 
(1)  Use designated streets. Move a building or structure only over streets designated for such use in the written permit; 
(2)  Notify of revised moving time. Notify the building official and chief of police, in writing, of a desired change in moving date and hours as proposed in the application; 
(3)  Notify of damage. Notify the commission of any and all damages done to property belonging to the city, within 24 hours after the damage or injury has occurred; 
(4)  Comply with governing law. Comply with all applicable ordinances and laws upon relocating the building or structure in the city; 
(5)  Pay expense of officer. Pay the expense of a traffic officer ordered by the city commission to accompany the movement of the building or structure to protect the public from injury; and 
(6)  Clear old premises. If the building or structure is removed from property within the city, remove all rubbish and materials and fill all excavations to existing grade at the original building site, so that the premises are left in a safe and sanitary condition. 
(Code 1982, § 6-307; Code 1999, § 18-687; Ord. No. 82-6, § 2, 3-1-1982) 
Secs. 18-405-18-421. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS 

Sec. 18-422. - Duty to obtain and display numbers. 
(a)  Whenever any building or structure, residential or commercial, shall be erected or located in the city, it shall be the duty of the owner, or the contractor, on behalf of the owner, to procure the correct number designated to such building or structure, and to affix such number in the same manner provided in subsection (b) of this section. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued by the city building official until such number is affixed as provided by this section. 
(b)  The owner or occupant of any building or structure, residential or commercial, designated a number shall affix such number in a conspicuous place above, on or at the side of said building or structure, or to a permanent fixture located in the front yard of the property on which the building or structure is located. Whenever any building or structure is situated more than 50 feet from the street line, such number shall be affixed to a permanent fixture located near the front walk, driveway, or common entrance to such building or structure. 
(c)  The owner or manager of every mobile home park in the city shall cause each lot in the mobile home park to be numbered in accordance with the directions of the city manager and, further, to affix such number in the manner provided in this section. 
(d)  The number required to be affixed as provided in this section shall be not less than four inches in height in residential districts and six inches in height in all other districts, shall be of a color that contrasts with the color of the part of the building or structure or other fixture to which such number is affixed, and shall be located in a position to be easily discernible from the street fronting the building, structure or mobile home lot. Once the number is affixed as provided herein, it shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of any building or structure, and the duty of every mobile home park owner or manager, to replace such number if the same is removed therefrom for any reason. 
(Code 1960, § 6-20; Code 1982, § 6-212; Code 1999, § 18-712; Ord. No. 78-3, § 1, 3-6-1978; Ord. No. 86-5, § 1, 7-14-1986) 
Secs. 18-423-18-442. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - DEVELOPMENT AND CONSTRUCTION PERMIT FEES 

Sec. 18-443. - Adopted. 
    The City of Clewiston Development and Construction Permit Fee Schedule is hereby adopted as part of appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1999, § 18-751; Res. No. 2006-06, § 1(exh. A), 8-21-2006) 
Secs. 18-444-18-475. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - MARQUEES, AWNINGS AND CANOPIES 

Sec. 18-476. - Marquees. 
(a)  The term "marquee," as regulated by this article, includes any hood or awning of permanent construction attached to a building and projecting from the wall of such building above the entrance and extending over a public right-of-way. 
(b)  In addition to the foregoing regulations, the following shall apply to marquees: 
(1)  All marquees, including the anchors, bolts, support rods and braces thereof, shall be designed by a registered engineer, shall be properly guttered and connected by downspout to a sewer so that the water therefrom will not drip or flow on the public property, and the roof thereof shall be used for no other purposes than to form and constitute a roof. 
(2)  No marquees shall be permitted to extend nearer the curbline than one foot. 
(3)  Marquees shall be supported solely by the building to which they are attached, and no columns or posts shall be permitted as support thereof. The roof of any marquee shall be designed and constructed to support a live load of not less than 100 pounds per square foot, except that this provision shall not apply to awnings. No marquee shall be erected on any building of wooden frame construction unless attached to the masonry, concrete or steel support of the building. 
(4)  Signs attached to or hung from a marquee shall be completely within the border line of the marquee's outer edge, and shall in no instance be lower than eight feet above the sidewalk or public thoroughfare, nor shall it exceed five feet in height, exclusive of the name of the establishment exhibiting the marquee. 
(Code 1982, § 6-276; Code 1999, § 18-501; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(6-276), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 18-477. - Awnings and canopies. 
(a)  The term "awning" includes any structure made of cloth or metal with a metal frame attached to a building and projecting over a sidewalk or thoroughfare when the same is so erected as to permit its being raised or lowered to a position flat against the building when not in use. The term "canopy" includes any structure, other than an awning, made of cloth or metal with metal frames attached to a building, projecting over a thoroughfare or sidewalk, and carried by a frame supported by the ground or sidewalk. 
(b)  The foregoing regulations shall be modified for awnings and canopies as follows: 
(1)  Canopies and awnings may be constructed of cloth or metal, but all frames and supports shall be of metal. 
(2)  No canopy shall exceed ten feet in width, but there is no limitation on the width of awning. All such awnings and canopies shall be not less than eight feet above the level of the sidewalk, and shall not extend beyond a point one foot inside the curbline. 
(3)  Every awning shall be securely attached to and supported by the building, and posts or columns beyond the building line shall not be permitted. When such building is less than ten feet from public property, no awning shall be attached to the wood jambs, frames, or other wood members of the building. No advertising shall be placed on any awning or canopy except the name of the owner and the business, industry or pursuit conducted within the premises, which may be painted or otherwise permanently placed in a space not exceeding eight inches in height on the front and side portions thereof. 
(Code 1960, § 19-32; Code 1982, § 6-277; Code 1999, § 18-502) 
Chapter 22 - BUSINESSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1-22-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY LICENSING 

Sec. 22-19. - When required. 
    Every person engaged or intending to engage in business in this city as a contractor, general contractor, building contractor, residential contractor, or other trade regulated by and as defined in F.S. § 489.105, division I and division II, or any other trade regulated and licensed by the county shall present to the community development director a license issued by the county. 
Secs. 22-20-22-41. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - JUNKYARDS AND JUNK VEHICLE BUSINESSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Junkyard control law, F.S. § 339.241; secondhand dealers and secondary metals recyclers, F.S. ch. 538. 

Sec. 22-42. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Junkyard means a place, structure, lot or parcel of land where junk is bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled as a business. 
    Vehicle means a machine propelled by power other than human power designed to travel along the ground by the use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and includes, but is not limited to, automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles, tractors, buggies, wagons and farm equipment. 
(Code 1982, § 9-1; Code 1999, § 22-131; Ord. No. 88-5, pt. 1, 8-15-1988) 
Sec. 22-43. - General requirements. 
    Any person establishing a junkyard shall comply with the following subsections and other applicable ordinances of the city: 
(1)  Area. The area of land to be used shall not be less than 43,560 square feet (one acre) nor more than 174,280 square feet (four acres). 
(2)  Enclosure. The area to be occupied by the junkyard shall be entirely surrounded by a substantial, continuous chainlink fence or masonry wall. The chainlink fence or masonry wall shall be at least six feet in height. The masonry wall shall be of solid construction so as to obscure the contents of the yard. All chainlink fencing must be screened or slatted so as to obscure the view of the contents of the yard. Such fence or wall shall be of similar composition, construction and color throughout and shall be constructed without openings except for one entrance and one exit. Such entrance and exit are to be equipped with gates. Such gates shall be closed and locked except during business hours. Such fence or wall and gates shall be maintained in good order and shall not be allowed to deteriorate. 
(Code 1960, § 10A-6; Code 1982, § 9-17; Code 1999, § 22-132) 
Sec. 22-44. - Requirements for certain junkyards. 
    Any person operating a junkyard on December 8, 1969, shall comply with the following subsections and other applicable ordinances of the city: 
(1)  Area. The area used for the operation of a junkyard shall not be increased. 
(2)  Buildings. No additional temporary or permanent building shall be erected and no temporary or permanent building shall be altered to increase its square footage area. 
(3)  Enclosure. The area occupied by a junkyard shall be entirely surrounded by a substantial, continuous chainlink fence or masonry wall at least six feet in height. The fence or wall shall meet the requirements set forth in section 22-43(2). 
(Code 1960, § 10A-7; Code 1982, § 9-18; Code 1999, § 22-133) 
Sec. 22-45. - Operation. 
    Every person operating a junkyard shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  The junkyard, together with things kept therein, shall at all times be maintained in a sanitary condition. 
(2)  Water shall not be allowed to stand in any place on the premises in such a manner as to afford a breeding place for mosquitoes. 
(3)  No garbage or other waste liable to give a foul odor or attract vermin shall be kept on the premises. 
(4)  Gasoline and oil shall be removed from any junk; the premises shall not be allowed to become a fire hazard. Junk shall be arranged so as to permit easy access to all such junk for firefighting purposes. 
(5)  Each purchase and sale of junk shall be recorded in English in a permanent register kept on the premises, giving the date, name, residence address and telephone number of the person from whom the junk was purchased and to whom it was sold, and a description of the junk. Such permanent register shall be available to the inspection of the police department of the city for a period of two years from the date of the transaction. 
(6)  Junk vehicles shall not be stacked one on top of another; other junk shall be stored in piles not to extend above the top of the six-foot fence or wall surrounding the junkyard. 
(Code 1960, § 10A-8; Code 1982, § 9-19; Code 1999, § 22-134) 
State Law reference- Secondhand dealers' records of purchases, F.S. § 538.04; holding period for secondhand items, F.S. § 538.06. 
Sec. 22-46. - Enclosure of vehicle business premises; minimum area. 
(a)  Any person engaged in a new or used vehicle sales, service, rental or repair business and who keeps or stores junk vehicles on his premises shall keep or store said vehicles in an area entirely surrounded by a substantial, continuous chainlink fence or masonry wall at least six feet in height. The fence or wall shall meet the requirements set forth in section 22-43(2). 
(b)  Any person beginning in such business after December 8, 1969, shall provide a fenced or walled area, as described in subsection (a) of this section, of not less than 10,000 square feet for the storage of such vehicles. 
(c)  A person engaged in a new or used vehicle sales, service, rental or repair business need not keep a junk vehicle in a fenced or walled area as aforesaid if such vehicle is being kept for repair or insurance adjustment and is promptly and conspicuously posted with a written notice giving the date of posting, the name of the business posting the notice, the name and address of the owner of the vehicle, the year, make, model, color and location of the vehicle and that the vehicle is held for repair or insurance adjustment; provided, however, that any vehicle kept for repair or insurance adjustment shall be placed within a fenced or walled area as aforesaid after the expiration of four months after it is first posted. 
(d)  The person engaged in the vehicle business shall promptly furnish the police department of the city with a copy of each notice posted and shall maintain the notice on each vehicle while it is not within a fenced or walled area. 
(Code 1960, § 10A-9; Code 1982, § 9-20; Code 1999, § 22-135) 
Sec. 22-47. - Building permit required for enclosures. 
    Prior to the construction or erection of a fence or wall required by this article, plans therefor shall be submitted to the city and a building permit obtained. 
(Code 1960, § 10A-10; Code 1982, § 9-21; Code 1999, § 22-136) 
Secs. 22-48-22-66. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEALERS OF PRECIOUS METALS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Secondhand dealers, F.S. ch. 538. 

Sec. 22-67. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Precious metals means any item containing any gold, silver, or platinum, or any combination thereof, excluding any chemical or any automotive, photographic, electrical, medical, or dental materials or electronic parts. 
    Precious metals dealer means a secondhand dealer who normally or regularly engages in the business of buying used precious metals for resale. The term does not include those persons involved in the bulk sale of precious metals from one secondhand or precious metals dealer to another. 
    Secondhand dealer means any person, corporation, or other business organization or entity which is not a secondary metals recycler subject to F.S. § 538.18 et seq. and which is engaged in the business of purchasing, consigning, or trading secondhand goods. 
    Secondhand goods means personal property previously owned or used, which is not regulated metals property regulated under F.S. § 538.18 et seq. and which is purchased, consigned, or traded as used property. Such secondhand goods do not include office furniture, pianos, books, clothing, organs, coins, motor vehicles, costume jewelry, cardio and strength training or conditioning equipment designed primarily for indoor use, and secondhand sports equipment that is not permanently labeled with a serial number. For purposes of this definition, the term "secondhand sports equipment" does not include golf clubs. 
    Secondhand store means the place or premises at which a secondhand dealer is registered to conduct business as a secondhand dealer or conducts business. 
    Transaction means any purchase, consignment, or trade of secondhand goods by a secondhand dealer. 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, F.S. § 538.03. 
Sec. 22-68. - Records of purchases required. 
(a)  In addition to the requirements in F.S. ch. 538, all persons dealing in secondhand goods shall keep a record of all purchases from private individuals at the time of each purchase. The records shall contain the name and address of the dealer and the name, initials or other identification of the person entering the following information: 
(1)  The place, date and time of the transaction. 
(2)  A complete and accurate description of the goods acquired, including the following information, if applicable: 
a.  Brand name. 
b.  Model number. 
c.  Manufacturer's serial number. 
d.  Size. 
e.  Color, as apparent to the untrained eye. 
f.  Precious metal type, weight, and content if known. 
g.  Gemstone description, including the number of stones, if applicable. 
h.  In the case of firearms, the type of action, caliber or gauge, number of barrels, barrel length, and finish. 
i.  Any other unique identifying marks, numbers, or letters. 
(3)  A description of the person from whom the goods were acquired, including: 
a.  Full name, current residential address, workplace, and home and work phone numbers. 
b.  Height, weight, date of birth, race, gender, hair color, eye color, and any other identifying marks. 
c.  The right thumbprint, free of smudges and smears, of the person from whom the goods were acquired. 
(4)  Any other information required by the form approved by the state department of law enforcement. 
(b)  The secondhand dealer shall require verification of the identification by the exhibition of a government-issued photographic identification card, such as a driver's license or military identification card. The record shall contain the type of identification exhibited, the issuing agency, and the number thereon. 
(c)  The seller shall sign a statement verifying that the seller is the rightful owner of the goods or is entitled to sell, consign, or trade the goods. 
(d)  A dealer shall maintain or cause to be maintained the information required by this section for not less than three years from the date of the purchase transaction. 
(Code 1982, § 11-26; Code 1999, § 22-161; Ord. No. 80-5, § 1, 11-17-1980) 
State Law reference- Recordkeeping requirements, F.S. § 538.04. 
Sec. 22-69. - Retention of purchase. 
    All persons dealing in secondhand goods purchased or bought from private individuals, shall retain the property purchased for a period of 15 days from the date of such purchase. It shall be unlawful for any buyer of gold, silver, or platinum to melt or resell any such articles described in this section before the expiration of 15 days after the date of the purchase. 
(Code 1982, § 11-27; Code 1999, § 22-162; Ord. No. 80-5, § 1, 11-17-1980) 
State Law reference- Holding period. F.S. § 538.06. 
Sec. 22-70. - Records to be open to law enforcement officers. 
    The records required by this article shall be available to any law enforcement agency or officer, upon request, and shall be preserved for a period of three years after the date of purchase. 
(Code 1982, § 11-28; Code 1999, § 22-163; Ord. No. 80-5, § 1, 11-17-1980) 
State Law reference- Record retention. F.S. § 538.06(5). 
Secs. 22-71-22-98. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SHOPPING CART REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Shopping carts, F.S. §§ 506.503, 506.509, 506.513, 506.5131, 506.17. 

Sec. 22-99. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Shopping cart means a basket mounted on wheels or similar device which is generally used in a retail establishment by a customer for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind. 
    Street means street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard (including the full right-of-way width), concourse, driveway, culvert, crosswalk, sidewalk, parking lots, parking areas, and places used by the general public. 
(Code 1982, § 11-29; Code 1999, § 22-191; Ord. No. 83-2, § 1, 1-17-1983) 
Sec. 22-100. - Possession of shopping carts. 
    Any person who is in possession of any shopping cart, laundry cart, dairy case, egg basket, poultry box, or bakery container with a state registered name or mark shall be presumed to be in possession of stolen property and is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree, punishable as provided in F.S. § 775.082. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 506.509. 
Sec. 22-101. - Illegal use of shopping carts and laundry carts. 
    It is a violation of this article: 
(1)  To remove any shopping cart or laundry cart from the premises or parking area of a retail establishment with intent to deprive temporarily or permanently the owner of such cart, or the retailer, of possession of the cart. 
(2)  To remove a shopping cart or laundry cart, without written authorization, from its owner or from the premises or parking area of any retail establishment. 
(3)  To remove, obliterate, or alter any serial number or sign affixed to a shopping cart or laundry cart. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 506.513. 
Sec. 22-102. - Return of shopping carts; assessment of fees, fines, and costs. 
(a)  The rightful owner of any shopping cart with a registered name or mark found on public property shall be immediately notified of its recovery. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law or local ordinance, no fee, fine, or costs may be assessed against the owner of a shopping cart unless the shopping cart was found on public property and was removed from the premises or parking area of a retail establishment by the owner of the shopping cart or an employee acting on the owner's behalf, and the fee, fine, or cost has been approved by the state department of agriculture and consumer services. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, F.S. § 506.51341. 
Secs. 22-103-22-132. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MANUFACTURED HOUSING SALES 

Sec. 22-133. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all businesses conducting retail sales of manufactured housing. 
(Code 1982, § 20-50; Code 1999, § 22-151; Ord. No. 87-8, § 1, 9-21-1987) 
Sec. 22-134. - Office requirements. 
    Manufactured housing sales businesses, to which this article is applicable, shall have and conduct business only from an office complying with the industrial district as provided in chapter 110 and with the building requirements. Pursuant to sections 50-5 and 50-8, no such sales shall be conducted from manufactured housing occupied and used as a sales office. 
(Code 1982, § 20-51; Code 1999, § 22-152; Ord. No. 87-8, § 1, 9-21-1987) 
Sec. 22-135. - Skirting. 
    Within 24 hours after any manufactured housing is parked on any sales lot within the city, it shall be skirted on all sides visible to the street with a material generally accepted as decorative mobile home skirting in manufactured housing parks within the county area. 
(Code 1982, § 20-53; Code 1999, § 22-154; Ord. No. 87-8, § 1, 9-21-1987) 
Sec. 22-136. - General appearance of manufactured homes. 
    No manufactured home shall be parked or stored on any sales lot within the city having any broken or missing glass from any windows, having any doors missing or damaged such that they cannot be closed and secured, or having any loose sheet metal, canopies or other parts subject to being blown away by winds. 
(Code 1982, § 20-54; Code 1999, § 22-155; Ord. No. 87-8, § 1, 9-21-1987) 
Secs. 22-137-22-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CANNABIS DISPENSING FACILITIES 

Sec. 22-151. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide the city with the opportunity to review the impact of recent changes in law, Constitutional amendments, as well as the impact of cannabis dispensing in other jurisdictions, and determine if such dispensing should be permitted and regulated in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-17, § 1, 9-18-2017) 
Sec. 22-152. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words or phrases, when used in this article, shall have the means ascribed to them in this section: 
    Cannabis (marijuana) means all parts of any plant of the genus Cannabis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plants or its seeds or resin. 
    Cannabis dispensing business or business means a business location offering cannabis for retail sale pursuant to a license to dispense cannabis issued under applicable law, including medical marijuana treatment center dispensary facilities. 
    Chapter 2017-232means the 2017 Senate Bill 8-A, as signed by the governor on June 23, 2017. 
    City means the municipal limits of the City of Clewiston, Florida. 
    State means the State of Florida. 
(b)  In addition to the definitions contained in subsection (a), other terms used in this article shall have the meaning ascribed to them in Chapter 2017-232, Florida Law, and are incorporated into this article by this reference. 
(Ord. No. 2017-17, § 2, 9-18-2017) 
Sec. 22-153. - Moratorium. 
    Beginning on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, a ban is hereby imposed on cannabis dispensing businesses in the city. 
(1)  It is unlawful and a violation of this article for any person or entity to open or cause to be opened any medical marijuana treatment center cannabis dispensing business within the city. 
(2)  The city shall not accept, process or approve any application for business tax receipts, licenses, building permits, land use permits, or any development permits concerning or related to a medical marijuana treatment center cannabis dispensing business. 
(3)  This article will be revisited each year. 
(Ord. No. 2017-17, § 3, 9-18-2017) 
Sec. 22-154. - Penalties. 
    Any person or entity who violates any provision of this article or who fails to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $500.00 per violation, per day, or be imprisoned for a period of time not to exceed 60 days. 
(Ord. No. 2017-17, § 4, 9-18-2017) 
Chapter 26 - CODE ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Code enforcement, F.S. ch. 162. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Community development director means the chief code enforcement officer of the city. 
    Code enforcement officer means any authorized agent or employee of the city whose duty it is to ensure code compliance. 
    Enforcement board means the city code enforcement board. 
    Repeat violation means a violation of a provision of a code or ordinance by a person who has been previously found through the code enforcement board or any other quasi-judicial or judicial process to have violated or who has admitted violating the same provision within five years prior to the current violation, notwithstanding whether the violations occur at different locations. 
    Special magistrate means the attorney appointed by the city commission to have the same status as an enforcement board under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, pt. 2(26-1), 2-15-2010) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.04. 
Sec. 26-2. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this article to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city by providing an equitable, expeditious, effective and cost effective method of enforcing the hereinafter described codes of the city where a pending or repeated violation continues to exist. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, pt. 2(26-2), 2-15-2010) 
State Law reference- Intent of the Local Government Code Enforcement Boards Act, F.S. § 162.02. 
Sec. 26-3. - Applicability. 
(a)  The code enforcement board or special magistrate shall enforce and have jurisdiction to enforce all municipal codes and ordinances. 
(b)  The code enforcement officer may, in his discretion, refer violations of this Code to the court having jurisdiction in the county. 
(c)  The provisions of these sections shall not apply to the enforcement pursuant to F.S. §§ 553.79 and 553.80, of building codes adopted pursuant to F.S. § 553.73 as they apply to construction, provided that a building permit is either not required or has been issued by the city. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "building codes" means only those codes adopted pursuant to F.S. § 553.73. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, pt. 2(26-3), 2-15-2010) 
State Law reference- Authority, F.S. § 162.02. 
Sec. 26-4. - City employees designated code enforcement officers. 
    The city commission designates certain of its employees or agents as code enforcement officers. Employees or agents who may be designated as code enforcement officers may include, but are not limited to, community development director, code inspectors, law enforcement officers, animal control officers, or fire safety inspectors. 
(Code 1982, § 6.5-1(a); Code 1999, § 26-1; Ord. No. 89-6, pt. 1, 2-5-1990; Ord. No. 2010-01, pt. 2(26-4), 2-15-2010) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.21(2). 
Sec. 26-5. - Provisions of Local Government Code Enforcement Boards Act supplemental. 
    It is the legislative intent of F.S. §§ 162.01-162.12 to provide an additional or supplemental means of obtaining compliance with local codes. Nothing contained in such sections shall prohibit the city commission from enforcing its codes by any other means. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, pt. 2(26-18), 2-15-2010) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.13. 
Secs. 26-6-26-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD AND SPECIAL MAGISTRATE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Special magistrate authorized, F.S. § 162.03; Code enforcement board, F.S. § 162.05. 

Sec. 26-29. - Organization of board. 
(a)  Generally. The city commission shall appoint a seven-member code enforcement board and legal counsel for the board or a special magistrate. 
(b)  Residency requirement; appointments. Members of the enforcement board shall be residents of the city. Appointments shall be made on the basis of experience or interest in the fields of zoning and property maintenance. The membership of the enforcement board shall, whenever possible, include: 
(1)  An architect; 
(2)  A business person; 
(3)  An engineer; 
(4)  A general contractor; 
(5)  A subcontractor; and 
(6)  A realtor. 
(c)  Terms of office; vacancies; absence from meetings. All appointments to the enforcement board shall be made for staggered terms of three years. A member may be reappointed for one successive term upon approval of the city commission, except that no member may serve for more than six consecutive years. Appointments to fill any vacancy on the enforcement board shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term of office. If any member fails to attend two of three successive meetings without cause and without prior approval of the chairperson, the enforcement board shall declare the member's office vacant, and the city commission shall promptly fill such vacancy. 
(d)  Chairperson; quorum; compensation. The members of the enforcement board shall elect a chairperson, who shall be a voting member, from among its members. The presence of four or more members shall constitute a quorum of the enforcement board. Members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for such travel expenses, mileage expenses, per diem expenses and such honorariums as are received by members of other city boards, as may be authorized by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, pt. 2(26-5(a)-(d)), 2-15-2010) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.05. 
Sec. 26-30. - Special magistrate; appointment. 
(a)  The city commission shall appoint a special magistrate, as needed. Appointments shall be made on the basis of experience and interest in the subject matter, in the sole discretion of the city commission. A special magistrate must be a member in good standing of The Florida Bar. Appointments to fill any vacancy shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term of office. 
(b)  The term of office for a special magistrate shall be for three years, unless terminated earlier by the city commission for misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance in office. 
(c)  The amount of compensation paid to a special magistrate shall be determined by the city commission, and may not be reduced during the term of office. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, pt. 2(26-5(e)), 2-15-2010) 
Sec. 26-31. - Powers. 
    The enforcement board or special magistrate shall have the power to: 
(1)  Adopt rules for the conduct of its hearings. 
(2)  Subpoena alleged violators and witnesses to its hearings. Subpoenas may be served by the sheriff of the county or police department. 
(3)  Subpoena evidence to its hearings. 
(4)  Take testimony under oath. 
(5)  Issue orders having the force of law commanding whatever steps are necessary to bring a violation into compliance. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, pt. 2(26-10), 2-15-2010) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.08. 
Secs. 26-32-26-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Enforcement procedure, F.S. § 162.06. 

Sec. 26-51. - Board to initiate proceedings. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the code enforcement officer to initiate enforcement proceedings of the various codes and ordinances; however, no member of the code enforcement board or special magistrate shall have the power to initiate such enforcement proceedings. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsections (c) and (d) of this section, if a violation of the codes or ordinances is found, the code enforcement officer shall notify the violator and give him a reasonable time to correct the violation. Should the violation continue beyond the time specified for correction, the code enforcement officer may issue a citation or may notify the code enforcement board or special magistrate and request a hearing pursuant to the procedure in section 26-52. The code enforcement board or special magistrate, through its clerical staff, shall schedule a hearing. Written notice of such hearing shall be mailed or hand-delivered to the violator, and posted, as provided in section 26-52. If the violation is corrected and then recurs, or if the violation is not corrected by the time specified for correction by the code enforcement officer, the case may be presented to the enforcement board or special magistrate even if the violation has been corrected prior to the board hearing, and the notice shall so state. 
(c)  If a repeat violation is found, the code inspector shall notify the violator but is not required to give the violator a reasonable time to correct the violation. The code inspector, upon notifying the violator of a repeat violation, shall notify the code enforcement board or the special magistrate and request a hearing. The code enforcement board or special magistrate, through its clerical staff, shall schedule a hearing and shall provide notice pursuant to F.S. § 162.12. The case may be presented to the code enforcement board or special magistrate even if the repeat violation has been corrected prior to the hearing, and the notice shall so state. If the repeat violation has been corrected, the code enforcement board or special magistrate retains the right to schedule a hearing to determine costs and impose the payment of reasonable enforcement fees upon the repeat violator. The repeat violator may choose to waive his rights to this hearing and pay said costs as determined by the code enforcement board or special magistrate. 
(d)  If the code inspector has reason to believe a violation or the condition causing the violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety, and welfare or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible in nature, the code inspector shall make a reasonable effort to notify the violator and may immediately notify the code enforcement board or special magistrate and request a hearing. 
(e)  If the owner of the property that is subject to an enforcement proceeding before an code enforcement board, special magistrate, or court transfers ownership of such property between the time the initial pleading was served and the time of the hearing, such owner shall: 
(1)  Disclose, in writing, the existence and the nature of the proceeding to the prospective transferee. 
(2)  Deliver to the prospective transferee a copy of the pleadings, notices, and other materials relating to the code enforcement proceeding received by the transferor. 
(3)  Disclose, in writing, to the prospective transferee that the new owner will be responsible for compliance with the applicable code and with orders issued in the code enforcement proceeding. 
(4)  File a notice with the code enforcement official of the transfer of the property, with the identity and address of the new owner and copies of the disclosures made to the new owner, within five days after the date of the transfer. 
A failure to make the disclosures described in subsections (e)(1), (2), and (3) of this section before the transfer creates a rebuttable presumption of fraud. If the property is transferred before the hearing, the proceeding shall not be dismissed, but the new owner shall be provided a reasonable period of time to correct the violation before the hearing is held. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, pt. 2(26-6), 2-15-2010) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.06. 
Sec. 26-52. - Conduct of hearing. 
(a)  Upon request of the code enforcement officer or at such other times as may be necessary, the special magistrate may call a hearing or the chairperson of the code enforcement board may call hearings of the enforcement board and hearings may also be called by written notice signed by at least three members of the enforcement board. The enforcement board or special magistrate at any hearing may set a future hearing date. The enforcement board should attempt to convene no less frequently than once every two months, but may meet more or less often as the demand necessitates. Minutes shall be kept of all hearings by the code enforcement board or special magistrate, and all hearings shall be open to the public. The city clerk shall provide clerical and administrative personnel as may be reasonably required by the code enforcement board or special magistrate for the proper performance of its duties. 
(b)  Each case before the enforcement board or special magistrate shall be presented by either the city attorney firm or by a member of the community development director's administrative staff. 
(c)  If the city commission prevails in prosecuting a case before the code enforcement board or special magistrate, it shall be entitled to recover all costs incurred in prosecuting the case before the board or special magistrate and such costs may be included in the lien authorized under F.S. § 162.09(3). 
(d)  The enforcement board or special magistrate shall proceed to hear the cases on the agenda for that day. All testimony shall be under oath and shall be recorded. The enforcement board or special magistrate shall take testimony from the code enforcement officer and the alleged violator. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings. 
(e)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the enforcement board or special magistrate shall issue findings of fact, based on evidence of record and conclusions of law, and shall issue an order affording the proper relief consistent with powers granted herein. The finding of the code enforcement board shall be by motion approved by a majority of those members present and voting, except that at least four members must vote in order for the action to be official. The order may include a notice that it must be complied with by a specified date and that a fine may be imposed, and, under the conditions specified in F.S. § 162.09(1), the cost of repairs may be included along with the fine if the order is not complied with by that date. 
(f)  A certified copy of such order may be recorded in the public records of the county and shall constitute notice to any subsequent purchasers, successors in interest, or assigns if the violation concerns real property, and the findings therein shall be binding upon the violator and, if the violation concerns real property, any subsequent purchasers, successors in interest, or assigns. If an order is recorded in the public records pursuant to this subsection and the order is complied with by the date specified in the order, the enforcement board shall issue an order acknowledging compliance that shall be recorded in the public records. A hearing is not required to issue such an order acknowledging compliance. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, pt. 2(26-9), 2-15-2010) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.07. 
Sec. 26-53. - Administrative fines; costs of repair; liens. 
(a)  The enforcement board or the special magistrate, upon notification by the code inspector that an enforcement order has not been complied with by the set time or upon finding that a repeat violation has been committed, may order the violator to pay a fine specified in this section for each day the violation continues past the date set for compliance, or, in the case of a repeat violation, for each day the repeat violation continues, beginning with the date the repeat violation is found to have occurred by the code inspector. 
(b)  In addition, if the violation is a violation described in F.S. § 162.06(4), the code enforcement board or special magistrate shall notify the board of building commissioners, which may make all reasonable repairs which are required to bring the property into compliance and charge the violator with the reasonable cost of the repairs along with the fine imposed pursuant to this section. Making such repairs does not create a continuing obligation on the part of the city commission to make further repairs or to maintain the property and does not create any liability against the city commission for any damages to the property if such repairs were completed in good faith. If a finding of a violation or a repeat violation has been made as provided in this section, a hearing shall not be necessary for issuance of the order imposing the fine. 
(c)  If, after due notice and hearing, the code enforcement board or special magistrate finds a violation to be irreparable or irreversible in nature, it may order the violator to pay a fine as specified in subsection (d) of this section. 
(d)  A fine imposed pursuant to this section shall not exceed $250.00 per day for a first violation and shall not exceed $500.00 per day for a repeat violation, and, in addition, may include all costs of repairs pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. However, if the code enforcement board finds the violation to be irreparable or irreversible in nature, it may impose a fine not to exceed $5,000.00 per violation. 
(e)  In determining the amount of the fine, if any, the enforcement board or special magistrate shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  The gravity of the violation; 
(2)  Any actions taken by the violator to correct the violation; and 
(3)  Any previous violations committed by the violator. 
An enforcement board or special magistrate may reduce a fine imposed pursuant to this section. 
(f)  A certified copy of an order imposing a fine, or a fine plus repair costs and/or other associated costs incurred by the city under subsection (b) of this section, may be recorded in the public records of the county, and thereafter shall constitute a lien against the real property on which the violation exists and upon any other real or personal property owned by the violator. Upon petition to the circuit court, such order shall be enforceable in the same manner as a court judgment by the sheriffs of this state, including execution and levy against the personal property of the violator, but such order shall not be deemed to be a court judgment except for enforcement purposes. A fine imposed pursuant to this section shall continue to accrue until the violator comes into compliance or until judgment is rendered in a suit filed pursuant to this section, whichever occurs first. A lien arising from a fine imposed pursuant to this section runs in favor of the city commission, and the city commission may execute a satisfaction or release of lien entered pursuant to this section. After three months from the filing of any such lien which remains unpaid, the code enforcement board or special magistrate may authorize the city attorney to foreclose on the lien or to sue to recover a money judgment for the amount of the lien plus accrued interest. 
(g)  No lien created pursuant to the provisions of this part may be foreclosed on real property which is a homestead under Fla. Const., Art. X, § 4. The money judgment provisions of this section shall not apply to real property or personal property which is covered under Fla. Const., Art. X, § 4.a). 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, pt. 2(26-11), 2-15-2010) 
State Law reference- Administrative fines, costs of repair, liens, F.S. § 162.09. 
Sec. 26-54. - Appeals. 
    An aggrieved party, including the city commission, may appeal a final administrative order of the enforcement board or special magistrate to the circuit court. Such an appeal shall not be a hearing de novo but shall be limited to appellate review of the record created before the enforcement board or special magistrate. An appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the execution of the order to be appealed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, pt. 2(26-12), 2-15-2010) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.11. 
Sec. 26-55. - Duration of lien. 
    No lien provided under the Local Government Code Enforcement Boards Act shall continue for a period longer than 20 years after the certified copy of an order imposing a fine has been recorded, unless within that time an action is commenced pursuant to F.S. § 162.09(3) in a court of competent jurisdiction. In an action to foreclose on a lien or for a money judgment, the prevailing party is entitled to recover all costs, including a reasonable attorney's fee, that it incurs in the action. The city commission shall be entitled to collect all costs incurred in recording and satisfying a valid lien. The continuation of the lien effected by the commencement of the action shall not be good against creditors or subsequent purchasers for valuable consideration without notice, unless a notice of lis pendens is recorded. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, F.S. § 162.10. 
Sec. 26-56. - Notices. 
    All notices required by this article shall be by certified mail, return receipt requested; by hand delivery by a law enforcement officer, code enforcement officer, or other person designated by the commission; and/or by other methods provided for in F.S. § 162.12, including posting, publication and substitute service. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, pt. 2(26-13), 2-15-2010) 
State Law reference- Notices, F.S. § 162.12. 
Sec. 26-57. - Lien research fee. 
    The city commission may establish a uniform fee to be paid in advance for research conducted by city personnel at the request of any party regarding the status of, or the outstanding amount due, on a lien created under section 26-53. The fee shall be based upon the average cost incurred by the city, through its personnel, in conducting the research for a single lien. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, pt. 2(26-14), 2-15-2010) 
Sec. 26-58. - Request for lien reduction. 
    The enforcement board or special magistrate may establish a uniform fee to be paid in advance by any party submitting a request to the special magistrate for a recommendation to reduce the amount of a lien created under section 26-53. Such fee must be paid each time that the same party submits such a request for the same lien. The fee shall be based upon the average cost incurred by the city, through its personnel and the special magistrate, in processing a single request, in hearing the request, and in submitting any recommendation on the request to the board. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, pt. 2(26-15), 2-15-2010) 
Sec. 26-59. - Costs. 
    If the city prevails in prosecuting a case before the code enforcement board or special magistrate, it shall be entitled to recover all costs incurred in such prosecution, as determined by the board or special magistrate, and such costs may be included in the lien created under section 26-11. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, pt. 2(26-16), 2-15-2010) 
Sec. 26-60. - Deposit; disposition of proceeds. 
    All monies received hereunder, generated by fines or otherwise, shall be deposited into the city's general fund reserve account, to be budgeted first for payment of special magistrate fees. All remaining funds shall be appropriated and expended as provided by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, pt. 2(26-17), 2-15-2010) 
Secs. 26-61-26-76. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CITATION ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Supplemental procedure for code enforcement, F.S. § 162.21. 

Sec. 26-77. - Definition of code enforcement officer. 
    As used in this article, the term "code enforcement officer" means any designated employee or agent of a county or municipality whose duty it is to enforce codes and ordinances enacted by the county or municipality. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, F. S. § 162.21(1). 
Sec. 26-78. - Designation of code enforcement officers. 
    The city commission may designate certain of its employees or agents as code enforcement officers. The training and qualifications of the employees or agents for such designation shall be determined by the city. Employees or agents who may be designated as code enforcement officers may include, but are not limited to, code inspectors, law enforcement officers, animal control officers, or fire safety inspectors. Designation as a code enforcement officer does not provide the code enforcement officer with the power of arrest or subject the code enforcement officer to the provisions of F.S. §§ 943.085-943.255. Nothing in this section amends, alters, or contravenes the provisions of any state-administered retirement system or any state-supported retirement system established by general law. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, F. S. § 162.21(2). 
Sec. 26-79. - Issuance of citation. 
(a)  A code enforcement officer is authorized to issue a citation to a person when, based upon personal investigation, the officer has reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed a civil infraction in violation of a duly enacted code or ordinance and that the county court will hear the charge. 
(b)  Prior to issuing a citation, a code enforcement officer shall provide notice to the person that the person has committed a violation of a code or ordinance and shall establish a reasonable time period within which the person must correct the violation. Such time period shall be no more than 30 days. If, upon personal investigation, a code enforcement officer finds that the person has not corrected the violation within the time period, a code enforcement officer may issue a citation to the person who has committed the violation. A code enforcement officer does not have to provide the person with a reasonable time period to correct the violation prior to issuing a citation and may immediately issue a citation if a repeat violation is found or if the code enforcement officer has reason to believe that the violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety, or welfare, or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.21(3)(a), (b). 
Sec. 26-80. - Contents of citation notice of violation. 
    A citation notice of violation issued by a code enforcement officer shall contain: 
(1)  The date and time of issuance. 
(2)  The name and address of the person to whom the citation is issued. 
(3)  The date and time the civil infraction was committed. 
(4)  The facts of the violation constituting reasonable cause. 
(5)  The number or section of the code or ordinance violated. 
(6)  The name and authority of the code enforcement officer. 
(7)  The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay the civil penalty or to contest the citation. 
(8)  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects to contest the citation. 
(9)  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects not to contest the citation. 
(10)  A conspicuous statement that if the person fails to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed, or fails to appear in court to contest the citation, the person shall be deemed to have waived his right to contest the citation and that, in such case, judgment may be entered against the person for an amount up to the maximum civil penalty. 
(Code 1982, § 6.5-1(a)(3); Code 1999, § 26-3; Ord. No. 89-6, pt. 1, 2-5-1990; Ord. No. 2010-01, pt. 2(26-7), 2-15-2010) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.21(3)(c). 
Sec. 26-81. - Distribution-Copies of citation. 
    After issuing a citation to an alleged violator, a code enforcement officer shall forward one copy to the city clerk. 
(Code 1982, § 6.5-1(b); Code 1999, § 26-4; Ord. No. 89-6, pt. 1, 2-5-1990; Ord. No. 2010-01, pt. 2(26-8), 2-15-2010) 
Sec. 26-82. - Same-Original citation. 
    After issuing a citation to an alleged violator, a code enforcement officer shall deposit the original citation and one copy of the citation with the county court. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.21(4). 
Sec. 26-83. - City to enact enforcement procedures. 
(a)  The city is authorized to enforce codes and ordinances under the provisions of this article and may enact an ordinance establishing procedures for the implementation of such provisions, including a schedule of violations and penalties to be assessed by code enforcement officers. 
(b)  If the city chooses to enforce codes or ordinances under the provisions of this article, each code or ordinance or the ordinance enacted by the city establishing procedures for implementation of this section shall provide the following: 
(1)  A violation of a code or an ordinance is a civil infraction. 
(2)  A maximum civil penalty not to exceed $500.00. 
(3)  A civil penalty of less than the maximum civil penalty if the person who has committed the civil infraction does not contest the citation. 
(4)  For the issuance of a citation by a code enforcement officer who has reasonable cause to believe that a person has committed an act in violation of a code or an ordinance. 
(5)  For the contesting of a citation in county court. 
(6)  Such procedures and provisions as are necessary to provide for the enforcement of a code or an ordinance under the provisions of this section. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.21(5). 
Sec. 26-84. - Refusal of citation a misdemeanor. 
    Any person who willfully refuses to sign and accept a citation issued by a code enforcement officer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable as provided in F.S. § 775.082 or F.S. § 775.083. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.21(6). 
Sec. 26-85. - Provisions not applicable to certain statutes and codes. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to the enforcement pursuant to F.S. §§ 553.79 and 553.80 of the Florida Building Code adopted pursuant to F.S. § 553.73 as applied to construction, provided that a building permit is either not required or has been issued by the city. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.21(7). 
Sec. 26-86. - Provisions to provide means of additional enforcement. 
    The provisions of this article are additional and supplemental means of enforcing city codes or ordinances and may be used for the enforcement of any code or ordinance, or for the enforcement of all codes and ordinances. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the city from enforcing its codes or ordinances by any other means. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.21(8). 
Chapter 30 - EMERGENCY SERVICES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1-30-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Alarm system contractors, F.S. §§ 489.101 et seq., 401.501 et seq. 

Sec. 30-19. - Application. 
    This article shall be applicable to alarms from any alarm system, whether mechanical or electrical/electronic, which emits a signal, whether audible or telephonically tied to the city police department, reasonably calculated to cause an emergency response from the city police department or fire department. 
(Code 1982, § 12-13(b); Code 1999, § 30-31; Ord. No. 87-10, § 1, 11-16-1987) 
Sec. 30-20. - False alarm. 
    Whenever an alarm is activated in the city, thereby requiring an emergency response to the location by representatives from the city police department and/or fire department, and if that alarm is responded to, a police officer on the scene of the activated alarm system shall inspect the area protected by the system and shall determine whether the emergency response was in fact required as indicated by the alarm system or whether in some way the alarm system malfunctioned and thereby activated a false alarm. If the inspecting police officer at the scene determines the alarm to be false, such officer shall make a written report of the false alarm, a copy of which shall be mailed or delivered to the alarm user annually at the address of the alarm system installation location, advising the alarm user of the false alarm. The chief of police or his designee shall have the right to inspect any alarm system on the premises to which a response has been made, and he may cause an inspection of such system to be made at any reasonable time thereafter to determine whether it is being used in conformity with the terms of this section. 
(Code 1982, § 12-13(c); Code 1999, § 30-33; Ord. No. 87-10, § 1, 11-16-1987) 
Sec. 30-21. - Appeals. 
    Appeals regarding the false alarms shall be made to the city manager within 30 days of the occurrence. 
(Code 1982, § 12-13(d); Code 1999, § 30-34; Ord. No. 87-10, § 1, 11-16-1987) 
Sec. 30-22. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  Penalties shall be assessed against owners or users of alarm systems within the city for false alarms as follows: 
Number of False Alarm 
Reports Within One Year 
Beginning October 1 Penalty 
Assessed 1st to 3rd ..... Warning 4th to 10th ..... $50.00 per false alarm 11th and over ..... $100.00 per false alarm  
(b)  If a user has alarm systems at more than one location within the city (multiple business and/or residential locations), the penalty schedule set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall apply to each location separately. 
(Code 1982, § 12-13(e); Code 1999, § 30-35; Ord. No. 87-10, § 1, 11-16-1987) 
Chapter 34 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Junkyards, F.S. § 339.241; litter, F.S. § 403.713; abandoned property, F.S. ch. 705; public nuisances, F.S. ch. 823. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1-34-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Nuisances, F.S. § 823.01; procedure for abatement of nuisances, F.S. §§ 60.05, 60.06. 

Sec. 34-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Nuisance means anything that is noxious or offensive, or anything that interferes with the comfort of the citizens, or that is injurious to the public health. 
(Code 1960, § 10-2; Code 1982, § 8-5(a); Code 1999, § 34-31) 
Sec. 34-20. - General prohibition. 
    No person shall keep or suffer to remain upon his premises, or upon any premises owned, used or controlled by him, in any dwelling, store, warehouse, or other building, or upon any vacant lot, or in any yard or other place within the city, any nuisance to the annoyance of those residing or being in the vicinity thereof, or any unwholesome or decayed or decaying animal or vegetable matter, or any other matter or thing detrimental to the health or comfort of residents. 
(Code 1960, § 10-2; Code 1982, § 8-5; Code 1999, § 34-32) 
Sec. 34-21. - Offensive deposits on streets or property. 
    No person shall throw, place or deposit, or cause to be thrown, placed or deposited, any offal, trash, garbage, or filth of any kind into any of the public streets, roads, alleys, lanes or thoroughfares or vacant lot, or into or upon the premises of any other person within the city. 
(Code 1960, § 10-2; Code 1982, § 8-6; Code 1999, § 34-33) 
Sec. 34-22. - Offensive deposits in or drainage to water. 
(a)  No person shall throw or place or deposit the bodies of dead animals, or animal matter of any kind in any water within the city limits. 
(b)  No person shall dig or make any drain or sewer carrying any sewage or refuse material which shall empty into any pond, ditch or stagnant water. 
(Code 1960, § 10-2; Code 1982, § 8-7; Code 1999, § 34-34) 
Sec. 34-23. - Cleanliness of lots. 
    Every owner or agent of a vacant lot shall keep such lot in a clean and sanitary condition, and shall remove any excreta, trash, weeds or garbage from same within 24 hours after receiving notice from the community development director. 
(Code 1960, § 10-2; Code 1982, § 8-10; Code 1999, § 34-36) 
Sec. 34-24. - Depositing of trash or garbage in trash containers rented to businesses. 
    Any person depositing trash or garbage in or around trash containers rented by the city to businesses located within the city, without the consent of an authorized representative of that business, shall be in violation of this Code. 
(Code 1982, § 8-13; Code 1999, § 34-38; Ord. No. 85-1, § 1, 2-18-1985) 
Secs. 34-25-34-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - JUNKED, WRECKED PROPERTY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Secondhand goods dealers, F.S. § 538.01 et seq.; procedure for removal and disposition of abandoned property on public property, F.S. § 705.101 et seq.; purchases and sales of metals by junk dealers, F.S. § 538.18 et seq.; inspection of junkyards, etc., to locate stolen items, F.S. § 812.055. 

Sec. 34-52. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Junk means wrecked, derelict, dismantled, partially dismantled or nonoperative vehicles, washing machines, refrigerators, dishwashers, water heaters, television sets, similar machinery, boats, old scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, lumber, trash, rubber, debris, oddments, wastements, litter, leavings, ruins, castoffs, rummage, waste, and any other old scrap ferrous or nonferrous materials. 
    Junkyard means a place, structure, lot or parcel of land where junk is bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled as a business. 
    Property means any real property within the city which is not a street or highway. 
    Street or highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every publicly dedicated right-of-way within the city. 
    Vehicle means a machine propelled by power other than human power designed to travel along the ground by the use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles, tractors, buggies, wagons and farm equipment. 
(Code 1982, § 9-1; Code 1999, § 34-81; Ord. No. 88-5, pt. 1, 8-15-1988) 
Sec. 34-53. - Nuisance declared. 
    The accumulation and storage of junk not maintained as provided in this article shall constitute a nuisance, detrimental to health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2; Code 1999, § 34-82; Ord. No. 88-5, pt. 1, 8-15-1988) 
Sec. 34-54. - Junk on street or highway prohibited. 
    No person shall leave any junk upon a street or highway. This section shall not apply to grass, leaves, tree and shrub clippings and similar items which have been placed out to be picked up by the city. 
(Code 1982, § 9-3; Code 1999, § 34-83; Ord. No. 88-5, pt. 1, 8-15-1988) 
Sec. 34-55. - Junk on real property prohibited; exceptions. 
    No person in charge or control of any property, whether as owner, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any junk to remain on any real property within the city for a period longer than 72 hours, nor shall any person deposit junk upon the real property of another person. This prohibition shall not apply to junk in an entirely enclosed building, a junkyard maintained in a lawful manner, or junk vehicles on the business property of a new or used vehicle business maintained in a lawful manner. 
(Code 1982, § 9-4; Code 1999, § 34-84; Ord. No. 88-5, pt. 1, 8-15-1988) 
Sec. 34-56. - Notice for removal of junk on property. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the code enforcement officer to give written notice to the registered owner of any junk which is in violation of this article, and to the registered lienholder thereof, to the person responsible for depositing the junk, or to give such notice to the owner of the real property, or the person in charge or control of such real property, where such junk is situated (in cases where the identity of the owner or lienholder is not registered or otherwise readily ascertainable) advising such person that such junk violates this article and demanding that such junk be removed to a lawful place. Such notice may be given by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. A copy of the written notice shall be posted on the property where the junk is located when the original notice is mailed or delivered. 
(b)  Notice shall be deemed to be complete and sufficient when addressed to the owner and lien holder of the personal property, and the owners of the real property as shown on the registration of the personal property and on the latest tax roll and deposited in the United States mail with proper postage prepared. 
(Code 1982, § 9-6; Code 1999, § 34-86; Ord. No. 88-5, pt. 1, 8-15-1988) 
Secs. 34-57-34-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NOISE NUISANCE 

Sec. 34-90. - Regulation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud and raucous noise. The term "noise nuisance" means any sound which, because of its volume level, duration and character, annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities within the limits of the city. 
(b)  The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud and raucous noises in violation of this section, which enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Horns and signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on a street or public place of the city, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; the use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up. The use of sirens, except by authorized emergency vehicles, is prohibited. 
(2)  Radios, phonographs and similar devices. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, television set, boom box set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which the machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure of vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection. 
(3)  Loud vocal noises. Vocal noises made in a loud and raucous manner between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office or other place of business, or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence. 
(4)  Construction or repairing of buildings. The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair, of any building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in the case of urgent necessity in the interest of the public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the community development director who shall determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and if determined that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, may grant permission for such work to be done within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the work. 
(5)  Schools, courts, churches, hospitals, medical facilities. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, medical facility, church or court, while the same is in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of the institution or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in a hospital; provided that conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that such street is a school, medical facility, hospital, or court street. 
(6)  Construction equipment. The operation between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. and at any time on Sundays of any pile driver, stem or power shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise. 
(7)  Electronic sound amplification. The use of electronic sound amplification equipment in such a manner as to produce a sound which is capable of being heard at a point in excess of 50 feet from the source thereof between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. is prohibited in the following zones: agriculture district, one single-family district, multiple-family district, commercial district, and industrial district. 
(c)  The provisions of subsections (b)(1) through (7) of this section are intended to be construed to secure for the people freedom from unwanted loud and raucous noise as described in this section without violating any of the rights secured by the Constitution to the people, and are not intended, nor shall they be construed, to regulate the usual and customary noise incidental to urban life. 
(Code 1999, § 34-91; Ord. No. 2008-02, pt. 1, 5-19-2008) 
Sec. 34-91. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating the provisions of section 34-90 shall be subject to the penalty provided by section 1-15. 
(Code 1999, § 34-92; Ord. No. 2008-02, pt. 1, 5-19-2008) 
Chapter 38 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Fire prevention and protection, F.S. ch. 633. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Departmental control of fires; preventing interference with department; arrest authority. 
    The fire department and its members shall have control and management of all fires within the limits of the city, and the fire marshal and the members of the fire department shall have the power to prevent anyone from interfering in any way with the department or with any of the members of the department in the performance of their duties at a fire. The fire marshal shall have authority at fires in the city, and is authorized to summon a law enforcement officer to arrest and take into custody any person interfering in any way with the department or any of the members thereof in the performance of their duties at a fire. 
(Code 1960, § 9-16; Code 1982, § 7-1; Code 1999, § 38-1; Ord. No. 77-9, § 1, 1-9-1978; Ord. No. 96-06, § 1, 6-17-1996) 
Sec. 38-2. - Resisting, interfering with personnel or equipment. 
    No person shall resist, impede, obstruct or interfere with the movements of the fire marshal or his assistants or any firefighter in the execution of his duty. No person shall refuse to obey any order lawfully given by any officer of the fire department at any fire, or meddle or interfere with any engine, carriage, hook and ladder, truck, hose or fire apparatus, when engaged at or going to any fire. Any person may be required to keep beyond a certain line to be designed by the marshal or other officers in command at the fire. 
(Code 1960, § 9-2; Code 1982, § 7-2; Code 1999, § 38-2) 
State Law reference- Powers of fire marshal, F.S. § 633.121; assault or battery of firefighters, F.S. § 784.07; preventing or obstructing extinguishment of fire, F.S. § 806.10. 
Sec. 38-3. - Damaging fire alarm. 
    No person shall tamper or meddle with or interfere in any way with any station or fire alarm, firebox or any of the wires or supports thereof, or cut, break, injure, deface or remove any such boxes, or any of the wire or supports thereof, connected with any part of the fire alarm system, or make any connection or communication therewith, so as to interrupt or interfere with the proper working of such system, or negligently or willfully injure, break or destroy any machinery, equipment, apparatus or fixtures connected with such system. 
(Code 1960, § 9-4; Code 1982, § 7-3; Code 1999, § 38-3) 
State Law reference- Interfering with fire alarms, F.S. § 806.10. 
Sec. 38-4. - False fire alarms. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to give, or cause to be given, a false alarm of fire with intent to deceive. 
(Code 1960, § 9-17; Code 1982, § 7-4; Code 1999, § 38-4; Ord. No. 77-9, § 1, 1-9-1978) 
State Law reference- False alarms of fires, F.S. § 806.101. 
Secs. 38-5-38-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STANDARDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Florida Fire Prevention Code, F.S. § 633.0215. 

Sec. 38-27. - Code adopted by reference. 
    The Florida Fire Prevention Code and state standards are hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth in this article. 
(Code 1960, § 9-9; Code 1982, § 7-18; Code 1999, § 38-31; Ord. No. 77-9, § 1, 1-9-1978) 
State Law reference- Florida Fire Prevention Code, F.S. § 633.0215; minimum standards, F.S. § 633.025. 
Sec. 38-28. - Position of fire marshal established; to be inspector; appointment; assistants. 
    There is hereby established the position of fire marshal who shall be the chief inspector for the purpose of enforcement of this article and the prevention of fires within the city. He shall be appointed by the city manager. The fire marshal may designate assistant inspectors as shall from time to time be authorized by the city manager. 
(Code 1960, § 9-10; Code 1982, § 7-19; Code 1999, § 38-32; Ord. No. 77-9, § 1, 1-9-1978) 
Sec. 38-29. - Ordinances and laws enforced by division. 
    The fire marshal shall enforce all laws and ordinances pertaining to the following: 
(1)  Inspection of potential fire hazards. 
(2)  Abatement of existing fire hazards. 
(3)  Investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires. 
(4)  Control and use of explosives and flammables. 
(5)  Regulation of the maintenance of fire escapes. 
(6)  Regulation of the maintenance of automatic and other private fire alarm systems, and fire extinguishing equipment. 
(7)  Control of the means and adequacy of exits, in case of fire, from factories, hotels, lodging houses, hospitals, churches, halls, theatres, and other places in which number of persons work, meet, live or congregate. 
(8)  Education fire prevention programs. 
(9)  Building occupancy capacity. 
(10)  Life safety requirements. 
(Code 1960, § 9-11; Code 1982, § 7-20; Code 1999, § 38-34; Ord. No. 77-9, § 1, 1-9-1978) 
Sec. 38-30. - Inspections required. 
    It shall be the duty of the inspector to inspect, as often as he shall find necessary to the enforcement of this article, all buildings and premises, except private dwellings, in the city. 
(Code 1960, § 9-13; Code 1982, § 7-21; Code 1999, § 38-34; Ord. No. 77-9, § 1, 1-9-1978) 
Sec. 38-31. - Right to enter for inspection. 
(a)  The inspector shall have the right and authority to enter any building, structure, or premises within the city for the purpose of making inspections or investigations at all reasonable hours, provided that, except in the cases of emergency, the right and authority conferred by this section shall not apply to the entry of a private residence. 
(b)  The inspection and investigation authorized shall be for the purpose of reporting and correcting fire hazards pertaining to buildings and their occupants, including, but not limited to, disrepair, age and dilapidated conditions, faulty or unapproved construction, inadequate fire escapes or lack of means of egress, inadequate fire alarm protection, inadequate fire extinguishing equipment, materials and buildings especially susceptible to fire, conditions endangering other property or occupants, and any other fire hazards dangerous to life or property. 
(Code 1960, § 9-12; Code 1982, § 7-22; Code 1999, § 38-35; Ord. No. 77-9, § 1, 1-9-1978) 
Sec. 38-32. - Order and correction of violations. 
    Where violations of this article or of any other laws or ordinances relating to fire hazards are found by the inspector, he shall serve a written order to correct violations upon the owner, operator, occupant or other person responsible for the violation. 
(1)  Method of service. The order required in this section shall be served by making personal delivery of the order of the owner, operator, occupant or other person responsible, or by leaving the order with some person of suitable age and discretion upon the premises, or by affixing a copy of the order to the door at the entrance of the premises in violation. 
(2)  Time for compliance. The order required herein shall set forth a time limit for compliance, depending upon the hazard and danger created by the violation. In cases of extreme danger to persons or property, the inspector shall have the authority to require compliance immediately upon service of the order. 
(3)  Appeal from order. A person to whom an order hereunder is directed shall have the right to appeal such order within 24 hours of the service of such order. 
(4)  Failure to comply. Any person to whom an order is directed who shall fail to comply with such order within the time specified shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(5)  Correction by city. When a person to whom an order is directed shall fail to comply with such order within the specified time, the inspector shall have the authority to contract with others for the removal of such materials and charge the cost thereof to the person to whom his order is directed. The person removing material under a contract made hereunder shall be authorized to enter the premises and to remove such materials. If the cost of removal is not paid within 90 days after the receipt of a statement therefor from the inspector, such cost shall be levied against the property on which such fire hazard exists by a special assessment. The levying of such assessment shall not affect the liability of the person to whom the order is directed to fine and imprisonment as herein provided. 
(Code 1960, § 9-14; Code 1982, § 7-23; Code 1999, § 38-36; Ord. No. 77-9, § 1, 1-9-1978) 
Sec. 38-33. - Investigation, record and report of fires. 
(a)  The fire marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring in the city in which property has been destroyed or damaged, and, so far as possible, shall determine whether the fire is the result of carelessness or design. If the fire is of a suspicious origin, the fire marshal shall immediately notify the state fire marshal. 
(b)  The fire marshal shall keep a record of all fires and of all the facts concerning the same, including statistics as to the extent of such fires and the damage caused thereby. 
(Code 1960, § 9-15; Code 1982, § 7-24; Code 1999, § 38-37; Ord. No. 77-9, § 1, 1-9-1978) 
Chapter 42 - HUMAN RELATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1-42-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DISCRIMINATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Discrimination, F.S. § 760.01 et seq.; fair housing, F.S. § 760.20 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-19. - Anti-discrimination policy. 
(a)  It is the policy of the city that in the exercise of its police power for the public safety, public health and welfare, within Constitutional limitations, that all persons, regardless of race, color, sex, national origin, religion, age, disability, financial status, sexual orientation, or gender identity or expression, as defined by Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1991, the Equal Pay Act of 1963, the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967, as amended, the Rehabilitation Act, the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, and the Florida Civil Rights Act, be afforded equal opportunity to all terms and conditions of employment, all contracting opportunities within the city, all interaction with the city, all participation in any city programs or activities, and any other benefit, service and opportunity. 
(b)  The city manager shall, through each department, develop a complaint procedure that may be used by any person that believes he or she has been treated unfairly that will assure there will be no threats or actual retaliation for the complaint. The procedure shall require a fair opportunity for the complaint to be heard by persons not included in the actions complained of. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05, § 1, 3-20-2017) 
Secs. 42-20-42-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HOUSING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Fair housing, F.S. § 760.20 et seq. 

Sec. 42-40. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administrator means that person appointed by the city commission pursuant to section 42-42. 
    Age unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, refers exclusively to persons who are 18 years of age or older. 
    Discriminatory housing practice means any act that is unlawful under section 42-49. 
    Familial status means of, relating to, or characteristic of a family; specifically, a situation in which a minor (under the age of 18 years) in residing with a parent or other person having legal custody of such minor, or residing with another person with written consent of a parent or legal guardian. 
    Family means one or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling. 
    Housing or housing accommodation means any building, structure, or portion thereof, mobile home or trailer, or other facility which is occupied as or designed or intended for occupancy as a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof, mobile home or trailer or other facility. 
    Lending institution means any bank, insurance company, savings and loan association or any other person or organization regularly engaged in the business of lending money, guaranteeing loans, or sources of credit information, including, but not limited to credit bureaus. 
    Owner means any person, including, but not limited to, a lessee, sublessee, assignee, manager, or agent, and also including the city and its departments or other subunits having the right of ownership or possession or the authority to sell or lease any housing accommodation. 
    Persons means one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mortgage companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, or public corporations, including, but not limited to, the city or any department or subunit thereof. 
    Real estate agent means any real estate broker, any real estate salesman, or any other person, employee, agent, or otherwise, engaged in the management or operation of any real property. 
    Real estate broker or salesman means a person, whether licensed or not, who, for or with the expectation of receiving a consideration, lists, sells, purchases, exchanges, rents, or leases real property, or who negotiates or attempts to negotiate any of these activities, or who holds himself out as engaged in these activities, or who negotiates or attempts to negotiate a loan secured or to be secured by mortgage or other encumbrance upon real property, or who is engaged in the business of listing real property in a publication; or a person employed by or acting on behalf of any of these. 
    Real estate transaction includes the sale, purchase, exchange, rental or lease of property, and any contract pertaining thereto. 
    Rent includes leases, subleases, assignment and/or rental, including any contract to do any of the foregoing, or otherwise granting for a consideration the right to occupy premises that are now owned by the occupant. 
    Respondent means any person against whom a complaint is filed pursuant to this division. 
    Sale includes any contract to sell, exchange, or to convey, transfer or assign legal or equitable title to, or a beneficial interest in, real property. 
(Code 1982, § 8.5-23; Code 1999, § 42-46; Ord. No. 89-4, pt. 1, § 3, 10-9-1989; Ord. No. 92-01, pt. 1, § 3, 1-20-1992) 
State Law reference- Definitions, F.S. § 760.22. 
Sec. 42-41. - Declaration of policy. 
    It is the policy of the city, in keeping with the laws of the United States of America and the spirit of the constitution of the state, to promote, through fair, orderly and lawful procedure, the opportunity for each person so desiring to obtain housing of such person's choice in this city, without regard to race, color, ancestry, national origin, religion, sex, marital status, handicap, age or familial status and, to that end, to prohibit discrimination in housing by any person. 
(Code 1982, § 8.5-22; Code 1999, § 42-47; Ord. No. 89-4, pt. 1, § 2, 10-9-1989; Ord. No. 92-01, pt. 1, § 2, 1-20-1992) 
State Law reference- State policy, F.S. § 760.21. 
Sec. 42-42. - Administrator's authority and responsibilities. 
(a)  Appointment. The authority and responsibility for administering this division shall be vested in the city manager who shall appoint an administrator. 
(b)  General powers and duties. The administrator shall: 
(1)  Receive written complaints as hereinafter provided in section 42-43 relative to alleged unlawful acts under this article when a complaint seeks the administrator's good offices to conciliate; 
(2)  Upon receiving written complaint, make such investigations as the administrator deems appropriate to ascertain facts and issues; 
(3)  Utilize methods of persuasion, conciliation, and mediation or information adjustment of grievances; 
(4)  Establish, administer or review programs at the request of the city manager and make reports on such programs to the city manager; 
(5)  Bring to the attention of the city manager items that may require the city commission's notice or action to resolve; 
(6)  Render to the city manager annual written reports of his activities under the provisions of this article, along with such comments and recommendations as he may choose to make; and 
(7)  Cooperate with and render technical assistance to federal, state, local, and other public and private agencies, organizations and institutions which are formulating or carrying on programs to prevent or eliminate the unlawful discriminatory practices covered by the provisions of this division. 
(c)  Determination of probable cause. If, after fully processing the complaint in the manner hereafter provided, the administrator determines that there is probable cause to believe that there has been a violation of the provisions of this division, he shall refer the matter, along with the facts he has gathered in his investigations, to the proper county, state or federal authorities for appropriate legal action. 
(d)  Promulgation of forms and regulations. The administrator shall promulgate, publish and distribute the necessary forms, rules, and regulations to implement the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1982, § 8.5-26; Code 1999, § 42-48; Ord. No. 89-4, pt. 1, § 6, 10-9-1989; Ord. No. 92-01, pt. 1, § 6, 1-20-1992) 
State Law reference- Administration, F.S. § 760.30. 
Sec. 42-43. - Complaints. 
(a)  A person who claims that another person has committed a discriminatory housing practice against him may report that offense to the administrator by filing an informal complaint within 45 days after the date of the alleged discriminatory housing practice and not later. 
(b)  The administrator shall treat a complaint referred by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development or the Attorney General for the United States under the Fair Housing Act of 1968, Public Law 90-284, as an informal complaint filed under subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  An informal complaint must be in writing, verified or affirmed, on a form to be supplied by the administrator and shall contain the following: 
(1)  Identity and address of the respondent. 
(2)  Date of offense and date of filing the informal complaint. 
(3)  General statement of facts of the offense, including the basis of the discrimination (race, color, ancestry, national origin, religion, sex, marital status, handicap, familial status or age). 
(4)  Name and signature of the complainant. 
(d)  Each complaint shall be held in confidence by the administrator unless and until the complainant and the respondent consent in writing that it shall be made public. 
(e)  Within 15 days after the filing of the informal complaint, the administrator shall transmit a copy of the same to each respondent named therein by certified mail, return receipt requested. Thereupon, the respondents may file a written, verified informal answer to the informal complaint within 20 days of the date of the receipt of the informal complaint. 
(f)  An informal complaint or answer may be amended at any time, and the administrator shall furnish a copy of each amended informal complaint or answer to the respondents complaint, respectively, as promptly as practicable. 
(g)  The administrator shall assist complaints or respondents when necessary in the preparation and filing of informal complaints or answers or any amendments thereto. 
(Code 1982, § 8.5-27; Code 1999, § 42-49; Ord. No. 89-4, pt. 1, § 7, 10-9-1989; Ord. No. 92-01, pt. 1, § 7, 1-20-1992) 
Sec. 42-44. - Processing complaints. 
(a)  Within 30 days after the filing of an informal complaint, the administrator shall make such investigation as he deems appropriate to ascertain facts and issues. If the administrator shall deem that there are reasonable grounds to believe that a violation has occurred and can be resolved by conciliation, he shall attempt to conciliate the matter by methods of initial conference and persuasion with all interested parties and such representatives as the parties may choose to assist them. Conciliation conferences shall be informal and nothing said or done in the course of the informal conference with the individuals to resolve the dispute may be made public or used as evidence in a subsequent proceeding by either party without the written consent of both the complainant and the respondent. The administrator or employee of the administrator who shall make public any information in violation of this section shall be deemed guilty of a violation of a city ordinance and shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in section 42-40. 
(b)  If the parties desire to conciliate, the terms of the conciliation shall be reduced to writing in the form approved by the administrator and must be signed by and verified by the complainant and respondent and approved by the administrator. The conciliation agreement shall be for conciliation purposes only and shall not constitute an admission by any party that the law has been violated. 
(c)  If the administrator deems that there is not probable cause to believe that the alleged discriminatory housing practice has been committed, the administrator shall take no further action with respect to the alleged offense. 
(d)  If the administrator, with respect to any matter that involves a contravention of this division by failure to conciliate a complaint after the parties, in good faith, have attempted such conciliation; or determining that the violation alleged in the complaint cannot be resolved by conciliation, he shall notify both the complainant and the respondent within 30 days of the failure or the determination, and he shall proceed as provided in section 42-42(c). 
(Code 1982, § 8.5-28; Code 1999, § 42-50; Ord. No. 89-4, pt. 1, § 8, 10-9-1989; Ord. No. 92-01, pt. 1, § 8, 1-20-1992) 
Sec. 42-45. - Additional remedies. 
    The procedure prescribed by this division does not constitute an administrative prerequisite to another action or remedy available under other law. Nothing in this division shall be deemed to modify, impair or otherwise affect any right or remedy conferred by the constitution or laws of the United States or the state, and the provisions of this division shall be in addition to those provided by such other laws. 
(Code 1982, § 8.5-29; Code 1999, § 42-51; Ord. No. 89-4, pt. 1, § 9, 10-9-1989; Ord. No. 92-01, pt. 1, § 9, 1-20-1992) 
Sec. 42-46. - Education and public information. 
    The administrator may conduct educational and public informational activities that are designed to promote the policy of this division. 
(Code 1982, § 8.5-30; Code 1999, § 42-52; Ord. No. 89-4, pt. 1, § 10, 10-9-1989; Ord. No. 92-01, pt. 1, § 10, 1-20-1992) 
Sec. 42-47. - Untruthful complaints or testimony. 
    It shall be a violation of this division for any person knowingly and willfully to make false or untrue statements, accusations or allegations in a complaint filed hereunder or to give false testimony concerning violations of this division. 
(Code 1982, § 8.5-31; Code 1999, § 42-53; Ord. No. 89-4, pt. 1, § 11, 10-9-1989; Ord. No. 92-01, pt. 1, § 11, 1-20-1992) 
Sec. 42-48. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates any provisions of this division shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine up to but not exceeding the sum of $500.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1982, § 8.5-32; Code 1999, § 42-54; Ord. No. 89-4, pt. 1, § 12, 10-9-1989; Ord. No. 92-01, pt. 1, § 12, 1-20-1992) 
Sec. 42-49. - Unlawful housing practices. 
(a)  Sale or rental and advertising in connection therewith. Except as provided in section 42-50, it shall be unlawful and a discriminatory housing practice for an owner, or any other person engaging in a real estate transaction, or for a real estate broker, because of race, color, ancestry, national origin, religion, sex, marital status, handicap, familial status or age, to: 
(1)  Refuse to engage in a real estate transaction with a person or to otherwise make unavailable or deny housing to any person. 
(2)  Discriminate against a person in the terms, conditions or privileges of a real estate transaction or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith. 
(3)  Refuse to receive or to fail to transmit a bona fide offer to engage in a real estate transaction from a person. 
(4)  Refuse to negotiate for a real estate transaction with a person. 
(5)  Represent to a person that housing is not available for inspection, sale, rental or lease when, in fact, it is so available, or to fail to bring a property listing to such person's attention, or to refuse to permit him to inspect the housing. 
(6)  Steer any person away from or to any housing. 
(7)  Make, print, publish, circulate, post or mail, or cause to be made, printed, published or circulated, any notice, statement, advertisement or sign, or to use a form of application or photograph for a real estate transaction or, except in connection with a written affirmative action plan, to make a record or oral or written inquiry in connection with a prospective real estate transaction, which indicates directly or indirectly an intent to make a limitation, specification, or discrimination with respect thereto. 
(8)  Offer, solicit, accept, use or retain a listing of housing with the understanding that a person may be discriminated against in a real estate transaction or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith. 
(9)  Induce or attempt to induce any person to transfer an interest in any housing by representations regarding the existing or potential proximity of housing owned, used or occupied by any person protected by the terms of this division. 
(10)  Make any misrepresentations concerning the listing for sale or rental, or the anticipated listing for sale or rental, or the sale or rental of any housing in any area in the city for the purpose of inducing or attempting to induce any such listing or any of the transactions set forth in this subsection (a). 
(11)  Retaliate or discriminate in any manner against any person because of his opposing a practice declared unlawful by this division or because he has filed a complaint, testified, assisted or participated in any manner in any investigation, proceeding or conference under this division. 
(12)  Aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce any person to engage in any of the practices prohibited by the provisions of this division, or to obstruct or prevent any person from complying with the provisions of this division, or any conciliation agreement entered into thereunder. 
(13)  By canvassing to compel any unlawful practices prohibited by the provisions of this division. 
(14)  Otherwise to deny to, or withhold, any housing accommodations from a person. 
(15)  Promote, induce, influence or attempt to promote, induce or influence by the use of postal cards, letters, circulars, telephone, visitation or any other means, directly or indirectly, a property owner, occupant, or tenant to list for sale, sell, remove from, lease, assign, transfer, or otherwise dispose of any housing by referring, as a part of the process or pattern of indicating neighborhood unrest, community tension, or fear of racial, color, religious, nationality or ethnic change in any street, block, neighborhood or any other area, to the race, color, or religion of neighbors, tenants or other prospective buyers of any housing. 
(16)  Place a sign or display any other evidence either purporting to offer for sale, lease, assignment, transfer or other disposition or tending to lead to the belief that a bona fide offer is being made to sell, lease, assign, transfer or otherwise dispose of any housing that is not in fact available or offered for sale, lease, assignment, transfer or other disposition. 
(b)  Financing. It shall be unlawful and a discriminatory housing practice for any lending institution to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining housing, or to discriminate against such person in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance, because of the race, color, ancestry, national origin, religion, sex, marital status, handicap, familial status or age of such person or of any person associated with such person in connection with such loan or other assistance, or of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants or occupants of the housing in relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given; provided that nothing contained in this subsection shall impair the scope or effectiveness of the exceptions contained in section 42-50. 
(c)  Brokerage services. It shall be unlawful and a discriminatory housing practice to deny any person access to, or membership or participation in, any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers organization or other service, organization, or facility related to the business of selling or renting housing, or to discriminate against such person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation because of race, color, ancestry, national origin, religion, sex, marital status, familial status or age. 
(Code 1982, § 8.5-24; Code 1999, § 42-55; Ord. No. 89-4, pt. 1, § 4, 10-9-1989; Ord. No. 92-01, pt. 1, § 4, 1-20-1992) 
State Law reference- Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing, F.S. § 760.23; discrimination in brokerage services, F.S. § 760.24; discrimination in financing of housing, F.S. § 760.25. 
Sec. 42-50. - Exemptions and exceptions. 
(a)  Nothing contained in section 42-49 shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit charitable or educational institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, from limiting or from advertising the sale, rental or occupancy of housing which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons. Nor shall anything in this division prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose, provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
(b)  Nothing in section 42-49, other than subsection (a)(7) thereof, shall apply to: 
(1)  Any single-family house sold or rented by any owner, provided that such private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family houses at any one time; provided, further, that in the case of the sale of any such single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in such house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period; provided, further, that the owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on such owner's behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any rights to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of, more than three such single-family houses at any one time; provided, further, that the owner sells or rents such housing: 
a.  Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent, or salesperson, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting housing, or of any employee or agency of any such broker, agent, salesperson, or person; and 
b.  Without the publication, posting, or mailing, after notice of any advertisement or written notice in violation of section 42-49(a)(7), but nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstracters, title companies, and other such professional assistance as may become necessary in order to perfect or transfer the title. 
(2)  Rooms or units in housing containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as such owner's residence, provided that the owner sells or rents such rooms or units: 
a.  Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesperson, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting housing, or of any employee or agency of any such broker, agent, salesperson, or person; and 
b.  Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice in violation of section 42-49(a)(7), but nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstracters, title companies, and other such professional assistance as may become necessary in order to perfect or transfer the title. 
(c)  For the purpose of subsection (c) of this section a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting housing if he: 
(1)  Has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as principal, other than in the sale of his own personal residence, in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any housing or any interest therein; 
(2)  Has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of his own personal residence, in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any housing or any interest therein; or 
(3)  Is the owner of any housing designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families. 
(d)  Nothing in section 42-49 shall be construed to: 
(1)  Bar any person from restricting sales, rentals, leases or occupancy, or from giving preference, to persons of a given age for bona fide housing intended solely for minors. 
(2)  Make it an unlawful act to require that a person have legal capacity to enter into a contract or lease. 
(3)  Bar any person from advertising or from refusing to sell or rent any housing which is planned exclusively for, and occupied exclusively by, individuals of one sex, to any individual of the opposite sex. 
(4)  Bar any person from selling, renting or advertising any housing which is planned exclusively for, and occupied exclusively by, unmarried individuals to unmarried individuals only. 
(5)  Bar any person from advertising or from refusing to sell or rent any housing which is planned exclusively for married couples without children or from segregating families with children to special units of housing. 
(6)  Bar any person from refusing a loan or other financial assistance to any person whose life expectancy, according to generally accepted mortality tables, is less than the term for which the loan is requested. 
(Code 1982, § 8.5-25; Code 1999, § 42-56; Ord. No. 89-4, pt. 1, § 5, 10-9-1989; Ord. No. 92-01, pt. 1, § 5, 1-20-1992) 
State Law reference- Exemptions, F.S. § 760.29. 
Chapter 46 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Arrest, F.S. ch. 901; law enforcement, F.S. ch. 943. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1-46-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Minimum qualifications for employment, F.S. § 943.13. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-19. - Department created composition. 
    The police department is created in Charter § 5.04. 
(Code 1960, § 17-1; Code 1982, § 15-1; Code 1999, § 46-31) 
Sec. 46-20. - General duties of police officers. 
    The chief of police and all police officers shall perform and discharge all duties imposed upon them by state laws and all such duties as shall be prescribed by ordinance or resolution of the city commission and shall have charge of the enforcement of all ordinances and regulations prescribed by the city commission or a department of the city under the authority of the city commission. 
(Code 1960, § 17-3; Code 1982, § 15-5; Code 1999, § 46-32) 
Sec. 46-21. - Attendance at fires. 
    Where possible, a member of the police department may attend all fires within the city limits to ensure order and to prevent theft and other crimes. 
(Code 1960, § 17-4; Code 1982, § 15-6; Code 1999, § 46-33) 
Secs. 46-22-46-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CHIEF OF POLICE 

Sec. 46-46. - Position created; appointment; general duties; city marshal abolished. 
    There is hereby created a position in the police department of the city to be known as chief of police. The chief of police shall be selected as in the case of other members of the police department and shall be subject to similar regulations and shall perform duties similar to other members of the police department. He shall be considered as the head of the police department, in charge of the actions and conduct of such department, and responsible to the city manager and the city commission therefor. 
(Code 1960, § 17-2; Code 1982, § 15-2; Code 1999, § 46-51) 
State Law reference- Salary incentive program for local law enforcement officers, F.S. § 943.22. 
Sec. 46-47. - Chief responsible for subordinates. 
    The chief of police shall be responsible for the official conduct of all police officers appointed or employed by him. 
(Code 1960, § 17-3; Code 1982, § 15-3; Code 1999, § 46-51) 
Chapter 50 - MANUFACTURED HOMES, MOBILE HOMES, MANUFACTURED HOME AND MOBILE HOME PARKS, RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Purpose. 
    The intent and purpose of this chapter is to provide regulations governing mobile home parks and recreational vehicle parks as to their location and manner of operation in general; to provide regulations and zoning restrictions governing individual mobile homes and recreational vehicles as to their location, occupancy and use, when other than in regularly licensed mobile home parks or recreational vehicle parks; and to establish such traffic and parking regulations for all types of mobile homes, recreational vehicle parks and commercial trailers as to promote the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Code 1982, § 20-1; Code 1999, § 50-1; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(20-1), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 50-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial trailer includes the various types of trailers advertising a business, vehicles commonly known as semitrailers and any type of vehicle used as a temporary office or headquarters for a business. Small utility trailers used for transporting boats and other vehicles are specifically excluded from this definition. 
    Mobile home means a residential structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is eight body feet or more in width, over 35 feet in length, built on an integral chassis, and designed to be used as a dwelling when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained in the structure. 
    Mobile home park means a place set aside and offered by a person for either direct or indirect remuneration of the owner, lessor, or operator of such place, for the parking, accommodation, or rental of five or more mobile homes. 
    Mobile home space means a designated parcel of land designed for the accommodation of a mobile home, its accessory buildings or structures, and accessory equipment for the exclusive use of the occupants. 
    Operator means the owner, operator, keeper, lessor, proprietor, manager, assistant manager, desk clerk, agent, or employee of a mobile home park, lodging or a recreational vehicle park or a recreational camp who is designated by the permittee as the individual solely responsible for the daily operation of the park or camp and its compliance with this chapter and the rules adopted under F.S. ch. 513. 
    Recreational vehicle means a portable vehicular structure which is built on a chassis, designed as a dwelling for travel, recreation, or vacation; with a transportable body width not exceeding 81/2 body feet and a length not exceeding 40 feet, and does not qualify as a mobile home. This includes both motor homes which are self-propelled recreational vehicles and travel trailers which are on wheels and are towable. For purposes of this chapter, the term "recreational vehicles" includes the following terms and their definitions: 
(1)  Auto camper means a lightweight, collapsible unit that fits on top of an automobile and into the trunk with the cover removed, and is designed for travel, recreation and vacation uses. 
(2)  Camper van means a vehicle specially equipped for camping. 
(3)  Camping trailer means a vehicular portable unit mounted on wheels and constructed with collapsible partial sidewalls which folds for towing by another vehicle and unfold at the campsite to provide temporary living quarters for recreational camping use. 
(4)  Fifth-wheel recreational trailer means a vehicular portable unit mounted on wheels of such size and weight as not to require special highway movement permits. It is primarily designed and constructed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational camping or travel use and designed to be connected for towing through the use of a fifth-wheel device. It is of a length and width not exceeding the limitations provided in F.S. § 316.515, as administered by the state department of highway safety and motor vehicles. 
(5)  Motor home means a vehicular unit, not exceeding length and width limitations provided in F.S. § 316.515, as administered by the state department of highway safety and motor vehicles, and built on a self-propelled motor vehicle chassis, primarily designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use. 
(6)  Park model recreational vehicle means a transportable unit built on a single chassis and designed to provide seasonal or temporary living quarters when connected to utilities necessary for operation of installed fixtures and appliances. The total area of the unit in a setup mode, when measured from the exterior surface of the exterior walls at the level of maximum dimensions and including any bay windows that extend to the floor line will not exceed 500 square feet. 
(7)  Travel trailer means a vehicular portable unit mounted on wheels, of such size or weight as not to require a special highway movement permit when drawn by a motorized vehicle. It is primarily designed and constructed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use. 
(8)  Truck camper means a portable unit which is designed to be loaded onto or affixed to the bed or chassis of a truck and is constructed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use. 
    Recreational vehicle park means a place set aside and offered by a person or public body for either direct or indirect remuneration to the owner, lessor, or operator of such place, for the parking and accommodation of five or more recreational vehicles or tents utilized for sleeping or eating. The term "recreational vehicle park" also includes buildings and sites set aside for group camping and similar recreational facilities. For the purposes of this chapter, the terms "campground," "camping resort," "RV resort," "travel resort," and "travel park," or any variations of these terms, are synonymous with the term "recreational vehicle park." 
    Recreational vehicle space means a parcel of land in a recreational vehicle park designated for the placement of one recreational vehicle, one park model recreational vehicle, one tent or a combination of one recreational vehicle and tents for the exclusive use of its occupants. A site may also contain such temporary structures as collapsible screened enclosures and storage sheds. 
(Code 1982, § 20-2; Code 1999, § 50-2; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(20-2), 12-19-1994) 
State Law reference- Definitions, F.S. § 513.01. 
Sec. 50-3. - Building permit required for additions. 
    All mobile home or commercial trailer additions shall require a building permit. 
(Code 1982, § 20-3; Code 1999, § 50-3; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(20-3), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 50-4. - State regulation adopted. 
    F.A.C. ch. 64E-15, for mobile home and recreational vehicle parks, is hereby adopted by reference. If any conflict arises between the regulations of this chapter and F.A.C. ch. 64E-15, the state law would apply. 
(Code 1999, § 50-4; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(20-3.1), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 50-5. - Mobile homes prohibited outside mobile home parks; exception. 
    Except as provided herein, and except in zoning use districts RM-1 and RM-2, no person shall occupy, use or locate a mobile home in any place other than a regularly licensed mobile home park. 
(1)  This section shall not be construed as prohibiting the occupancy or use of existing mobile homes not located within licensed mobile home parks; provided, however, no existing mobile home which is located outside a regularly licensed mobile home park shall be replaced with another mobile home at such time as the present one is removed or damaged beyond repair or becomes unsafe for habitation. 
(2)  Occupancy of existing mobile homes as permitted by subsection (1) of this section shall nevertheless be limited to the person in whom legal or equitable title to the real estate on which the mobile home is located is vested. 
(Code 1982, § 20-4; Code 1999, § 50-5; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(20-4), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 50-6. - Parking on streets. 
    Mobile homes, recreational vehicles and trailers of all types covered by this chapter may be parked on a temporary basis upon the streets or public areas available for parking and controlled by the city only upon the following conditions: 
(1)  They shall be parked parallel to the curb and within the parking lines and areas indicated upon the pavement or by appropriate signs nearby. 
(2)  While the necessity for their temporary parking is recognized, mobile homes, recreational vehicles and trailers parked at the curb require an unusual amount of space and present a hazard to traffic safety, and for that reason they shall not be parked upon any public street for longer than one hour. 
(3)  They shall not be parked on any public street unless attached to the towing vehicle at all times. 
(4)  They shall not be parked on any public street of the city in such a manner as to interfere with the normal use of such street for traffic, even though such parking may be temporary for the purpose of loading or unloading freight or other commodities. 
(5)  The chief of police, with the approval of the city manager, is authorized to promulgate, from time to time, additional regulations on the movement and parking of mobile homes and commercial trailers, as may be necessary to carry into effect the intent of this chapter. Such regulations shall be considered promulgated and in effect upon suitable signs being prepared and posted at the place where the regulation applies, setting forth such regulations clearly. 
(Code 1982, § 20-5; Code 1999, § 50-6; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(20-5), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 50-7. - Storage on private property. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any resident of the city from storing a recreational vehicle of any type on the same lot as his residence, provided such recreational vehicle complies with the definition of a recreational vehicle, travel trailer or camping trailer and is not occupied or used for any purpose while stored; carries a current vehicle registration tag; and, provided further, that such recreational vehicle is stored at least 60 feet from the front property line and ten feet from all other property lines. All commercial trailers may be stored only in a commercial or industrial district and mobile homes may be stored only in an industrial district and shall be located so as to conform with building setbacks of such district. 
(Code 1982, § 20-6; Code 1999, § 50-7; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(20-6), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 50-8. - Use as office or place of business. 
    No person shall occupy or use a mobile home of any type covered by this chapter for an office or headquarters for a place of business, except that this provision shall not apply to building contractors having an office trailer, which may be located upon a site during the period of active construction. 
(Code 1982, § 20-7; Code 1999, § 50-8; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(20-7), 12-19-1994) 
Secs. 50-9-50-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOBILE HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Permits and regulations, F.S. ch. 513. 

Sec. 50-35. - Permit required. 
    No person shall establish, maintain, or operate within the limits of the city any mobile home park or recreational vehicle park, on any location or plot of ground, for the use of transients or others, by the day, week, month, or season, or longer period, regardless of whether a charge is made or not, unless such person possesses a valid permit from the city community development director for that purpose. 
(Code 1982, § 20-18; Code 1999, § 50-36; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(20-18), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 50-36. - Permit application. 
    Any person applying for a permit to establish, maintain, or operate a mobile home park or recreational vehicle park must first file with the community development director a complete copy of the plan of the proposed park, drawn to scale, and showing all proposed roadways and proposed septic tanks, or other means of sewage disposal and removal, and the plan for water supply and lighting. The applicant shall be accompanied by a permit from the state department of health and rehabilitative services for operation of a mobile home park or recreational vehicle park, and shall also have attached to it a deposit sufficient to purchase a city business tax receipt up through the next ensuing September 30. 
(Code 1982, § 20-19; Code 1999, § 50-37; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(20-19), 12-19-1994) 
State Law reference- State permit required, F.S. § 513.02. 
Sec. 50-37. - Location. 
    Mobile home parks or recreational vehicle parks shall be located only in use districts in which they are permitted under chapter 110, zoning. 
(Code 1982, § 20-20; Code 1999, § 50-38; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(20-20), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 50-38. - Minimum area requirements. 
    The minimum area requirements for each mobile home and recreational vehicle space shall be as follows: 
(1)  Spaces to be utilized for a mobile home shall contain no less than 5,000 square feet with a minimum 50-foot width. 
(2)  Each space shall be accessible from abutting streets for all essential and emergency uses by vehicular equipment, including equipment used by public protective agencies such as fire, police, and ambulance services. 
(3)  Each recreational vehicle space shall contain a minimum of 1,200 square feet. 
(4)  The density shall not exceed 25 recreational vehicle units per acre of site area. 
(5)  Each tent space shall contain a minimum of 500 square feet. 
(Code 1999, § 50-39; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(20-20.1), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 50-39. - Setback lines and screening on park perimeter. 
    Minimum building line setbacks and screening on the perimeter of a mobile home park or recreational vehicle park shall be as follows: 
(1)  Front yard setback. No part of a mobile home, recreational vehicle or structure shall be closer than 25 feet from a public right-of-way line. 
(2)  Side and rear yard setbacks. Six feet. 
(3)  Screening. A mobile home park or recreational vehicle park shall be provided with perimeter screening on all sides adjacent to a residential or commercial zoning district or public street. Such screening shall be placed within a buffer strip having a width of not less than ten feet and shall conform with one of the following alternatives: 
a.  Construction of a masonry wall of brick, textured concrete or painted block with a minimum height of five feet. 
b.  Installation of a chainlink or other metal fencing with a minimum height of five feet. The fence shall be supplemented with shrubs having a minimum height of two feet at time of planting, spaced so the branches will meet, creating a solid buffer and shall reach a height of five feet within three years. 
(Code 1982, § 20-21; Code 1999, § 50-40; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(20-21), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 50-40. - Setback lines within park. 
    Minimum building line setbacks within the park shall be as follows: 
(1)  Front yard setback. No part of a mobile home, recreational vehicle or structure shall be closer than 71/2 feet from the right-of-way line of any interior roadway. 
(2)  Side and rear yard setback. Six feet. 
(Code 1982, § 20-22; Code 1999, § 50-41; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(20-22), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 50-41. - Spacing of units with relation to other units and buildings. 
    A minimum distance of 12 feet between adjacent mobile homes and recreational vehicles or any enclosed appurtenances thereof shall be maintained at all times. Such 12-foot distance shall also be maintained between any combination of mobile homes, recreation vehicles or structures. 
(Code 1999, § 50-42; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(20-23), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 50-42. - Site corners to be marked. 
    Corners of all mobile home and recreational vehicle sites in parks shall be marked on the ground by permanent markers. 
(Code 1982, § 20-23; Code 1999, § 50-43; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(20-24), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 50-43. - Right-of-way widths; construction standards. 
    Plans for parks shall include right-of-way widths as follows: 
(1)  Minimum right-of-way shall be 20 feet. 
(2)  Minimum pavement width shall be as follows: 
a.  Two-way traffic: 20 feet. 
b.  One-way traffic: 12 feet. 
(3)  Roadways shall be constructed according to standards established by the city's engineer, which shall be available at the office of the city manager or city community development director. 
(4)  Two off-street parking spaces of a minimum of 160 square feet each shall be provided for each mobile home or recreational vehicle. 
(Code 1982, § 20-24; Code 1999, § 50-44; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(20-25), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 50-44. - Duty to register occupants. 
    It shall be the duty of any person operating or maintaining a mobile home park or recreational vehicle park to keep a register of all persons accommodated in the park, such register to include the names, home addresses, and descriptions of the mobile home or recreational vehicles occupying a space in the park. 
(Code 1982, § 20-25; Code 1999, § 50-45; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(20-26), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 50-45. - Duty to provide for sanitation. 
    It shall be the duty of any person operating or maintaining a mobile home or recreational vehicle park to prescribe and enforce rates and regulations for the management or operation of the park so as to ensure that all proper sanitation methods are observed. 
(Code 1999, § 50-46; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(20-27), 12-19-1994) 
Secs. 50-46-50-63. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MOBILE HOME INSTALLATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Mobile home tie-down requirements, F.S. § 320.8325. 

Sec. 50-64. - State regulation adopted by reference. 
    F.A.C. 15C-1.0101 et seq., Rules of the Division of Motor Vehicles, State of Florida, is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein. 
(Code 1982, § 20-36; Code 1999, § 50-71; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(20-36), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 50-65. - Blocking, tie-down required. 
    Every mobile home in the city which is moved in or set up shall be blocked, anchored and tied down in accordance with the requirements of F.A.C. 15C-1.0101 et seq., as amended. 
(Code 1982, § 20-37; Code 1999, § 50-72; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(20-37), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 50-66. - Skirting of mobile homes. 
(a)  Any mobile home installed in the city shall be skirted on all sides. The term "skirting" shall mean the technique by which the space beneath the mobile home is effectively screened from view and protected from invasion of animals which might otherwise establish a habitat, create sanitation problems or cause physical destruction of electrical, mechanical, or structural components of the mobile home. Skirting or screening shall be accomplished with one of the following materials or a combination thereof: 
(1)  Vegetated earth berm; 
(2)  Pressure-treated or other rot-resistant wood; 
(3)  Masonry; 
(4)  Fiberglass panels or rigid vinyl or equivalent material manufactured for skirting applications; or 
(5)  Metal of a quality and durability comparable to the exterior finish of the mobile home. 
(b)  Skirting shall allow for adequate ventilation in accordance with the standard building code; however, lattice or other partially open materials must provide screening of not less than 50 percent opacity. 
(1)  Mobile homes installed after February 1, 1992. Any mobile home installed after February 1, 1992, shall be required to comply with this section prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  Mobile homes installed on or before February 1, 1992. Any mobile home installed on or before February 1, 1992, shall be required to provide skirting for such mobile home in compliance with one or more of the methods set forth in this section. Compliance shall be achieved prior to January 1, 1995. Mobile homes which have not been skirted by January 1, 1995, shall be considered to be in violation of this Code and subject to a $500.00 fine for each 30-day period such violation continues. 
(Code 1999, § 50-73; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(20-38), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 50-67. - Inspection prior to installation. 
    Prior to installation, any mobile home over seven years of age shall be inspected by the community development director for compliance with minimum standards as established by the city. 
(Code 1999, § 50-74; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(20-39), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 50-68. - Violations; civil remedy. 
    Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. The city may bring suit to restrain, enjoin or otherwise prevent violation of this article in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1982, § 20-41; Code 1999, § 50-79; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(20-44), 12-19-1994) 
Chapter 54 - OFFENSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Abandoned appliances, securing or removing doors, F.S. § 823.07 et seq.; weapons, F.S. ch. 790; assault and battery, F.S. ch. 784; prostitution, F.S. ch. 796; resisting law enforcement officers, F.S. §§ 843.01, 843.02; gambling generally, F.S. ch. 849; riots and unlawful assemblies generally, F.S. ch. 870; breach of the peace and disorderly conduct, F.S. § 877.03; duty to render assistance when summoned, F.S. § 901.18. 

Sec. 54-1. - Adoption of state misdemeanors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit within the city limits any act which is recognized by the laws of the state as a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person upon conviction thereof shall be punished as for a violation of this Code, but in no event shall the punishment exceed the penalty provided by the laws of the state for the similar offense. 
(Code 1960, § 13-1; Code 1982, § 12-1; Code 1999, § 54-1) 
Case Law reference- Adoption of state misdemeanors by reference upheld, MacFarland v. Roberts, 74 So.2d 88 (Fla. 1954); Jaramillo v. City of Homestead, 322 So.2d 496 (Fla. 1975); adoption includes future enactments, State v. Smith, 189 So.2d 846 (Fla. 4th DCA 1966). 
Chapter 58 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Restriction on sales from vehicles, F.S. § 337.406; charitable solicitation, F.S. ch. 496; home solicitation, F.S. § 501.021 et seq.; secondhand goods dealers. F.S. ch. 538; peddling at camp meetings restricted, F. S. § 871.03. 

Sec. 58-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Charitable solicitor means any person who requests, directly or indirectly, money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value, or offers or attempts to sell any tangible or intangible thing on the representation that the whole or any part of the proceeds shall be used or go for a charitable or religious purpose. 
    Peddler or salesman means any person who engages in the business of selling goods, wares or merchandise, or who solicits orders for such goods, wares or merchandise, by going from house to house. 
(Code 1960, § 14-1; Code 1982, § 13-1; Code 1999, § 58-1; Ord. No. 78-6, § 1, 6-5-1978) 
Sec. 58-2. - Registration, permit, business tax receipt required. 
    Before any person engages in the business of a peddler or salesman or charitable solicitor in the city, he shall register with and be issued a permit by the city, and unless exempted by law, shall pay the business receipts tax. 
(Code 1960, § 14-2; Code 1982, § 13-2; Code 1999, § 58-2; Ord. No. 78-6, § 1, 6-5-1978) 
Sec. 58-3. - Application required. 
    An application for a registration permit shall be in writing, signed by the person making the application and shall be on a form supplied by the city. The application required shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, business address, residence or headquarters of the person applying for the permit. 
(2)  If the applicant is not an individual, the names and addresses of the applicant's principal officers and managers and written evidence authorizing such selling or charitable solicitation, certified to be a true and correct copy by the official having charge of the applicant's records. 
(3)  A description of the tangible and intangible products being offered for sale and the period of time that such peddler or salesman is to be engaged in such business in the city. If a charitable solicitation, a statement of the purpose for which such solicitation is made, the total amount of funds proposed to be raised thereby, the use or disposition to be made of any receipts therefrom, and the period of time that such solicitor is to be engaged in soliciting in the city. 
(4)  The name and address of the persons by whom the receipts of such solicitation shall be disbursed and the name and address of the persons who will be in direct charge of conducting the solicitation, and the names of all promoters connected or to be connected with the proposed solicitation. 
(5)  A statement that the applicant has never been charged with or convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, or, if the applicant has been so charged or convicted, the details thereof. 
(6)  A statement to the effect that if a permit is granted, it will not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement by the city, or by any department or officer thereof. 
(7)  If, while any application is pending, or during the term of any permit granted thereon, there is any change in fact, policy or method that would alter the information given in the application, the applicant shall notify the police in writing thereof within 24 hours after such change. 
(8)  An application fee, established by resolution and in appendix A to this Code, shall accompany the sworn application. 
(Code 1960, § 14-3; Code 1982, § 13-3; Code 1999, § 58-3; Ord. No. 78-6, § 1, 6-5-1978) 
State Law reference- Authority to levy regulatory fees, F.S. § 166.221. 
Sec. 58-4. - Investigation of application. 
    The chief of police or his designee shall examine the application, and shall make, or cause to be made, such further investigation of the application and the applicant as he shall deem necessary in order for him to perform his duties under this chapter. 
(Code 1960, § 14-4; Code 1982, § 13-4; Code 1999, § 58-4; Ord. No. 78-6, § 1, 6-5-1978) 
Sec. 58-5. - Standards for issuing permit. 
    The city shall issue the permit applied for under this chapter whenever the following facts exist: 
(1)  That all the statements made on the application are true. 
(2)  That the control and supervision of the sale or solicitation will be under responsible and reliable persons. 
(3)  That the applicant has not been charged with nor convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude which would adversely affect the activity for which the applicant has made application. 
(Code 1960, § 14-5; Code 1982, § 13-5; Code 1999, § 58-5; Ord. No. 78-6, § 1, 6-5-1978) 
Sec. 58-6. - Permit form; granting not endorsement by city; time limit. 
    Permits issued under this chapter shall be carried on the person to whom issued, shall bear the name and address of the person to whom it is issued, the number of the permit, the date issued, the dates and times within which the permit holder may solicit or sell, and a statement that the permit does not constitute an endorsement by the city or by any of its departments, officers or employees, of the purpose or of the person conducting the sale or solicitation. No permit may be granted for a period longer than 90 days, but the city may extend any permit for not more than 90 additional days upon a showing that unnecessary hardship would be created by a failure to extend the original 90-day period for such additional days. 
(Code 1960, § 14-6; Code 1982, § 13-6; Code 1999, § 58-6; Ord. No. 78-6, § 1, 6-5-1978) 
Sec. 58-7. - Permit and license nontransferable; return upon expiration. 
    Any permit or occupational license issued under this chapter shall be nontransferable and shall be returned to the city within two days of its date of expiration. 
(Code 1960, § 14-7; Code 1982, § 13-7; Code 1999, § 58-7; Ord. No. 78-6, § 1, 6-5-1978) 
Sec. 58-8. - Appeal from denial of permit. 
    Within five days after receiving notification by certified mail that an application for a permit under this chapter has been denied, any applicant may file a written request for a public hearing on the application before the city manager, together with written exceptions to the findings of fact upon which city based its denial of the application. Upon the filing of such request, the city manager shall fix a time and place for the hearing and shall notify the applicant thereof. The hearing shall be held within ten days after the request is filed. At the hearing, the applicant may present evidence in support of his application and exceptions. Any interested person may, in the discretion of the city manager, be allowed to participate in the hearing and present evidence in opposition to the application and exceptions. Within ten days after the conclusion of the hearing, the city manager shall render a written report either granting or denying the application for permit. In his report, the city manager shall state the facts upon which his decision is based, and his ruling upon any exceptions filed in the original findings of the city. The report shall be filed in the city manager's office for public inspection and a copy shall be served by certified mail upon the applicant. 
(Code 1960, § 14-8; Code 1982, § 13-8; Code 1999, § 58-8; Ord. No. 78-6, § 1, 6-5-1978) 
Sec. 58-9. - Suspension, revocation of permits. 
    Whenever it shall be shown, or whenever the chief of police or his designee has knowledge, that any person to whom a permit has been issued under this chapter, has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, or any promoter, agent or solicitor of a permit holder has misrepresented the purpose of the solicitation or sale, the chief of police shall immediately suspend the permit and give the permit holder written notice by certified mail of a hearing to be held within five days of such suspension to determine whether or not the permit should be revoked. This statement must contain a statement of the facts upon which the city has acted in suspending the permit. At the hearing, the permit holder, and any other interested person, shall have the right to submit evidence as to the facts upon which the chief of police based the suspension of the permit, and any other facts which may aid the chief of police in determining whether this chapter has been violated and whether the purpose of the solicitation or sale has been misrepresented. If, after such hearing, the city finds that this chapter has been violated or the purpose of the sale or solicitation has been misrepresented, he shall, within two days after the hearing file in the office of the city manager for public inspection and serve upon the permit holder, a written statement of facts upon which he bases such finding and shall immediately revoke the permit. If, after such hearing, the chief of police finds that this chapter has not been violated, and the purposes of the sale or solicitation has not been misrepresented, he shall, within five days after the hearing, give to the permit holder a written statement cancelling the suspension of the permit and stating that no violation nor misrepresentation was found to have been committed. Within ten days after receiving notification by certified mail that his permit has been revoked, the applicant may file a written request for a public hearing on the revocation before the city manager and follow the same procedure set forth in section 58-8. 
(Code 1960, § 14-9; Code 1982, § 13-9; Code 1999, § 58-9; Ord. No. 78-6, § 1, 6-5-1978) 
Sec. 58-10. - Prohibition of outdoor roadside sales of merchandise. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any merchandise within the city from outdoor roadside stands, whether on public or private property. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to or affect the following: 
(1)  Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction; 
(2)  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officers; 
(3)  Any sale conducted by any merchant, mercantile or other business establishment from or at a place of business wherein such sales would be permitted by the zoning regulations of the city. For purposes of this section, "business establishment" and "place of business" shall mean a location at which retail sales of merchandise have been conducted continuously by the applicant for at least 12 months prior to application for a temporary tent sales permit under this section; 
(4)  Any bona fide charitable, educational, cultural or governmental institution or organization, when the proceeds from such sale are used directly for the institution or organization's charitable purposes, and the goods or articles are not sold on a consignment basis, except that no sale shall be held under these provisions until after a permit has been obtained from the city approving the times and location of such sale, for which permit there shall be no fee assessed; 
(5)  House to house sales authorized by this chapter; or 
(6)  Garage sales authorized by section 110-529. 
(Code 1982, § 13-10; Code 1999, § 58-10; Ord. No. 85-7, § 1, 8-5-1985; Ord. No. 2017-16, § 1, 9-18-2017) 
Chapter 62 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND CERTAIN PUBLIC PLACES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Requiring property owner to make improvements. 
(a)  The city commission may adopt a resolution directing and requiring the owner of any lot, parcel or tract of land fronting or abutting on any street, avenue, alley or other public way to construct, build or repair a sidewalk, foot pavement, curb or gutter or either one or more of such improvements thereon, to be built in front of such abutting property or in front of a lot on a corner or which lies between two streets and upon a grade and of such materials, width and other dimensions and in such manner as the commission shall direct. The resolution shall fix a time within which the work shall be done by the owner and a copy of such resolution shall be served upon such owner or upon the agent of such owner, or if the owner is a nonresident of the city, or cannot be found within the city and has no known agent in the city, a copy of such resolution shall be published once each week for two weeks in some newspaper published in the city and a copy thereof posted upon such lot, parcel or tract of land; or, if no newspaper is published in the city, such posting upon such lot, parcel or tract of land shall be deemed sufficient. If the owner shall not, within the time fixed in such resolution, build, construct or repair such sidewalk or foot pavement, curb, or gutter or either one or more of such improvements in the manner and as directed in such resolution, the commission may cause the same to be done and pay therefor, and charge, assess and collect the expense thereof against such lot, parcel or tract of land and against the owner thereof. 
(b)  All the provisions of article III of this chapter relative to the making of the assessments and proceedings subsequent thereto, notice to hear complaints and action thereon, and the effect, thereof, decrease of amount of assessment, contesting legality of assessment, acquisition by city of lien and effect thereof, rate of interest, entry in City Improvement Lien Book, effect of such entry, payment of lien, issuance of certificates of indebtedness, the enforcement and collection of the lien and attorney's fee, shall be applicable to and may be followed in making and enforcing the assessments authorized by this section. 
(Laws of Fla., ch. 10433(1925), art. VIII, § 6; Code 1999, § 62-1) 
Sec. 62-2. - Granting nonexclusive license to drainage district to use street rights-of-way. 
(a)  The city commission does hereby grant to Clewiston Drainage District a nonexclusive license to use all present and future street rights-of-way within the city which are contiguous to Clewiston Drainage District Canals Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 for the purpose of maintaining such canals. 
(b)  The public shall have the continuous use of said streets. The Clewiston Drainage District shall exercise its right of maintenance under this license in such manner so as to inconvenience the public use of streets as little as possible. Any damage done to the city streets by Clewiston Drainage District under this license shall be repaired by them to the specifications of the city. 
(Code 1960, § 2-19; Code 1982, § 16-1; Code 1999, § 62-2) 
Sec. 62-3. - Deposit of lawn trimmings, trash and junk. 
(a)  Prohibited in certain places. It shall be unlawful for any person to place lawn, shrubbery or tree trimmings or discarded personal property or junk in any city park or the right-of-way adjacent thereto, or upon any sidewalk or any drainage canal bank within the city. 
(b)  Placement for city collection. Lawn, shrubbery and tree trimmings, discarded personal property and junk placed out for collection by the city shall be placed adjacent to the property from which it originates and shall be placed adjacent to the driving portion of the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 81-9, § 1, 1-18-1982; Code 1982, § 16-2; Code 1999, § 62-3) 
Secs. 62-4-62-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIDEWALKS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Supplemental method of making local improvements, F.S. ch. 170. 

Sec. 62-25. - Damaging, destroying generally. 
    It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person, whether the owner of the abutting property or not, to damage or destroy any sidewalk within the city, except when the same is being removed for the expressed purpose of being replaced by the abutting property owner or by the city. 
(Code 1960, § 18-13; Code 1982, § 16-14; Code 1999, § 62-33) 
Sec. 62-26. - Duty of abutting owner to prevent damage or destruction. 
    It is hereby declared the duty of the owner of property abutting upon any sidewalk to exercise due care and diligence to prevent damage to or destruction of such sidewalk. A willful disregard of this requirement on the part of the property owner shall be considered a violation of this article, regardless of the then existing condition of such sidewalk. 
(Code 1960, § 18-10; Code 1982, § 16-15; Code 1999, § 62-34) 
Sec. 62-27. - Duty to repair or replace damaged or destroyed sidewalks; repair by city; lien. 
    Any person owning property abutting upon or in front of any sidewalk shall be responsible for any damage to or destruction of that portion of the sidewalk abutting upon or running in front of such person's property. Whenever any such sidewalk shall have become damaged or destroyed, it may become the duty of the owner of such abutting property to immediately repair or replace the same, of such specifications as to dimensions and material as is then currently used by the city in constructing sidewalks. Should such property owner fail or refuse to repair or replace such damaged sidewalk within a reasonable period of time after receiving notice of such damage, the city shall proceed to either repair or replace such damages or destroyed sidewalk, as the situation may require, and to charge the cost thereof, including a reasonable allowance for supervisory personnel, against the owner of such property. Upon the failure of such person to pay the same within 30 days after the completion thereof, such charges shall become a lien upon said property. 
(Code 1960, § 18-11; Code 1982, § 16-16; Code 1999, § 62-35) 
Sec. 62-28. - Enforcement of liens. 
    Any lien acquired by the city by virtue of this article shall be enforced in the same manner as other municipal liens for special benefits are enforced. All resolutions, notices, hearings, and other proceedings which might be necessary or desirable in order to constitute such charge, a lien against the property is hereby expressly authorized. 
(Code 1960, § 18-12; Code 1982, § 16-17; Code 1999, § 62-36) 
State Law reference- Foreclosure of special assessment liens, F.S. ch. 173. 
Sec. 62-29. - Bond for destruction or damage prerequisite to building permit. 
    Any person who applies for a building permit under the provisions of this Code, where the work to be performed under such permit is on property on which a sidewalk is located, before the permit is issued may be required to post a cash or surety bond in the amount of $500.00 payable to the city to ensure the repair or replacement of any damage to or destruction of such sidewalk. The repair or replacement of the sidewalk shall be completed no later than the completion of the work for which the building permit was issued. Upon the failure of the permit holder to repair or replace the sidewalk, the city may forfeit the bond, repair or replace the sidewalk and charge the cost of same against the bond. Any bond remaining after the repair or replacement, shall be paid to the permit holder by the city. 
(Code 1960, § 18-12.1; Code 1982, § 16-18; Code 1999, § 62-37) 
Sec. 62-30. - Violations. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. Each violation of this article shall be considered a separate offense. Any fine levied by virtue of this section shall not be a bar to enforcing the provisions of sections 62-27 and 62-28, nor shall the fact that an abutting property owner has paid the cost of repair or replacement of such damaged or destroyed sidewalk be a bar to conviction and penalties under this article. 
(Code 1960, § 18-14; Code 1982, § 16-19; Code 1999, § 62-38) 
Secs. 62-31-62-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LIBRARY[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Execution against municipal property prohibited, F.S. § 55.11; municipal property exempt from taxation, F.S. § 196.199(1)(c); public library, F.S. ch. 257. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 62-49. - Established. 
    There is hereby established a public library to be known as the Clewiston Public Library. 
(Code 1960, § 10B-1; Code 1982, § 10-1; Code 1999, § 62-101) 
Sec. 62-50. - Donations authorized; title to vest in the city. 
    Any person may make any donation of money, other personal property or lands for the benefit of the library, and the title of the property so donated may be made to and shall vest in the city and the city shall thereby become the owners in trust to the uses of the public library. 
(Code 1960, § 10B-8; Code 1982, § 10-9; Code 1999, § 62-102) 
Sec. 62-51. - Service as circulating library. 
    The city commission may authorize any circulating library, reading matter or work of art of any private person, association or corporation, to be deposited in the public library rooms, to be drawn or used outside of the rooms only on payment of such fees or membership as the corporation or association owning the same may require. Deposits may be removed by the owners thereof at their pleasure, but the books or reading matter so deposited in the rooms of any such public library shall be separately and distinctly marked and kept upon shelves apart from the books of the city library. Every such private or associate library or other property so deposited in the public library, while so placed or remaining, shall be subject to use and reading within the library room without charge by any person and inhabitant of the city entitled to the use of the free library. 
(Code 1960, § 10B-10; Code 1982, § 10-11; Code 1999, § 62-103) 
Sec. 62-52. - Free use by inhabitants of city. 
    The library and reading room shall be free to the use of the inhabitants of the city, subject always to such reasonable regulations as the city may adopt. The librarian may exclude from the use of the library and reading room any person who shall willfully violate or refuse to comply with rules and regulations established for the government of the library. Persons so excluded may appeal to the city commission. 
(Code 1960, § 10B-4; Code 1982, § 10-12; Code 1999, § 62-104) 
State Law reference- Free service required if state funds received, F.S. § 257.25. 
Sec. 62-53. - Penalty for violation of rules recovered by civil action. 
    Penalties imposed or accruing by any bylaw or regulation of the library may be recovered in a civil action before any court having jurisdiction. Such action to be instituted in the name of the city. Any monies collected in any such action shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1960, § 10B-7; Code 1982, § 10-13; Code 1999, § 62-105) 
Secs. 62-54-62-79. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LIBRARY ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 62-80. - Established. 
    The Clewiston Public Library Advisory Board is hereby established. Such board shall be composed of seven members to be appointed by the city commission from the citizens of the city. Neither the mayor nor any member of the city commission shall be a member of the board. 
(Code 1960, § 10B-1; Code 1982, § 10-2; Code 1999, § 62-126) 
Sec. 62-81. - Terms; vacancies; compensation; bond. 
    The members of the library advisory board shall serve a term of seven years. The terms shall begin in December following the appointment. One member shall be chosen annually for the term of seven years. If a vacancy occurs by resignation, removal or otherwise, the city commission shall fill such vacancy for the unexpired term. A member shall not receive any pay or compensation for any service rendered as a member of such board. 
(Code 1960, § 10B-1; Code 1982, § 10-3; Code 1999, § 62-127) 
Sec. 62-82. - Organization; procedure; authority. 
    The library advisory board members shall meet annually after each appointment to organize and elect one of their members as president, and such other officers as may be necessary. Four members of such board shall be a quorum. The board may make and adopt such bylaws, rules and regulations for their own guidance as they may deem expedient, subject to the supervision and control of the city commission, and not inconsistent with law. They shall advise the city commission regarding expenditures of all monies collected or donated and of the renting or construction of any library building; and care of the grounds, rooms or buildings constructed, leased or set apart for library purposes. 
(Code 1960, § 10B-1; Code 1982, § 10-4; Code 1999, § 62-128) 
Sec. 62-83. - Report of board to commission. 
    The library advisory board, through the library director, shall keep the city commission abreast of all issues pertaining to the Clewiston Public Library. 
(Code 1960, § 10B-5; Code 1982, § 10-6; Code 1999, § 62-129) 
State Law reference- Confidentiality of library records, F.S. § 257.261. 
Sec. 62-84. - Amendment of bylaws or regulations. 
    The bylaws, rules or regulations established by the library advisory board shall be approved by the city commission. 
(Code 1960, § 10B-6; Code 1982, § 10-7; Code 1999, § 62-130 
Chapter 66 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Taxation and finance, F.S. § 166.201 et seq.; ad valorem taxation, F.S. ch. 192 et seq.; occupational license tax, F.S. ch. 205. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 66-1-66-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC SERVICE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Public service tax authorized, F.S. § 166.231. 

Sec. 66-19. - Levied. 
    There is hereby levied by the city on each and every purchase of electricity, metered natural gas, liquefied petroleum gas either metered or bottled, manufactured gas either metered or bottled, and kerosene and fuel oil, a tax of ten percent of the charge made by the seller of each commodity, which tax shall in each case be paid by the purchaser thereof to the seller of such commodity at the time of paying the charge therefor. 
(Code 1960, § 21-6; Code 1982, § 18-11; Code 1999, § 66-31; Ord. No. 77-8, § 1, 11-7-1977) 
State Law reference- Public service tax, F.S. §§ 166.231-166.235. 
Sec. 66-20. - Limit on fuel oil tax. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, the tax on fuel oil hereunder shall not exceed $0.04 per gallon. 
(Code 1982, § 18-12; Code 1999, § 66-32) 
State Law reference- Fuel oil tax limited, F.S. § 166.231(2). 
Sec. 66-21. - Certain purchases exempt. 
    There is hereby exempted from taxation under this article the purchase of the taxable items by the United States government, the state, or any other public body as defined in F.S. § 1.01, a recognized church for use exclusively for church purposes, the purchase of natural gas, manufactured gas or fuel oil by a public or private utility, either for resale or for use as fuel in the generation of electricity, or the purchase of fuel oil or kerosene for use as an aircraft engine fuel or propellant or for use in internal combustion engines. 
(Code 1960, § 12-6; Code 1982, § 18-14; Code 1999, § 66-33; Ord. No. 77-8, § 1, 11-7-1977) 
State Law reference- Exemptions, F.S. § 166.231(4), (5). 
Sec. 66-22. - Collection from purchaser. 
    It shall be the duty of every seller of items taxable hereunder within the corporate limits of the city to collect from the purchaser thereof for the use of the city, the tax hereby levied at a time of collecting the selling price thereof, and to report and pay over on or before the 20th day of each calendar month to the city, all such taxes levied and collected during the preceding calendar month. It shall be unlawful for any seller to collect for any utility service without at the same time collecting the tax hereby levied. Any seller failing to collect such tax at the time of collecting for any such utility service shall be liable to the city for the amount of such tax; provided, however, that the seller shall not be liable for the payment of such tax on uncollected bills. If any purchaser shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay for such utility service, including the tax hereby imposed, the seller shall have the right and is hereby authorized and empowered to immediately discontinue further service to such purchaser until the tax and the seller's bill have been paid in full. 
(Code 1960, § 21-7; Code 1982, § 18-15; Code 1999, § 66-34) 
State Law reference- Authority to prescribe the manner of remitting tax to the city, F.S. § 166.231(7). 
Sec. 66-23. - Records; monthly statements; payment to city. 
    Each seller shall keep complete records showing all sales in the city of such commodities or service, which records shall show the price charged upon each sale, the date thereof and the date of payment therefor and such records shall be kept open for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the city during normal business hours on all business days and such duly authorized agents of the city shall have the right, power and authority to make such transcripts thereof as are required for the proper supervision and enforcement of the terms of this article. In addition to making such records available for inspection, every seller is hereby required to execute and file not later than the 20th day of each month, on a form prescribed by the city, setting forth the amount of such tax to which the city became entitled under the provisions of this article on account of bills paid by purchasers during the preceding month, and contemporaneously with the filing of such statement, shall pay the amount of such tax to the city as above provided. 
(Code 1960, § 21-8; Code 1982, § 18-16; Code 1999, § 66-35) 
Sec. 66-24. - Computation of time. 
    In all cases where the seller of taxable items under this article collects the price thereof at monthly periods, the tax hereby levied may be computed on the aggregate amount of purchases during such period, provided that the amount of tax to be collected shall be the nearest whole cent to the amount computed. 
(Code 1960, § 21-9; Code 1982, § 18-17; Code 1999, § 66-36) 
Sec. 66-25. - Violations; penalty. 
    Any purchaser willfully failing or refusing to pay the tax hereby imposed and any seller violating any of the provisions or terms of this article or any officer, agent or employee of any seller who shall violate any of the terms or provisions of this article, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1960, § 21-10; Code 1982, § 18-18; Code 1999, § 66-37) 
Secs. 66-26-66-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LOCAL BUSINESS TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Local business tax, F.S. ch. 205; persons subject to municipal levy, F.S. § 205.042; conditions for municipal levy, F.S. § 205.043. 

Sec. 66-54. - Levy. 
    The city commission levies a business tax for the privilege of engaging in or managing any business, profession, or occupation within its jurisdiction on any person who: 
(1)  Maintains a permanent business location or branch office within the city, for the privilege of engaging in or managing any business within the city. 
(2)  Maintains a permanent business location or branch office within the city for the privilege of engaging in or managing any profession or occupation within the city. 
(3)  Does not qualify under subsection (1) or (2) of this section and who transacts any business or engages in any occupation or profession in interstate commerce, if the business tax is not prohibited by section 8, article I of the United States Constitution. 
(Code 1999, § 66-66) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.042. 
Sec. 66-55. - When liability attaches; reductions prohibited. 
    As soon as any person engages in any business, profession or occupation in the city, he shall be liable for the business tax. Regardless of when such occupation, business or profession commences, no reduction shall be made in the amount of the business tax except as set forth in section 66-56 for a partial year. 
(Code 1960, § 11-7; Code 1982, § 11-7; Code 1999, § 66-67) 
Sec. 66-56. - Dates due and delinquent; penalties. 
(a)  All business tax receipts shall be sold by the city beginning August 1 of each year, are due and payable on or before September 30 of each year, and expire on September 30 of the succeeding year. If September 30 falls on a weekend or holiday, the tax is due and payable on or before the first working day following September 30. Any person entering into the business or occupation for which an annual business tax is required by this article, on or after April 1, shall be required to pay one-half the annual business tax. 
(b)  Business tax receipts that are not renewed when due and payable are delinquent and subject to a delinquency penalty of ten percent for the month of October, plus an additional five percent penalty for each subsequent month of delinquency until paid. However, the total delinquency penalty may not exceed 25 percent of the business tax for the delinquent establishment. 
(c)  Any person who engages in or manages any business, occupation, or profession without first obtaining a local business tax receipt, is subject to a penalty of 25 percent of the tax due, in addition to any other penalty provided by law or ordinance. 
(d)  Any person who engages in any business, occupation, or profession covered by this article, who does not pay the required business tax within 150 days after the initial notice of tax due, and who does not obtain the required business tax receipt is subject to civil actions and penalties, including court costs, reasonable attorneys' fees, additional administrative costs incurred as a result of collection efforts, and a penalty of up to $250.00. 
(Code 1960, § 11-1; Code 1982, § 11-1; Code 1999, § 66-68) 
State Law reference- Dates due and delinquent, delinquency penalty, authority to provide for partial-year tax, F.S. § 205.053. 
Sec. 66-57. - Exemptions. 
    Every person who, under the laws of the state, is entitled to any exemption as provided in F.S. §§ 205.063 through 205.192 shall be entitled to an exemption from the payment of the city business tax to the same extent. 
(Code 1960, § 11-2; Code 1982, § 11-2; Code 1999, § 66-69) 
State Law reference- Exemptions, F.S. § 205.063 et seq. 
Sec. 66-58. - Certain professions or businesses individually taxed. 
    The business tax for such professions or businesses as architects, auctioneers, auditors or accountants, dentists, civil engineers, lawyers, osteopaths, chiropractors, chiropodists, phrenologists, physicians or surgeons, real estate brokers or other similar professions shall be construed to mean that each individual shall pay the tax herein provided, whether practicing by himself or in partnership or employed by others. 
(Code 1960, § 11-3; Code 1982, § 11-3; Code 1999, § 66-70) 
Sec. 66-59. - Activities falling into more than one classification. 
    Unless otherwise specified, when any occupation, business, profession or privilege shall fall into more than one of the classifications contained in this article, such occupations, businesses, professions or privileges shall be required to comply with the tax requirements of each such classification or provision. 
(Code 1960, § 11-4; Code 1982, § 11-4; Code 1999, § 66-71) 
Sec. 66-60. - Transfer. 
(a)  Business tax receipts may be transferred from one location to another location provided that the business tax receipts are presented to the city for the approval of such transfer. 
(b)  Business tax receipts may be transferred with the approval of the city with the business for which they were taken out, except as otherwise provided by law, when there is a bona fide sale and transfer of the property used and employed in the business as stock in trade. 
(c)  Business tax receipts shall not be subject to transfer where the essential nature of the business has been changed or where the business tax receipt holder has been exempt from payment of all or any part of the business tax. 
(d)  Business tax receipts may be transferred to a new owner, when there is a bona fide sale of the business, upon payment of a transfer fee of up to ten percent of the annual business tax, but not less than $3.00 nor more than $25.00, and presentation of the original business tax receipt and evidence of the sale. 
(e)  Upon written request and presentation of the original business tax receipt, any business tax receipt may be transferred from one location to another location in the city upon payment of a transfer fee of up to ten percent of the annual business tax, but not less than $3.00 nor more than $25.00. 
(Code 1960, § 11-5; Code 1982, § 11-5; Code 1999, § 66-72) 
State Law reference- Transfer of business tax receipts, F.S. § 205.043(2), (3). 
Sec. 66-61. - Responsibility of employees for compliance. 
    Where the principal, master or employer has complied with provisions of this article, it shall be unnecessary for his agent, servant or employee to comply herewith unless otherwise expressly provided for herein; provided, however, that if such principal, master or employer shall not have complied with this article, each of his agents, servants or employees shall be subject to prosecution, and, upon conviction, to punishment to the same extent as his principal, master or employer. 
(Code 1960, § 11-6; Code 1982, § 11-6; Code 1999, § 66-73) 
Sec. 66-62. - License not to protect from prosecution; false statements. 
    No business tax receipt issued under the provisions of this article shall protect any person from prosecution for transacting any business, trade or profession not covered by such business tax receipt, or shall protect any merchant doing business with a greater stock in trade than covered by such business tax receipt, or any hotel keeper or roominghouse keeper having a greater number of rooms than is covered by such business tax receipt. Any business tax receipt issued upon any false statement shall not protect the holder thereof from prosecution for transacting business without a business tax receipt. 
(Code 1960, § 11-9; Code 1982, § 11-9; Code 1999, § 66-75) 
Sec. 66-63. - Agents. 
    Each individual who acts as agent and each individual who acts as business or sales agent for a corporation engaged in any business mentioned in this section shall be required to pay the business tax and obtain a business tax receipt as agent in his own name. This section shall apply to every person who seeks, negotiates or transacts for himself or for any other person or occupation in section 66-66, and the assessment of such taxes are hereby fixed per annum unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1982, § 11-10; Code 1999, § 66-76) 
Sec. 66-64. - Hotels, etc. 
(a)  The terms "hotel," "apartment house," "roominghouse," "tourist court," "motel" and similar terms shall refer to and mean only such hotels, apartments, etc., as shall come under the jurisdiction and regulation of the division of hotels and restaurants of the state department of business regulation. 
(b)  Each person operating a hotel, apartment house, rooming house, tourist court, motel or similar business, shall be under the duty to ascertain annually on or before September 30 of each year whether such business comes under the jurisdiction and regulation of the division of hotels and restaurants, and, if so, shall be under the duty to advise the city of such fact, and that the person has also secured the proper license from the division. 
(c)  Each hotel, apartment house, roominghouse, etc., which is required to have a permit or license from the state division of hotels and restaurants shall be considered as coming within the requirements of this article requiring the payment of the business tax, and the owner of such property shall be required to secure a business tax receipt. 
(d)  The owner of rental property which does not come under the jurisdiction and regulations of the state division of hotels and restaurants shall not be required to secure a business tax receipt under this section. 
(Code 1982, § 11-10; Code 1999, § 66-77) 
State Law reference- Regulation of hotels and restaurants, F.S. ch. 509. 
Sec. 66-65. - Liability of certain outdoor events. 
    Persons sponsoring outdoor shows, circuses, carnivals or parades other than those regulated in article II of chapter 10 are required to deposit $100.00 to cover the cost of garbage removal, cleaning of grounds, and compliance with sanitary regulations. The unexpended balance will be refunded after inspection by the chief of police. Cash bond, in the discretion of the city manager, may be required to protect the city against damage to street pavements and property before license is issued or permission given to move equipment from the railroad tracks to a location beyond the city limits. This bond shall be refunded only upon authority of the city manager. Circus parades in the city must have approval of city manager. 
(Code 1999, § 66-78) 
Sec. 66-66. - Schedule. 
    The business taxes are levied upon each person coming under the provisions of this article by resolution and included in the schedule in appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1960, § 11-10; Code 1982, § 11-10; Code 1999, § 66-79; Ord. No. 80-2, § 1, 9-22-1980; Ord. No. 92-07, § 1, 10-19-1992; Ord. No. 2000-05, § 1, 9-7-2000) 
Chapter 70 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Uniform Traffic Control Act, F.S. ch. 316; municipal regulation on matters covered by that chapter prohibited, F.S. § 316.007; powers of local authorities generally, F.S. § 316.008. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 70-1-70-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPECIFIC STREET REGULATIONS 

Sec. 70-19. - Speed limit in school zones. 
    In no event shall any person drive a vehicle in excess of 20 miles per hour within the area designated as a school zone which will be in effect only on days that public schools are in session, and for a period of time during each of such days, from 30 minutes before to 30 minutes after the times necessary and corresponding to the periods of time when pupils are arriving at a regularly scheduled breakfast program or a regularly scheduled school session and leaving regularly scheduled school sessions. 
(Code 1960, § 23-3; Code 1982, § 19-1; Code 1999, § 70-31) 
State Law reference- Speed limits in municipalities, F.S. § 316.189(1); school speed zones, F.S. § 316.1895. 
Sec. 70-20. - Use of certain streets by tractors, trucks, commercial vehicles. 
    When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, or stop, stand or park a farm tractor, trailer, semitrailer or a truck or common carrier vehicle or other commercial vehicle with a gross weight exceeding nine tons upon any of the paved streets of the city other than Sugarland Highway, South W. C. Owen Avenue, Francisco Street, Aztec Avenue and Sonora Avenue; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not prohibit the use of city streets by commercial vehicles for the purpose of making delivery of goods, merchandise or products to a consignee within the city. 
(Code 1960, § 23-2; Code 1982, § 19-2; Code 1999, § 70-32) 
Secs. 70-21-70-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING 

Sec. 70-46. - Prohibited in parks. 
    No person shall park a motor vehicle in any park in the city, except in an area set aside for the parking of vehicles. 
(Code 1960, § 23-11; Code 1982, § 19-16; Code 1999, § 70-61) 
Sec. 70-47. - Prohibited on sidewalks. 
    The parking of a motor vehicle on any portion of a sidewalk is prohibited. 
(Code 1960, § 23-4.1; Code 1982, § 19-17; Code 1999, § 70-62) 
Sec. 70-48. - Prohibited on Sugarland and Owen. 
    No person shall park a motor vehicle between the curb and sidewalk on Sugarland Highway between the east line of the city and Olympia Street, and on that portion of W. C. Owen Avenue south of Sugarland Highway. 
(Code 1960, § 23-9; Code 1982, § 19-18; Code 1999, § 70-63) 
Sec. 70-49. - Prohibited in specified places, moving illegally parked vehicles; authority of officers; penalty for violation. 
(a)  Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device, no person shall: 
(1)  Stop, stand or park a vehicle: 
a.  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street; 
b.  On a sidewalk; 
c.  Within an intersection; 
d.  On a crosswalk; 
e.  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone unless the sign indicates a different length; 
f.  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic; 
g.  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a roadway or within a roadway tunnel; 
h.  On any railroad tracks; 
i.  On a bicycle path; 
j.  At any place prohibited by official signs; 
k.  In any area where the curb is visibly painted with yellow paint; 
l.  Within an alley for over 15 minutes unless there is left available not less than nine feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic; 
m.  Where signs are erected upon approach to hazardous or congested places; 
n.  Within any parking space specifically designated and marked for disabled or handicapped persons, except those persons so authorized under F.S. §§ 316.1955 and 316.1956; 
o.  Upon those streets which have been marked or signed for parallel parking, other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of the traffic flow, and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the edge of the roadway; 
p.  In such manner as to obstruct the free use of the streets by other vehicles or in such manner as to impede proper parking by any other vehicle or to impede traffic on the streets; 
q.  For any purpose or length of time, other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a loading zone Monday through Friday from 7:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m.; and in no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes; or 
r.  In any area designated as a fire lane, except for the purpose of loading and unloading handicapped passengers. 
(2)  Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger: 
a.  Within ten feet of a public or private driveway; 
b.  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant; 
c.  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection; 
d.  Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway; 
e.  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite to the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of such entrance (when properly signposted); 
f.  On an exclusive bicycle lane; or 
g.  At any place where official signs prohibit standing. 
The driver of a bus or taxicab shall not stand or park a vehicle upon any street in any business district at any place other than a bus stop or taxicab stand, respectively. 
(3)  Stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed. 
(4)  Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers: 
a.  Within 50 feet of the nearest rail or a railroad crossing; 
b.  At any place where official signs prohibit parking. 
(5)  Park either a truck with a chassis capacity greater than two tons, or a commercial trailer, or both, in use districts R1-A, R-1B, R-1C, R-2, R-3, RM-1 and RM-2, except on a temporary basis for loading and unloading, or in connection with the construction of a building on such property, and excepting further that such a truck or commercial trailer may be parked in such district if parked within a totally enclosed building. 
(b)  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as is lawful. 
(c)  A law enforcement officer or parking enforcement specialist who discovers a vehicle parked in violation of any of the provisions of this section shall: 
(1)  Issue a ticket as used by the city to the driver. 
(2)  If the vehicle is unattended, attach such ticket to the vehicle in a conspicuous place. 
(d)  Any person violating, permitting, suffering, allowing or assisting anyone to violate any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine in the amount specified in this subsection per notice or violation, provided the fine is paid within ten days of issuance of the notice of violation. 
(1)  For violation of subsection (a)(1)n of this section (regarding parking spaces for disabled or handicapped persons), the fine shall be $250.00. 
(2)  For violation of subsection (a)(1)r of this section, regarding stopping, standing or parking in a fire lane, or subsection (a)(2)b of this section, regarding stopping, standing or parking within 15 feet of a fire hydrant, the fine shall be $100.00. 
(3)  For all other violations, the fine shall be $75.00. 
Any person who fails to pay the amount specified on a ticket issued for any such infraction within the time allowed on the ticket will be subject to the court procedure provided for in F.S. § 316.1967. 
(Code 1982, § 19-19; Code 1999, § 70-64; Ord. No. 85-10, § 1, 12-2-1985; Ord. No. 98-04, pt. 1, 7-20-1998; Ord. No. 2007-08, pt. 1, 7-16-2007) 
State Law reference- Parking regulations, F.S. § 316.1945. 
Sec. 70-50. - Liability for payment of parking ticket violations and other parking violations. 
(a)  The owner of a vehicle is responsible and liable for payment of any parking ticket violation unless the owner can furnish evidence, when required by this subsection, that the vehicle was, at the time of the parking violation, in the care, custody, or control of another person. In such instances, the owner of the vehicle is required, within a reasonable time after notification of the parking violation, to furnish to the appropriate law enforcement authorities an affidavit setting forth the name, address, and driver's license number of the person who leased, rented, or otherwise had the care, custody, or control of the vehicle. The affidavit submitted under this subsection is admissible in a proceeding charging a parking ticket violation and raises the rebuttable presumption that the person identified in the affidavit is responsible for payment of the parking ticket violation. The owner of a vehicle is not responsible for a parking ticket violation if the vehicle involved was, at the time, stolen or in the care, custody, or control of some person who did not have the permission of the owner to use the vehicle. The owner of a leased vehicle is not responsible for a parking ticket violation and is not required to submit an affidavit or the other evidence specified in this section, if the vehicle is registered in the name of the person who leased the vehicle. 
(b)  Any person who is issued a city parking ticket by a parking enforcement specialist or officer is deemed to be charged with a noncriminal violation and shall comply with the directions on the ticket. If payment is not received or a response to the ticket is not made within the time period specified thereon, the county court or its traffic violations bureau shall notify the registered owner of the vehicle that was cited, or the registered lessee when the cited vehicle is registered in the name of the person who leased the vehicle, by mail to the address given on the motor vehicle registration, of the ticket. Mailing the notice to this address constitutes notification. Upon notification, the registered owner or registered lessee shall comply with the court's directive. 
(c)  Any person who fails to satisfy the court's directive waives his right to pay the applicable civil penalty. 
(d)  Any person who elects to appear before a designated official to present evidence waives his right to pay the civil penalty provisions of the ticket. The official, after a hearing, shall make a determination as to whether a parking violation has been committed and may impose a civil penalty not to exceed $100.00 or the fine amount designated by city ordinance, plus court costs. Any person who fails to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed by the court is deemed to have been convicted of a parking ticket violation, and the court shall take appropriate measures to enforce collection of the fine. 
(Code 1960, § 23-4.1; Code 1982, § 19-31; Code 1999, § 70-66) 
State Law reference- Liability for parking violations, F.S. § 316.1967. 
Secs. 70-51-70-73. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TRAFFIC INFRACTION DETECTORS 

Sec. 70-74. - Use of traffic infraction detectors. 
    The city hereby authorizes the use of traffic infraction detectors within its municipal boundaries to enforce applicable traffic laws related to red light violations, pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of F.S. § 316.0083, known as the Mark Wandall Traffic Safety Act. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, 12-20-2010) 
Sec. 70-75. - Incorporation of applicable Florida laws. 
    The provisions of F.S. § 316.0083, known as the Mark Wandall Traffic Safety Act, as may be amended from time to time, are hereby incorporated herein and made a part hereof. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 3, 12-20-2010) 
Sec. 70-76. - Implementation of general law. 
    The city manager is authorized to implement the provisions and requirements of F.S. § 316.0083, known as the Mark Wandall Traffic Safety Act, within the city's municipal boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 4, 12-20-2010) 
Sec. 70-77. - [Local hearing officer.] 
(a)  Designation of local hearing officers. The city's code enforcement special magistrate is designated to serve as local hearing officer, as set forth in F.S. § 316.003, as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives. 
(b)  Authorization to the city staff. The city is authorized to use code enforcement staff to implement the provisions of F.S. § 316.0083 et seq., and to have the appropriate code enforcement staff serve as the clerk to the local hearing officer. 
(Ord. No. 2013-04, §§ 2, 3, 7-15-2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2013-04, §§ 1-7, adopted July 15, 2013, allowed for the codification of its provisions but did not specify manner of inclusion. At the editor's discretion, §§ 2 and 3 have been codified as set out herein. 
Secs. 70-78-70-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS ON DESIGNATED CITY STREETS 

Sec. 70-96. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto: 
    Golf cart means a motor vehicle that is designed and manufactured for operation on a golf course for sporting or recreational purposes and that is not capable of exceeding speeds of 20 miles per hour. 
    Hybrid golf cart means a golf cart which shares its electric motive power with another source, such as a gasoline engine. 
    Low speed vehicle means any four-wheeled electric vehicle whose top speed is greater than 20 miles per hour but not greater than 25 miles per hour, including neighborhood electric vehicles. 
    Neighborhood electric vehicle (NEV) means an electrically driven vehicle designed for speeds of 20 to 25 miles per hour. A NEV is considered a low speed vehicle. 
    Speed-modified golf cart means a golf cart originally manufactured for at speeds up to 20 miles per hour that has been modified after initial manufacture to travel at speeds over 20 miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 7-17-2017) 
Sec. 70-97. - Authorization to operate golf carts on designated city streets. 
(a)  The city commission may, by resolution, designate and approve certain city streets as streets authorized for golf cart use (designated city street). The city commission may, at any time, revoke the designation and approval for golf cart use of any designated city street. The following streets, however, shall not be authorized for use by golf carts: 
(1)  Sugarland Highway (U.S. Highway 27). 
(2)  South Berner Road between Ventura Avenue and Sugarland Highway. 
(3)  All of South WC Owen Street. 
(4)  All of Sonora Avenue. 
(5)  All of South Francisco Street. 
(6)  That portion of Aztec Avenue between WC Owen Avenue and Francisco Street. 
(b)  Subject to the restrictions and limitations provided herein, golf carts, as defined in section 70-96, shall be authorized for use upon city streets designated and approved pursuant to section 70-97. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 7-17-2017) 
Sec. 70-98. - Restrictions on golf cart modifications and neighborhood electric vehicles. 
    Speed-modified golf carts and neighborhood electric vehicles or other low speed vehicles are not authorized for use upon any city streets. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 7-17-2017) 
Sec. 70-99. - Minimum required equipment. 
(a)  All golf carts operated on designated city streets (DCS) pursuant to this article shall at a minimum be equipped with the following for daytime use: 
(1)  Properly functioning brakes; 
(2)  Properly functioning steering apparatus; 
(3)  Safe tires; 
(4)  A rearview mirror; 
(5)  Reflectorized warning devices in the rear of the golf cart. 
(b)  All golf carts operated on DCS in fog, smoke and rain and/or operated earlier than 30 minutes after sunrise or later than 30 minutes before sunset shall at a minimum be equipped with the following: 
(1)  Two properly functioning headlights; 
(2)  Two properly functioning brake lights; 
(3)  Properly functioning left and right turn signals; 
(4)  An approved windshield; and 
(5)  Reflective devices or reflective tape on both sides of the golf cart. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 7-17-2017) 
Sec. 70-100. - Additional restrictions. 
(a)  No person shall drive a golf cart on a DCS unless such person possesses a valid driver's license. 
(b)  Golf carts shall not be driven on public sidewalks. 
(c)  All golf carts operated on any city street shall be insured for liability. The required insurance shall be as follows: 
(1)  $10,000.00 because of bodily injury to, or death of, one person. 
(2)  $20,000.00 because of bodily injury to, or death of, two or more persons. 
(3)  $10,000.00 because of injury to, or destruction of, property of others. 
(4)  While operating a golf cart on DCS, the operator shall comply with and obey all applicable state and local traffic laws. A golf cart operator who violates any traffic law may be ticketed in the same manner as the operator of a motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 7-17-2017) 
Sec. 70-101. - Golf cart registration. 
(a)  The owner of any golf cart to be operated on any DCS pursuant to this article shall first register the golf cart with the city. The owner registering the golf cart must be at least 18 years of age. The city shall charge an initial registration fee of $20.00. Regardless of the date of registration, all golf cart registrations shall be valid from January 1 until December 31. 
(b)  The owner of a golf cart to be operated on DCS pursuant to this article shall be required to renew the golf cart registration prior to January 1 of the year following initial registration. The city shall charge a renewal fee of $15.00 for each registration renewal. An owner who fails to renew the registration of a golf cart prior to January 1 shall be required to obtain a new registration and pay the initial registration fee of $20.00. 
(c)  Properly registered golf carts shall be issued a registration sticker which sticker shall be placed and maintained on the driver's side rear fender of the golf cart or as near as possible depending on the design of the golf cart. The city shall maintain a list of all golf cart registrations. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 7-17-2017) 
Sec. 70-102. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The city may enforce the provisions of this article through any legal means including prosecuting violations of this article pursuant to F.S. ch. 162, or the procedures for civil citations contained in this Code in sections 26-77 through 26-86. 
(b)  The operation of an unregistered golf cart, the operation of a golf cart which has been modified so as to no longer comply with the provisions of this article, the operation of a golf cart without minimum required equipment for the conditions, and the operation of any golf cart on non-designated city streets present an immediate threat to the health, safety and welfare. Accordingly, anyone adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction, a code enforcement board, a code enforcement special magistrate or the city commission, sitting in a quasi-judicial capacity, shall be subject to revocation of golf cart registration. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 7-17-2017) 
Chapter 74 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 74-1. - Garbage collection declared utility. 
    For the purposes of this chapter and the rules and regulations adopted hereunder, garbage collection service furnished by the city shall be considered a utility. 
(Code 1960, § 25-6; Code 1982, § 22-2; Code 1999, § 74-1; Ord. No. 78-9, § 1, 11-6-1978) 
Sec. 74-2. - Regulations authorized. 
    The city commission may by resolution adopt, amend and repeal rules and regulations for furnishing utilities and utility service: water, water meter connection, sewer service, sewer connection, electricity, electric service connection, garbage collection and any other utility or utility service furnished by the city. The rules and regulations may prescribe the amount of the cash deposit required as a condition to supply utilities or utility service, provide for interest and penalties for failure to pay a utility bill, including the right to discontinue furnishing utilities and utility service and such other requirements that will aid in the orderly, economical installation, maintenance, discontinuance and payment for utilities and utility service. 
(Code 1960, § 25-7; Code 1982, § 22-3; Code 1999, § 74-2) 
State Law reference- Limitation on lien and discontinuance of utility service, F.S. § 180.135. 
Sec. 74-3. - Placing, removing, damaging poles or wires. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, remove, destroy, deface or alter any pole or wire on or over any street, avenue, park, parkway or other public property in the city except upon permit from the director of utilities and in accordance with the terms of such permit. In addition to the penalty for violation of this Code, the director of utilities is hereby authorized to summarily correct any violation of this section to be extent possible by replacing any poles or wires which may be removed, defaced or destroyed, and to remove, destroy or replace any that may be placed in violation hereof. 
(Code 1960, § 18-17; Code 1982, § 22-4; Code 1999, § 74-3) 
Sec. 74-4. - Office of director created; duties generally. 
    The office of the director of utilities of the city is hereby created and established. The director of utilities shall take charge of, manage and be responsible for the utilities of the city. 
(Code 1960, § 2-12.1; Code 1982, § 22-1; Code 1999, § 74-4) 
Sec. 74-5. - Water connection required; regulations governing; connection charge. 
    Where the same shall be available, the owner of every lot or parcel of land within the city shall connect, or cause the plumbing of any building or buildings thereon to be connected, with the municipal waterworks system of the city, and use the facilities of such system. All such connections shall be made in accordance with the rules and regulations which shall be adopted from time to time by the city commission, which rules and regulations shall provide for a charge for making any such connections in any such reasonable amount as the city commission may fix and determine. 
(Code 1960, § 25-10; Code 1982, § 22-5; Code 1999, § 74-5) 
Sec. 74-6. - Fluoridation of city water supply. 
(a)  The city water department is directed to provide the means and proceed with the introduction of fluoride to the city water supply as directed by the state. 
(b)  During such time as the city continues to purchase its water from the United States Sugar Corporation, the city water department is directed to make such arrangements with said corporation necessary to carry out the foregoing, and to provide for a qualified technician or operator to personally supervise this treatment process as required by the state. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3; Code 1982, § 8-1; Code 1999, § 74-6) 
Sec. 74-7. - Sewer connection required; regulations governing; connection charge. 
(a)  The owner of each lot or parcel of land within the city, upon which lot or parcel of land any building or trailer used as a dwelling is situated for residential, commercial or industrial use, shall connect or cause such building or trailer to be connected with the public sewer facilities of the municipal sewer system of the city and use such facilities within 90 days following notification so to do by the city clerk. All such connections shall be made in accordance with the rules and regulations which shall be adopted from time to time by the city commission, which rules and regulations shall provide for a charge for making any such connections in such reasonable amounts as such commission may fix and determine. No connection shall be required where such sewer system or line is not available to such lot or parcel of land. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed to require or entitle any person to cross the private property of another to make any such sewer or water connection. 
(c)  If any owner of any lot or parcel of land within the city shall fail and refuse to connect with and use the facilities of the sewer system of the city after notification by the city clerk, as provided herein, then the city shall be authorized to make such connections, entering on or upon any such lot or parcel of land for the purpose of making such connection. The city shall thereupon be entitled to recover the costs of making such connection, together with reasonable penalties and interest and attorney's fees, by suit in any court of competent jurisdiction. In addition and as an alternative means of collecting such costs of making such connections, the city shall have a lien on such lot or parcel of land for such costs, which lien shall be of equal dignity with the lien of state and county and municipal taxes. Such lien may be foreclosed by the city in the same manner provided by state law for the foreclosure of mortgages upon real estate. 
(d)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any substances prohibited by the Florida Administrative Code governing municipal wastewater collection treatment, or wastes that can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the natural environment, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. Consideration will be given to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant and other pertinent factors. 
(1)  The utilities director shall create a fats, oils and grease best management practices manual (BMPM) that establishes uniform maintenance and monitoring requirements for controlling the discharge of grease from food service facilities discharging into the city's treatment plant for any area that the city provides utility service and submit it for approval to the city commission. A violation of the BMPM shall be a violation of this subsection (d). 
(2)  Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the penalty provided in section 1-15. 
(Code 1960, §§ 25-11-25-13; Code 1982, §§ 22-6-22-8; Code 1999, § 74-7; Ord. No. 2017-02, § 1, 2-20-2017) 
State Law reference- Limitation on lien, F.S. § 180.135; foreclosure of mortgages, F.S. ch. 702. 
Sec. 74-8. - Unlawful water or sewer connections. 
    No person shall be allowed to connect into any water line or sewer line owned by the city without the written consent of the city, and then the connection with such line shall be made only under the direction and supervision of the city. Any person who shall make any connection without such consent of the city shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1960, § 25-14; Code 1982, § 22-9; Code 1999, § 74-8) 
Sec. 74-9. - Building to include sewer facilities. 
    No person shall build or remodel or cause to be built or remodeled any structure used for human habitation or occupancy within the city which has available to it a sanitary sewer line, unless it is provided with water carried sewage facilities. 
(Code 1960, § 25-15; Code 1982, § 22-10; Code 1999, § 74-9) 
Sec. 74-10. - Connecting old plumbing to sewer. 
    Whenever it is desirable to connect old plumbing with the city's sewer main and/or water line, the owner or plumber contemplating doing such work shall notify the city plumbing inspector, who will inspect the old plumbing and notify the owner or plumber what alteration will be necessary to place such old plumbing in an acceptable condition for such connection. Any owner or plumber who shall make any such connection without the approval of the plumbing inspector shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1960, § 25-16; Code 1982, § 22-11; Code 1999, § 74-10) 
Sec. 74-11. - Duty to maintain plumbing. 
    The owner of the property shall be responsible for maintaining and keeping clean the water and sewer pipes leading and connecting from the plumbing system to the city distribution lines and main sewers. 
(Code 1960, § 25-20; Code 1982, § 22-12; Code 1999, § 74-11) 
Sec. 74-12. - Failure to maintain house sewer. 
    Failure to keep the sewer pipe, i.e., the pipe leading from the plumbing system to the city main, clean and maintained in the proper manner will give the city the right to cut off the water connection, which shall not be reconnected until the sewer pipe is cleaned and maintained properly. 
(Code 1960, § 25-21; Code 1982, § 22-13; Code 1999, § 74-12) 
Sec. 74-13. - Failure to connect or pay rates. 
    Any failure or refusal by an owner to connect to the city water or sewer system when required to do so, or any failure or refusal to pay the charges or rates described in this chapter, shall be construed to be a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1960, § 25-23; Code 1982, § 22-14; Code 1999, § 74-13) 
Secs. 74-14-74-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND IRRIGATION CONSERVATION 

Sec. 74-45. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in the article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Agriculture means the growing of farm products, including, but not limited to, sugar cane, vegetables, citrus and other fruits, pastureland, sod or nursery stock, including, but not limited to, ornamental foliage and greenhouse plants. 
    City means the City of Clewiston. 
    City commission means the City of Clewiston City Commission. 
    Code enforcement officer or code inspector means any authorized agent or employee of the city whose duty is to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article, including, but not limited to, law enforcement officers and designated employees of the fire marshal, water utilities department and community development department. 
    Impervious means land surfaces which do not allow the penetration of water including paved roads, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots and highly compacted areas including shell or clay. 
    Irrigation means the direct application of water by means other than precipitation. 
    Irrigation systems means equipment and devices which deliver water to plants being irrigated, including, but not limited to, pipelines, control structures, pipes and ditches, pumping stations, emitters, valves and fittings. The term "irrigation systems" does not include the transfer of water through water management systems from one location to another. 
    Person includes any natural person, individual, public or private corporation, firm, association, joint venture, partnership, municipality, governmental agency, political subdivision, public officer or any other entity whatsoever, or any combination of such, jointly or severally. 
    Water means water taken from any groundwater system, surface water system, or public water supply. 
    Water shortage or water shortage emergency means the declaration of such by the governing board or the executive director of the South Florida Water Management District pursuant to F.S. ch. 373. 
(Code 1999, § 74-41; Ord. No. 2005-11, pt. 2, 12-19-2005) 
Sec. 74-46. - Purpose. 
    This purpose of this article is to establish a regulatory framework and guidance document which will help ensure that water and landscape irrigation conservation will be consistent throughout the city. The provisions of this article shall apply to all users of water within the city and to all unincorporated areas served by the city and shall set restrictions, constraints and prohibitions to enhance the city's water resources and provide a permanent water conservation measure. Unless otherwise provided, nothing in this article shall be construed to relieve any person from compliance with any applicable regulations enacted by the city, district or other political subdivision of the state. 
(Code 1999, § 74-42; Ord. No. 2005-11, pt. 2, 12-19-2005) 
Sec. 74-47. - Implementation. 
    The city commission finds that a water shortage exists when a water shortage or water shortage emergency is declared by the South Florida Water Management District which includes the corporate limits to the city. 
(Code 1999, § 74-43; Ord. No. 2005-11, pt. 2, 12-19-2005) 
Sec. 74-48. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Every police officer of the city shall, in connection with all other duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this article. Failure to comply with the requirements of this article shall constitute a violation of a city ordinance, and may be punished as provided by F.S. § 162.21 as a civil infraction with a maximum civil penalty not to exceed $500.00. 
(b)  The provisions of this article may also be punishable by section 1-15. 
(c)  In addition to the sanctions contained herein, the city may take appropriate action, including, but not limited to, administrative action and requests for temporary and permanent injunctions, to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Each day in violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1999, § 74-44; Ord. No. 2005-11, pt. 2, 12-19-2005) 
Sec. 74-49. - Restrictions. 
(a)  Restriction or curtailment of water uses. Certain nonessential uses of water shall be restricted or curtailed during the existence of a water shortage or water shortage emergency, which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The sprinkling, watering or irrigating of any residential, commercial, institutional, governmental or industrial landscape areas shall be restricted to the hours of 4:00 p.m. to 10:00 a.m. 
(2)  The escape of water through defective plumbing, which means to knowingly allow water to escape through a system that is in disrepair, shall be prohibited. 
(3)  The operation of any ornamental fountain or other structure using water without a recirculation system shall be prohibited. 
(4)  The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, and boats must be done on a pervious surface (i.e., lawn or absorbent area) with the use of a self-canceling hose nozzle. 
(5)  The use of water for dust control, except as required for public health shall be prohibited. 
(6)  Irrigation of nursery plants shall be limited to: 
a.  Overhead, inside. 8:00 a.m. until 8:00 p.m., seven days a week (if a nursery has an overhead covering of any type, it is considered inside). 
b.  Overhead, outside. 7:00 a.m. until 7:00 p.m., seven days a week. 
c.  Flood. Eight days per month. 
d.  Low volume irrigation and low volume hand-watering. Under voluntary restrictions only. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to operate or cause the operation of any irrigation system or device in a manner causing water to be wasted, including, but not limited to, unnecessary watering of impervious areas, other than that which may occur incidental to the proper operation of the primary irrigation system. 
(c)  Upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, new installations of automatic irrigation systems shall be equipped with a water sensing device which will automatically discontinue irrigation during periods of rainfall. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, pt. 2, 12-19-2005) 
Sec. 74-50. - Ultra low volume plumbing fixture required. 
    Upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the installation of ultra low volume (ULV) plumbing fixtures shall be required in all new construction. The South Florida Water Management District's water use permit regulations specify that ULV fixtures have a maximum flow volume when the water pressure is 80 pounds per square inch (psi) as follows: 
(1)  Toilets. 1.6 gal./flush. 
(2)  Showerheads. 2.5 gal./min. 
(3)  Faucets. 2.2 gal./min. at 60 psi. 
(Code 1999, § 74-46; Ord. No. 2005-11, pt. 2, 12-19-2005) 
Sec. 74-51. - Exemptions. 
    The following activities shall be exempt from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Landscape irrigation by handwatering using a self-canceling nozzle. 
(2)  Landscape irrigation by systems from which the sole source is treated wastewater effluent. 
(3)  The operation of irrigation systems for system repair and maintenance. 
(4)  Flushing of water mains required for normal water main clearance and maintenance and for maintenance of water quality; however, where practical, contractors and utilities shall direct flushed water into pervious areas, flush at the minimum rate necessary for cleaning and disperse the water in such a manner to benefit local vegetation. 
(5)  Landscape irrigation for purposes of watering in fungicides, insecticides and herbicides as required by the manufacturer or by federal or state laws; however, this exemption applies only to licensed pest control operators and shall be limited to manufacturer's recommendations. 
(6)  Landscape irrigation for the purpose of watering in newly planted grass and foliage for the first 45 days after initial installation. 
(7)  Irrigation activity for dust emissions required by court or administrative action. 
(8)  Agricultural irrigation where the use of water is permitted by a consumptive or water use permit issued by the South Florida Water Management District. 
(Code 1999, § 74-47; Ord. No. 2005-11, pt. 2, 12-19-2005) 
Sec. 74-52. - Variance relief. 
(a)  Any person affected by the provisions of this article may make application to the city community development director for a variance if compliance would impose a unique, unnecessary and inequitable hardship on such person. Relief may be granted only upon a demonstration that such hardship is peculiar to the person or the affected property and is not self-imposed, and that the grant of the variance will be consistent with the general intent and purpose of this article. 
(b)  Upon receipt of an application for variance, the city community development director shall render a decision on the variance within ten working days. Denial of variance relief may be appealed to the city commission within 20 days of such person's receipt of the notice of denial. 
(c)  An application for a variance, and/or the granting of a variance, shall operate prospectively, and shall not affect any pending enforcement action against the property owner pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1999, § 74-48; Ord. No. 2005-11, pt. 2, 12-19-2005) 
Secs. 74-53-74-77. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BACKFLOW AND CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL 

Sec. 74-78. - General policy. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article shall be to: 
(1)  Protect the public potable water supply of the city from the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within the customer's internal distribution systems such contaminants or pollutants which could backflow into the public water systems; 
(2)  Promote the elimination or control of existing cross connections, actual or potential, between the customer's inplant potable water systems and nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and industrial piping systems; and 
(3)  Provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross connection control which will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems. 
(b)  Responsibility. The city shall be responsible for the protection of the public potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow of contaminants or pollutants through the water service connection. If, in the judgment of the city, an approved backflow prevention assembly is required (at the customer's water service connection or within the customer's private water system) for the safety of the water system, the designated agent of the city shall give notice in writing to the customer to install such an approved backflow prevention assembly at specific locations on his premises. The customer shall immediately install such approved assembly at the customer's own expense, and failure, refusal or inability on the part of the customer to install, have tested and maintain the assembly shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such requirements have been satisfactorily met. 
(c)  Plumbing official. The plumbing inspection division of the community development department has the responsibility to not only review building plans and inspect plumbing as it is installed, but it has the explicit responsibility of preventing cross connections from being designed and built into the structures within its jurisdiction. 
(1)  Where the review of building plans suggests or detects the potential for a cross connection being made an integral part of the plumbing system, the plumbing official has the responsibility to require such cross connection be either eliminated or provided with an approved backflow prevention assembly in accordance with the plumbing code. 
(2)  The plumbing official's responsibility begins at the point of service (the downstream side of the meter) and carries throughout the entire length of the customer's water system. The plumbing inspector should inquire about the intended use of water at any point where it is suspected that a cross connection might be made or where one is actually called for by the plans. When such a cross connection is discovered, it will be mandatory that a suitable, approved backflow prevention assembly be required by the plans and be properly installed, in accordance with the plumbing code. 
(d)  Certified backflow assembly technician. Certified backflow assembly technicians only shall do the testing, maintenance and/or repair of backflow prevention assemblies. 
(1)  The certified technician must tag each double check valve, pressure vacuum breaker, reduced pressure backflow assembly and air gap, showing the serial number of the assembly, date tested and by whom. The technician's license number must also be on this tag. 
(2)  In the case of a customer requiring a commercially available technician, any certified technician is authorized to make the test and report the results of that test to the customer, city and the county health department. If such a commercially tested assembly is in need of repair, a licensed plumber shall make the actual repair. 
(Code 1982, § 22-61; Code 1999, § 74-76) 
Sec. 74-79. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approved backflow assembly means accepted by the American Water Works Association as meeting an applicable specification or as suitable for the proposed use. 
    Auxiliary water supply means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the city's public water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another city's public potable water supply or any natural sources such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, etc., or used waters or industrial fluids. These waters may be contaminated or polluted or they may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the city does not have authority for sanitary control. 
    Back-pressure means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any sources other than the intended source. 
    Backflow means the reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either back-pressure or backsiphonage. 
    Backflow prevention assembly means an assembly or means designed to prevent backflow. Specifications for backflow prevention assemblies are contained within the city's cross connection control manual. All backflow prevention assemblies must be approved by the city utility director or community development director prior to installation. A listing of these approved backflow prevention assemblies is available from the city utility department. 
    Backsiphonage means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other than the intended source, cause by the reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system. 
    Contamination means an impairment of the quality or the potable water supply by sewage, industrial fluids, waste liquids, compounds or other materials to a degree which creates an actual or potential hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. 
    Cross connection means any physical connection or arrangement of piping or fixtures between two otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the other nonpotable water or industrial fluids of questionable safety, through which, or because of which, backflow may occur into the potable water system. The term "cross connection" includes any temporary connections, such as swing connections, removable sections, four-way plug valves, spools, dummy sections of pipes, swivel or change-over devices or sliding multiport tubes. 
    Cross connection containment means the installation of an approved backflow assembly at the water service connection to any customer's premises where it is physically and economically infeasible to find and permanently eliminate or control all actual or potential cross connections within the customer's water system; or the term "cross connection containment" means the installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly on the service line leading to and supplying a portion of a customer's water system where there are actual or potential cross connections which cannot be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point of the cross connection (isolation). 
    Cross connection, controlled, means a connection between a potable water system and a nonpotable water system with an approved backflow prevention assembly properly installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
    Designated agent means the person designated to be in charge of the water department of the city, invested with the authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective cross connection control program and for the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 22-62; Code 1999, § 74-77; Ord. No. 92-05, pt. 1, 6-29-1992) 
Sec. 74-80. - Policy. 
(a)  No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the city unless the water supply is protected as required by state laws, regulations, codes, and this article. Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued by the city if a backflow prevention assembly required by this article for control of backflow and cross connections is not installed, tested, and maintained, or if it is found that a backflow prevention assembly has been removed, by-passed, or if an unprotected cross connection exists on the premises. Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected. 
(b)  The customer's system shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the city to determine whether cross connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violation of this article, exist. When such a condition becomes known, the city shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing a physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected the conditions in conformance with the state and city statutes relating to plumbing, water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(c)  An approved backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on each service line to a customer's water system, at or near the property line or immediately inside the building being served. In all cases, the assembly will be installed before the first branch line leading off the service line, whenever the city deems the protection of the water supply to be in the best interest of the water supply customers. 
(d)  The type of protective assembly required under subsection (b) of this section shall depend upon the degree of hazard which exists at the point of cross connection (whether direct or indirect), as stipulated in the city's connection control manual. 
(e)  All presently installed backflow prevention assemblies which do not meet the requirements of this section but were approved assemblies for the purposes described herein at the time of installation and which have been properly maintained, shall, except for the inspection and maintenance requirements under section 74-81(a), be excluded from the requirements of these rules so long as the city is assured that they will satisfactorily protect the public water system. Whenever the existing assembly is moved from the present location or requires more than minimum maintenance or when the city finds that the maintenance of this assembly constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by an approved backflow prevention assembly meeting the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 22-63(a); Code 1999, § 74-78; Ord. No. 92-05, pt. 1, 6-29-1992) 
Sec. 74-81. - Requirements. 
(a)  It shall be the duty and responsibility of the customer at any premises where backflow prevention assemblies are installed to have certified inspections and operational tests made at least once per year at the customer's expense. In those instances where the city deems the hazard to be great, he may require certified inspections and tests at a more frequent interval. These inspections and tests shall be performed by a certified backflow assembly technician. It shall be the duty of the city to see that these tests are made according to the regulations set forth by the state department of health, bureau of drinking water/sanitation. 
(b)  Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in water supply lines to provide at least the degree of protection stipulated in the city cross connection control manual. All backflow prevention assemblies shall be exposed for easy observation and be readily accessible. 
(c)  All backflow prevention assemblies installed in a potable water supply system for protection against backflow shall be maintained in good working condition by the person having control of such assemblies. Upon inspection, any assembly found to be defective or inoperative, shall be replaced or repaired. No assembly shall be removed from use, relocated, or another assembly substituted, without the approval of the city. 
(d)  All backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested within ten working days of initial installation. 
(e)  No backflow prevention assembly shall be installed so as to create a safety hazard, e.g., installed over an electrical panel, steam pipes, boilers, pits, or above ceiling level. 
(Code 1982, § 22-63(b); Code 1999, § 74-79; Ord. No. 92-05, pt. 1, 6-29-1992) 
Secs. 74-82-74-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RATES AND CHARGES AND BILLING PROCEDURE 

Sec. 74-106. - When bills rendered and payable. 
    Bills for utilities furnished by the city shall be rendered at monthly intervals and shall be payable upon presentation. 
(Code 1960, § 25-8; Code 1982, § 22-25; Code 1999, § 74-106) 
Sec. 74-107. - Deposit required. 
    All persons to whom the city furnishes water, sewage collection, electricity, garbage collection or any other utility or any combination of utilities, shall maintain a cash deposit with the city clerk in such amount as may be prescribed in the utility rules and regulations. 
(Code 1960, § 25-9; Code 1982, § 22-26; Code 1999, § 74-107) 
Sec. 74-108. - Free water or sewer service prohibited. 
    No water or sewage disposal service shall be furnished or rendered free of charge to any person whatsoever, and the city and each and every agent, department or instrumentality which uses either or both of such services shall pay therefor at the rates fixed by this article. 
(Code 1960, § 25-22; Code 1982, § 22-27; Code 1999, § 74-108) 
Sec. 74-109. - Monthly water rates. 
    Uniform monthly water rates shall be charged by the city for potable water supplied to consumers, except bulk water consumers. A bulk water consumer is a person who consumes over 1,000,000 gallons of water per month. Monthly water rates shall be established by resolution and listed in appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1960, § 25-1; Code 1982, § 22-28; Code 1999, § 74-109; Ord. No. 78-10, 11-6-1978; Ord. No. 81-1, § 1, 1-19-1981; Ord. No. 82-2, § 1, 2-15-1982; Ord. No. 83-4, § 1, 3-7-1983; Ord. No. 83-6, § 1, 4-18-1983; Ord. No. 86-2, § 1, 2-3-1986; Ord. No 2000-07, § 1, 10-16-2000; Ord. No. 2002-05, pt. 1, 9-23-2002; Ord. No. 2005-12, pt. 1, 12-19-2005) 
Sec. 74-110. - Water tapping fees. 
    Tapping or connection fees shall be charged to each person who taps or connects into the city water system. Said fees shall be paid and permit issued therefor prior to the connection. Water tapping fees shall be established by resolution and listed in appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1960, § 25-2; Code 1982, § 22-29; Code 1999, § 74-110; Ord. No. 97-01, § 1, 2-4-1997; Ord. No. 2005-12, pt. 1, 12-19-2005) 
Sec. 74-111. - Monthly sewer rates. 
    Uniform monthly sewer rates shall be charged by the city to all persons who are connected to the city sewer system, such rate to computed on the volume of water consumed by such persons. Monthly sewer rates shall be established by resolution and listed in appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1960, § 25-3; Code 1982, § 22-30; Code 1999, § 74-110; Ord. No. 78-11, § 1, 11-6-1978; Ord. No. 81-6, § 1, 7-6-1981; Ord. No. 86-7, § 1, 7-29-1986; Ord. No. 2000-08, § 1, 10-16-2000; Ord. No. 2002-04, pt. 1, 9-23-2002; Ord. No. 2008-08, pt. 1, 1-26-2009) 
Sec. 74-112. - Sewer tapping fee. 
    Each person shall, who connects to the city sewer system, pay a tapping or connection fee to the city, such fee to be paid and a permit issued therefor prior to the connection. Said fee shall be established by resolution and listed in appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1960, § 25-4; Code 1982, § 22-31; Code 1999, § 74-112) 
Sec. 74-113. - Monthly electrical rates. 
    Uniform monthly electricity rates shall be charged by the city for electric current furnished to consumers of electricity. Said rates shall be established by resolution and listed in appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1960, § 25-5; Code 1982, § 22-32; Code 1999, § 74-113; Ord. No. 80-4, § 1, 9-22-1980; Ord. No. 81-2, § 1, 4-20-1981; Ord. No. 83-8, § 1, 10-3-1983; Ord. No. 91-5, pt. 1, 6-17-1991; Ord. No. 2000-06, § 1, 10-16-2000) 
Sec. 74-114. - Monthly garbage collection rates. 
(a)  The uniform monthly garbage collection rates shall be charged by the city to all persons to whom garbage collection service is furnished or made available by the city. Monthly garbage collection rates shall be established by resolution and listed in appendix A to this Code. 
(b)  The city may, by resolution, vary the uniform charge for garbage pickup to persons meeting criteria for special consideration, as established in such resolution. 
(c)  For the purpose of this article and the rules and regulations adopted thereunder, garbage collection services furnished by the city shall be considered a utility. 
(Code 1960, § 25-6; Code 1982, § 22-33; Code 1999, § 74-114; Ord. No. 78-9, § 1, 11-6-1978; Ord. No. 79-6, § 1, 10-8-1979; Ord. No. 80-3, § 1, 9-22-1980; Ord. No. 82-14, § 1, 10-18-1982; Ord. No. 82-17, § 1, 11-15-1982; Ord. No. 88-2, pt. 1, 3-21-1988; Ord. No. 89-3, pt. 1, 10-9-1989; Res. No. 91-15, § 1, 8-19-1991; Res. No. 92-12, § 1, 9-9-1992; Res. No. 93-14, 10-11-1993; Res. No. 97-02, § 1, 9-2-1997; Res. No. 2000-02, § 1, 3-20-2000; Res. No. 2002-18, § 1, 9-23-2002) 
Sec. 74-115. - Fee on electrical accounts levied for mosquito control. 
(a)  In order to raise sufficient money to provide for a program of mosquito control, there is hereby levied upon each light account furnished lights or electrical service by the city a monthly fee known as the "mosquito fee." The mosquito fee shall be established by resolution and listed in appendix A to this Code. Such fee shall be added to the monthly statement sent out by the city to those persons furnished electrical service and shall be collected at the same time as bills for electrical service are paid. Failure to pay such fee shall subject the consumer to the same penalty as failure to pay the electrical bill, including discontinuance of service. 
(b)  The city may, by resolution, vary the minimum charge for mosquito control fee to persons meeting the criteria established by the city. 
(Code 1960, § 10-7; Code 1982, § 8-12; Code 1999, § 74-115; Ord. No. 78-8, § 1, 11-6-1978; Ord. No. 82-15, § 1, 10-18-1982; Ord. No. 84-1, § 1, 9-22-1984; Res. No. 97-03, § 1, 9-2-1997; Ord. No. 2000-09, § 1, 10-16-2000; Ord. No. 2003-03, pt. 1, 9-22-2003; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 10-19-2015) 
Sec. 74-116. - Initial deposit and connection charges for electric and water service. 
(a)  Guarantee deposits. 
(1)  Before rendering services, the city will require a deposit of guarantee satisfactory to the city to secure the payment of bills as they mature. The amount of such deposit for residential electric and water service shall be the greater of $200.00 or the estimated amount for two months' billing. The amount of such deposit for commercial electric and water service shall be the estimated amount for two months' billing. Upon disconnection for nonpayment or violation of the city's rules and regulations, the city may require the consumer to pay an additional deposit which may be equal to a two months' billing period. Such guarantee deposit may be held in full by the city until final settlement of a consumer's account at any location and for any service rendered. 
(2)  Upon final settlement of a consumer's accounts, any unused balance of deposit or deposits will be refunded. Refund is contingent upon adequate identification and surrender of original guarantee deposit receipt. A guarantee deposit receipt is non-negotiable or transferable, and may be refunded only to the consumer whose signature appears thereon. 
(3)  Consumer deposits as aforesaid are not guarantees for payment of one specified service at one specified location, but rather are guarantees to the city of payments for any service rendered at any location within the territory served by the city. 
(b)  Connection charge. There shall be a service charge made for the connection of a new account or an existing account which has been disconnected for some reason other than nonpayment of a bill, violation of a contract or of the city's rules and regulations. The amount of the service charge shall be set by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 1982, § 22-34; Code 1999, § 74-116; Res. No. 93-03, § 1, 4-19-1993; Ord. No. 2016-08, § 1, 11-21-2016) 
Secs. 74-117-74-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WATER AND SEWER DEVELOPMENT FEES 

Sec. 74-146. - Levy and purpose. 
    The fees provided for in this article shall be for the purpose of helping to defray the costs of new or expanded water and sewer capital facilities and equipment attributable to new construction within the service area of the city in accordance with the schedule of development fees and other provisions of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 22-40; Code 1999, § 74-141; Ord. No. 87-1, § 1, 6-1-1987) 
Sec. 74-147. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to: 
(1)  All units for which construction permits are issued after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article was derived, to which water or sewer service is provided by the city at the time of initial occupancy of those units, regardless of whether units are located within or outside the corporate limits of the city; 
(2)  Any unit of which the use is changed to a higher equivalent residential units number as specified in section 74-149, but only to the extent of the increase in fees from the prior use; and 
(3)  Any units for which construction permits are issued on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, located outside the corporate limits of the city, to which water or sewer service is later provided, except, in any case this article shall not apply to the following: 
a.  Expansion of a residential dwelling unit. 
b.  Remodeling or rebuilding of any structure, unless such remodeling or rebuilding is in conjunction with a change of use of the structure. 
c.  Any units located within the corporate limits of the city for which construction permits have been issued on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article was derived. 
d.  As to services not available at the time of construction, units located within the corporate limits of the city for which construction permits are issued after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article was derived, but for which sewer service is not available at the time such permits are issued. 
In situations where a business or commercial use is transferred from one site to another, the city commission may, in its discretion, upon application from the owner of such business or commercial use, allow transfer to the new site of credit for all of the equivalent residential units as specified in section 74-149 previously allocated to the old site, in excess of one unit. The old site shall thereupon retain an equivalent residential unit rating of one and the new site shall be charged the fee for one equivalent residential unit, if applicable. However, the city commission shall not consider any such application unless the applicant conclusively demonstrates to the city commission that the owner of the real property upon which the business is located does not object to the transfer. 
(Code 1982, § 22-41; Code 1999, § 74-142; Ord. No. 87-1, § 1, 6-1-1987; Ord. No. 88-7, § 1, 10-17-1988) 
Sec. 74-148. - Determination of fee rates. 
    The rate charged as development fees shall be reviewed and revised by the city commission at least once every other year based upon a detailed analysis of projected construction within the service area of the city; the cost of any expanded or new capital facilities and equipment for water and sewer services generated by such construction; and the money otherwise available to meet such costs. In addition, the city commission may annually adjust the established development fee rates to reflect changes in the cost of relevant capital facilities and equipment. All changes or adjustments in the established development fee rates shall be made by ordinance and shall apply only to construction for which building permits are issued after the effective date of such ordinance. 
(Code 1982, § 22-42; Code 1999, § 74-143; Ord. No. 87-1, § 1, 6-1-1987) 
Sec. 74-149. - Schedule of fees. 
    Fees for water and sewer development for the areas to which sewer or water service is provided by the city shall be established by resolution and listed in appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1982, § 22-43; Code 1999, § 74-144; Ord. No. 87-1, § 1, 6-1-1987; Ord. No. 87-6, § 1, 8-3-1987; Ord. No. 92-08, § 1, 12-7-1992; Ord. No. 2006-03, pt. 1, 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 74-150. - Capital trust funds. 
(a)  Created. The following capital funds are created: 
(1)  Water capital trust fund; and 
(2)  Sewer capital trust fund. 
(b)  Use of funds. Amounts in each capital trust fund shall be used only for the purpose contained in the title of such fund and for no other purpose. Expenditures from each fund shall be specifically approved by the city commission and shall be limited to the capital facilities or equipment or for principal payments (including sinking fund payments) on bonds to acquire or build such facilities or equipment. Before authorizing an expenditure from any one of these trust funds, the city commission shall determine that: 
(1)  Such expenditure is for capital facilities or equipment to be used for the purpose contained in the title of the trust fund from which the expenditure is to be made; 
(2)  Such expenditure is made necessary by the new construction from which such funds were collected; and 
(3)  Such expenditure will result in a special benefit to the new construction from which such funds were collected. 
(Code 1982, § 22-44; Code 1999, § 74-145; Ord. No. 87-1, § 1, 6-1-1987; Ord. No. 92-08, § 1, 12-7-1992) 
Sec. 74-151. - Capital expansion plans. 
    The city commission shall prepare and maintain a capital expansion plan for each such fund. These plans shall be reviewed at least annually during the budget review process. 
(Code 1982, § 22-45; Code 1999, § 74-146; Ord. No. 87-1, § 1, 6-1-1987) 
Sec. 74-152. - Payment of fees; time of payment; remedies for nonpayment. 
(a)  Development fees shall be paid in cash and are not refundable. Development fees, for new construction, shall be due and payable at the time of the issuance of the first to be issued of a building or plumbing permit or occupational license for a business to be conducted on that property by the city on the unit so assessed. Development fees for all existing units for which service is later provided, and for units of which the use is changed to a higher equivalent residential unit number than the prior use, will be collected prior to the approval of the application for service for either water or sewer service. The development fee is comprised of two separate services, i.e., water and sewer. In areas where only one of these services is available, the applicable fee shall be that established for the service provided. The applicable fee for the other service will become due when that service is made available. 
(b)  It is the intent of the city commission that the development fees provided for by this article shall be paid by the individual or entity that obtains a permit to construct a unit for occupation, or that obtains a permit to have services provided to an existing unit. A developer who develops bare lots for sale in that condition shall not be required to pay the fee. An individual or entity who purchases any such bare lot and thereafter makes improvements for which services are to be provided, shall be required to pay the fees. The developer of rental lots shall be required to pay the fee before any such rental lot may be occupied. 
(Code 1982, § 22-26; Ord. No. 87-1, § 1, 6-1-1987; Ord. No. 88-7, § 2, 10-17-1988) 
Secs. 74-153-74-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Florida litter law, F.S. § 403.413; resource recovery and management, F.S. § 403.702 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-166. - Purpose. 
    This article, adopted under the provisions and authority of the general laws of the state, and the provisions hereof and all sections contained herein, shall be construed as having been adopted in the interest of the public health, safety and general welfare of the people of the city. 
(Code 1999, § 71-1; Ord. No. 2007-12, pt. 1, 1-28-2008) 
Sec. 74-167. - Penalty for violation of provision of chapter. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to penalty s provided in section 1-15. 
(b)  The public works department is authorized to remove illegal solid waste or relocate improperly stored garbage and garbage containers after an initial warning and a reasonable amount of time to correct has been provided. If the violation is not corrected within the time given to correct, the department may take the necessary corrective action to remedy the violation and bill the offending customer an amount sufficient to reimburse the city's costs. A warning and a reasonable amount of time to correct shall not be required for subsequent violations of the same nature committed by the same customer. 
(Code 1999, § 71-2; Ord. No. 2007-12, pt. 1, 1-28-2008) 
Sec. 74-168. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this article, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial bulk container means a container that is provided and/or authorized by the city for commercial garbage and trash disposal services; commonly referred to as a dumpster. 
    Commercial establishment means any public or private place, building and/or enterprise devoted in whole or in part to a business enterprise, whether nonprofit or profit-making in nature, including, but not limited to, hotels, motels, office buildings, stores, markets, theatres, hospitals, or other institutional buildings, but excluding any structure which constitutes a single family dwelling unit as defined in this section. For the purposes of this article, the term "commercial establishment" includes rental mobile home parks and residential developments of three or more units. 
    Commercial hauler means any person who owns, operates, or leases vehicles for the purpose of contracting to collect or transport solid waste and/or source separated materials from residential, commercial, or industrial properties. 
    Construction and demolition (C&D) waste means building materials and rubbish, including, but not limited to, earth, stone, brick, flooring, lumber, plaster, roofing, bathroom fixtures, kitchen fixtures, and any other waste resulting from construction, remodeling, repair or demolition of any building, pavement or other structure. Such waste materials may include trees, tree limbs and tree stumps generated by tree surgeons, landscape, and lawn maintenance contactors. 
    Contaminated waste pile means a horticulture waste pile containing any material other than bagged grass and leaves, tree limbs, palm fronds, and shrubbery cuttings incident to the care of lawn and gardens. Collection of contaminated waste requires scheduling of a special pickup service. 
    Disability service. Service offered to residential customers with disabilities who cannot maneuver the automated tipper cart provided by the city. A person must submit a medical certification form or a valid handicap parking certificate to be eligible for this service. 
    Garbage means every type of refuse accumulation, including animal, fruit, or vegetable matter which is subject to decay and production of noxious or offensive odors, or which, during or after decay, may serve as a breeding place or as feeding material for germ-carrying insects; specifically included are bottles, cans, or other containers or materials which, due to their ability to retain moisture, may serve as breeding places for water-breeding insects. 
    Hazardous waste means waste which requires special handling due to its acute or chronic effects on air and water quality; on fish, wildlife or other biota; and on the health and welfare of the public, including, but not limited to, oils, paints, cleaning products, explosives, pathological wastes; radioactive materials, batteries, and acidic, caustic, toxic or highly flammable chemicals. 
    Horticulture waste means bagged grass and leaves; tree limbs that are four inches or less in diameter and eight feet or less in length; palm fronds; and shrubbery cuttings incident to the care of lawns, shrubbery and gardens. 
    Industrial waste means all solid waste which results from industrial process and manufacturing operations such as factories, processing plants, repair and cleaning establishments, refineries and rendering plants. 
    Nuisance means a use of property or course of conduct that interferes with the legal rights of others by causing damage, annoyance, or inconvenience. 
    Property owner, occupant or manager means the person who owns, manages and/or occupies real property for which solid waste collections services are provided by the city. 
    Residential dwelling means any detached single-family or duplex residential unit as defined in chapter 110. Condominiums, patio houses, apartments and other such facilities used for residential purposes are classified as commercial establishments unless declared otherwise by the city. 
    Residential garbage container means a city-owned garbage collection cart issued and serviced by equipment and vehicles used by the city public works department. Residential garbage carts are designed for fully automated collection services. 
    Residential solid waste means garbage and horticulture waste resulting from the normal housekeeping activities of a dwelling unit to include limited quantities of discarded furniture, bedding, and white goods. The term "residential solid waste" also means construction and demolition debris resulting from minor home repair of the dwelling unit performed by the owner. 
    Special pickup material. All waste material other than normal residential solid waste and garbage requires scheduling a special pickup. Materials which exceed horticulture disposal quantities and contaminated waste piles (as defined herein) are specifically included and require a special pickup. The city will not as a regular curbside service pick up any material other than residential solid waste meeting the criteria defined herein. 
    Unacceptable waste means solid waste that does not have collection, processing, or disposal capabilities within the city. Such waste includes, but is not limited to, explosives; hospital, pathological, and biological waste; commercial and industrial hazardous waste as regulated by federal, state, and local law; and chemicals and radioactive materials. 
    White goods includes, but is not limited to, clothes washers and dryers, dishwashers, water heaters, residential furnaces, garbage disposals, trash compactors, conventional and microwave ovens, ranges and stoves, air conditioners, dehumidifiers, computers, refrigerators, and freezers. 
(Code 1999, § 71-3; Ord. No. 2007-12, pt. 1, 1-28-2008) 
Sec. 74-169. - Collection and disposal standards of private collectors and outside collectors. 
(a)  Requirements during construction. Prior to the issuance of a building permit by the city community development director for the extensive renovation or modification of a structure, or the construction of a new structure, provisions must be made for the on-site storage and handling of refuse. The city community development director shall make the determination for on-site refuse handling due to a structure renovation or modification. 
(b)  Procedures for removal of construction wastes. Builders, building contractors and construction tradesman shall use city provided services for removing from the site all construction and demolition wastes (excepting earth) as defined in section 74-168 emanating from their work. Privately operated or company-owned waste disposal services may be used when approved by the city public works director. Builders shall be responsible for removal and lawful disposal of excavated earth materials within 30 days of accumulation. 
(c)  Responsibility for removal of waste by producer. It shall be unlawful for any person, upon vacating or moving from any dwelling, storeroom or any other building situated within the corporate limits, to fail to remove all garbage, rubbish and debris from such building and premises and grounds appurtenant thereto or to fail to place said waste in an approved sanitary container for disposal in accordance herewith. Failure of a renter, lessee, and/or tenant to comply with this requirement shall obligate the property owner of record or his designee to fulfill the responsibility of compliance with this article. 
(d)  Transportation over town streets. Collectors of commercial refuse and collectors of refuse collected from outside the city desiring to haul over the streets of the city may do so, provided they use vehicles designed or outfitted so as to prevent the refuse carried therein from being blown, dropped or spilled from said vehicle. 
(Code 1999, § 71-4; Ord. No. 2007-12, pt. 1, 1-28-2008) 
Sec. 74-170. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Waste hazards. Hazardous wastes, infectious wastes, septic tank wastes, or dead animals shall not be placed in any manner for collection by the city. 
(b)  Unauthorized placement. The placement or scattering of yard clippings, tree limbs and/or other refuse in or upon street gutters and/or the street surface, or drainage canal banks is hereby declared a nuisance and a danger to storm drainage control and shall be prohibited. 
(c)  Unauthorized accumulation. Any accumulation of garbage or trash on any premises within the city is prohibited. Failure to remove any such existing accumulation of garbage or trash within 48 hours after due notice thereof shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(d)  Public places. No garbage, trash, recyclable material and/or horticulture waste shall be stored in any public place at any time. No garbage, trash, recyclable material, or horticulture waste shall be stored upon any private property other than that owned or occupied by the individual, except with the written consent of the owner or occupant. 
(e)  Location of residential garbage container. Except on scheduled collection days, all containers for the storage of garbage which are located outside any dwellings in residential districts shall be located so that they are obscured from view. 
(f)  Burying. No refuse, waste matter, rubbish or garbage, including, but not limited to, old buildings and structures, whether or not such materials are biodegradable, shall be buried on any parcel of private property within the city unless properly permitted by required agencies and the city. 
(g)  Burning. No person shall burn or cause to be burned any refuse or waste anywhere within the city limits, except as otherwise provided by law. 
(h)  Pilfering. It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized to do so to open, remove, untie, or to interfere with the orderly and legitimate collection of any refuse container or to collect, disturb or scatter refuse stored in containers placed for collection and disposal. 
(Code 1999, § 71-5; Ord. No. 2007-12, pt. 1, 1-28-2008) 
Sec. 74-171. - Waste collection fees set by resolution of city commission. 
    The monthly bill for utility services sent to each utilities consumer for city water shall include a charge for waste removal. This service shall include trash and garbage removal and shall be charged to the consumer at a rate prescribed by resolution of the city commission. If the utilities customer is a lessee of the premises serviced, or one other than the record owner thereof, the property owner of record shall be jointly responsible for the payment of the utilities that will include the fees for waste removal. 
(Code 1999, § 71-6; Ord. No. 2007-12, pt. 1, 1-28-2008) 
Secs. 74-172-74-184. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION SERVICES 

Sec. 74-185. - Mandatory service. 
    Every single-family dwelling, duplex, and multifamily dwelling within the city shall subscribe for solid waste collection and disposal services provided exclusively by the city. 
(Code 1999, § 71-7; Ord. No. 2007-12, pt. 1, 1-28-2008) 
Sec. 74-186. - Containers required for dwelling units; collection standards. 
(a)  Each residential dwelling shall receive a city-provided garbage container. Each container shall bear a serial number, which has been assigned to a street address, and the container shall remain at the assigned property regardless of whether the resident sells or moves. If a dwelling is to be unoccupied for any length of time, the property owner shall notify the public works department to retrieve the assigned container. Utility customers terminating or transferring their utility account and not leaving assigned residential refuse container shall be charged a fee for the container as determined by the public works director. Householders may request an additional residential city container for a fee which is the actual cost of the container to the city. The city shall not be liable to any property owner for the cost of repair or replacement for a container or receptacle not provided by the city. 
(b)  Residential customers who cannot transport the garbage container because of health reasons or physical limitations may provide a written statement from a physician to qualify and receive disability service. This service is available only to disabled customers at the recorded address and when there is no one living at that address who is physically able to roll the cart to the street. A fee as determined by resolution of the city commission will be charged for disability services. Disability service accounts shall be renewed annually. 
(c)  On the day of scheduled service, each container shall be placed within three feet of the curb or edge of roadway, except not on a sidewalk. The wheels of the container should face the house. The container may be placed for service on the night prior to collection but no later than 5:00 a.m. on the scheduled service day. All containers must be removed from the street by darkness on the service day and stored at the residence in accordance with section 74-170(e). If carts are left at the street the day following collection, the city may move the cart to the customer's property and charge a fee for this service. If a container remains at the street recurrently, a fee as determined by the public works director will be imposed pursuant to section 74-167. Any fee will be assessed with the monthly utility bill for the l customer. 
(d)  In lieu of the requirement of residential garbage carts, the owner, operator, manager or owners' association of multiple or multifamily dwellings or group of such dwellings that are included under this classification may request or be required by the public works director to use a commercial container as specified in division 3 of this chapter. 
(Code 1999, § 71-8; Ord. No. 2007-12, pt. 1, 1-28-2008) 
Sec. 74-187. - Collection scheduling and placement. 
(a)  Garbage. The city will collect garbage under the following conditions: 
(1)  Residential garbage will be collected on regular schedules. Pickups shall not be reduced by holidays, but pickups normally scheduled to be made on a holiday may be rescheduled by the city. 
(2)  Garbage, as defined herein, shall not be deposited directly into the carts but shall be placed in plastic or paper bags, a box, etc. Garbage placed in unapproved containers or placed outside of the approved city-issued cart will not be picked up. Cardboard boxes must be broken down and placed directly into the carts. Residential solid waste consisting of construction and demolition debris resulting from minor home repair from the dwelling unit may be placed directly into the cart. 
(3)  Garbage not placed within the approved city containers shall not be picked by the city. Exceptions to this standard will be made during the Christmas holiday period. 
(b)  Horticulture waste. 
(1)  The city will collect on weekly basis one pile of horticulture waste, including limbs, trimmings, and cuttings, not to exceed the volume dimensions which measure four feet by four feet by eight feet. Limbs shall not exceed eight feet in length and four inches in diameter. Bushy limbs shall be cut apart and trimmed to lay flat. Persons placing wastes for collection which exceed these standards shall coordinate with the public works department for proper removal as a special pickup service. 
(2)  Horticulture waste shall be placed for collection immediately adjacent to the premises producing such wastes, but not upon the paved street, sidewalk, storm gutter or canal bank. The city will not be responsible for damage to sprinkler systems, sprinkler heads, water meters and other objects, including fences, gates and hedges, other plants and trees damaged due to horticulture waste being placed over or piled on or against such items as a result of being placed there for collection by the occupants and/or owner of the property. 
(3)  No horticulture waste shall be placed for collection against or within ten feet of any wall, fence, vehicle, electric pole, down guys, utility lines, traffic control device, telephone interface junction panel, water valve box, manhole, tree, or any other obstruction so as to impede collection. 
(4)  No garbage or other solid waste materials shall be placed for collection commingled with horticulture waste. Commingled waste of this nature shall constitute a contaminated waste pile and will only be removed by special pickup service. 
(5)  Waste placed for collection in violation of any section of this article shall be tagged with written notice stating that the occupant of the premises must remove same within 48 hours; if the occupant fails to remove the waste, the city will pick up this accumulation and the occupant will be charged for a special pickup service. The special pickup fee will be charged with the occupant's monthly utility bill. 
(c)  Bulky wastes and white goods. 
(1)  Residential solid waste consisting of discarded furniture, bedding items and white goods shall be collected on a weekly basis as a regular service by the city. The volume of such waste shall not exceed dimensions which measure four feet by four feet by eight feet. Persons placing bulky wastes and white goods for collection which exceed these standards shall coordinate with the public works department for proper removal as a special pick up service. 
(2)  A refrigerator or freezer shall not be placed for collection without removal of its doors as provided in F.S. § 823.08. 
(d)  State of emergency. If a state of emergency has been declared by a person authorized to make such declaration, residential garbage and trash collection shall be made in accordance with the emergency plans of the city, or as authorized by the city manager or his designee. 
(e)  Special pickup. A special pickup is a collection service for items not authorized on a regular collection schedule. Such pickups include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  All bulky wastes and white goods exceeding size thresholds; 
(2)  Contaminated horticulture waste piles; and 
(3)  Any other unacceptable residential waste as determined by the public works director. 
Special pickups will be coordinated by the resident and the public works department as to time, place, date and items to be picked up. A minimum fee, found in appendix A to this Code, will be charged. The director of public works or his designee shall charge an additional amount above the minimum based on excessive volume, difficulty of collection, and other relevant factors. This fee shall be charged with the customer's next regular utility bill. 
(Code 1999, § 71-9; Ord. No. 2007-12, pt. 1, 1-28-2008) 
Secs. 74-188-74-212. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COMMERCIAL COLLECTION SERVICES 

Sec. 74-213. - Service required. 
    The city exclusively shall provide for the collection and disposal of all commercial establishments, including multifamily dwellings of three or more units. Service arrangements shall be approved by the city and all commercial garbage shall be collected according to the city's approved category of service. It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any commercial establishment in the city to dispose of any solid waste except by subscribing to the city's collection disposal service. 
(Code 1999, § 71-10; Ord. No. 2007-12, pt. 1, 1-28-2008) 
Sec. 74-214. - Bulk containers, placement, contents, collection schedule. 
(a)  Bulk containers. Commercial businesses shall utilize a city-provided container at the direction of the public works director. No tipper carts shall be easily seen from the street except on service day, and dumpsters shall be permanently obscured by a fence or dumpster enclosed as provided in subsection (e) of this section, as determined by the public works director, so as to be hidden from streets, sidewalks, and adjacent properties. In the event a compaction system is used, the city will charge the equivalent of three dumps for every pickup performed. 
(b)  Placement of containers. It will be the responsibility of the property owner to provide a place for a dumpster to be located on the property at which the dumpster is assigned. This location shall be approved by the public works director to ensure there is enough room to safely operate necessary equipment. Property owners with an assigned tipper cart shall provide an obscure storage location for the cart for all times except during service day. 
(c)  Contents of bulk containers. 
(1)  Hazardous wastes, infectious wastes and/or septic tank wastes as defined in this chapter shall not be placed in commercial bulk containers for collection. Substances in this class shall be disposed of as prescribed by the director of public works. 
(2)  Dead animals shall not be placed in bulk containers for regularly scheduled collection, but shall be disposed of in a manner consistent with state law. 
(3)  It will be the responsibility of the business owner to keep the area around the dumpster clean at all times. The city is not responsible for any unauthorized garbage or debris placed in or around an assigned dumpster. Dumpster lids are to be kept closed at all times. A lock may be installed on the container but the city will at no time be responsible for the key or the locking device. If the dumpster is locked at the time of pickup, the lock may be cut at the owner's expense. 
(4)  No bulk container shall be so filled as to render impossible its complete closure. 
(d)  Collection schedule and place. 
(1)  All commercial garbage and trash shall be collected according to the city's approved category of service as established by the public works director or his designee; however, putrescible garbage and trash shall be collected at least twice each week. 
(2)  Commercial garbage and trash shall be placed in such location that the container can be easily serviced by the manpower and equipment making the collection. Commercial bulk containers shall be located on private property unless otherwise provided by the director of public works. 
(e)  Enclosure requirements. The following enclosure requirements shall be met by all properties as described below: 
(1)  Minimum size. Each enclosure shall provide a minimum of 18 inches of clear space between each side of each dumpster (including lifting flanges) and the adjacent surface of that enclosure or other containers within the same enclosure. The height of each enclosure shall be 12 inches greater then the highest part of any dumpster or container therein. 
(2)  Materials and construction methods. Enclosures shall be constructed of walls or fences of wood or plastic lumber, (finished) masonry units, (finished) concrete or any combination of these elements and shall be constructed in a manner described in this subsection (e)(2)a through d of this section. The materials used shall be compatible with those of adjacent or surrounding buildings or structures and may be used in combination of the enclosure materials referenced above. Gates shall be constructed of opaque materials. 
a.  Wood lumber. Wood fences shall be of durable species, of a quality and design acceptable to the community development director or his designee. In making this determination, the community development director or his designee shall consider the following: 
1.  Whether the wood is pressure-treated or has a finish that protects the wood from the elements; 
2.  Adequacy of the supporting in-ground posts; and 
3.  That the lumber be minimum of nominal one inch by a nominal six-inch boards and shall have a maximum spacing between boards of one inch; and 
b.  Plastic lumber. Lumber shall be plastic members of new or recycled materials able to withstand the climatic and ultraviolet conditions of region and of a quality and design acceptable to the community development director or his designee. In making this determination, the community development director or his designee shall consider the following: 
1.  Whether the material is coated or has a finish that protects the plastic from the elements; 
2.  Adequacy of supporting in-ground posts; and 
3.  That the lumber be a minimum of nominal one-inch by nominal six-inch boards and shall have a maximum spacing between boards of one inch. 
c.  Masonry walls. All exterior faces of walls shall have a finish such as stucco, pre-finished block, stack block with struck joints, shadow blocks, painted or similar, installed according to industry standards and meeting with the approval of the community development director or his designee. 
d.  Concrete walls. Pre-cast or poured concrete walls shall have decorative textured finish. 
(3)  Location and screening requirements. One or more of the following provisions may apply to enclosures: 
a.  Existing required landscape areas. The enclosure and access drive to a dumpster may encroach into the existing required landscape areas with the approval of the community development director or his designee if it is shown that it is necessary to provide adequate space for the enclosure and access drive. Such enclosures shall be landscaped so as to form a visual barrier between the enclosures and the street. 
b.  Within parking areas. Enclosures may be located within or immediately adjacent to parking areas, regardless of building setback lines, and shall be landscaped. Such landscaping may be reduced as the enclosure is located toward the rear of low visibility areas of the property away from public streets, as long as a continuous visual barrier between the enclosure and the street is maintained. Applicants shall be permitted to reduce the width of existing parking spaces to no less than eight feet, six inches in width, and reduce the total number of spaces required, if shown to be necessary to provide space for the enclosure, which determination shall be made by the community development director and the city engineer or his designees. 
c.  Within yards. Enclosures may be located within building setback areas subject to the setback requirements in subsection (e)(3)d of this section and the enclosures shall be fully landscaped. The landscaping may be reduced if the enclosure is located toward the rear of the property or in an area which is not highly visible from public streets as long as a continuous visual barrier between the enclosure and the street is maintained. If the enclosure is located within a highly visible area within the building setback area, additional landscaping, architectural treatments or both in addition to a visual barrier may be required on the site as determined by the community development director or his designee. The additional landscaping, architectural treatments or both shall be required to the extent it is found necessary to mitigate the impact of the location of the dumpster and enclosure on the site. 
d.  In compliance with setbacks. When determined by the community development director, enclosures located in compliance with setbacks may be required to be fully landscaped when the enclosure is freestanding on a property in a high visibility location. Such landscaping may be reduced as the enclosure is located toward the rear or low visibility areas of the property away from public streets, as long as a continuous visual barrier between the enclosure and the street is maintained. 
e.  Camouflage/alternate screening exception. In locations where sufficient space does not exist to allow construction of a dumpster enclosure and the provisions of this section have been met where possible, the community development director or his designee may determine that no other trash option as described in this section is reasonably available and approve the application for a decorative veneer (camouflage) or other alternate screening method which may include conditions in lieu of enclosure construction. Such application and approval shall be conditioned so that there are no company identification/advertising logos on the dumpster surface, the dumpster is painted or stained a color compatible with the character and appearance of surrounding properties and the main building site, the area surrounding the dumpster is landscaped and the dumpster is placed upon a concrete pad, the purpose of which is to ensure that the dumpster is positioned such that it is not an aesthetic detriment to the community. 
(4)  Compliance for existing dumpsters. All new structures using dumpsters shall have the enclosures constructed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. When a permit is issued for repairs or improvements and the value of the repairs or improvements are $2,500.00 or more, an existing dumpster shall be enclosed not later than the completion of the repairs or improvements. 
(Code 1999, § 71-11; Ord. No. 2007-12, pt. 1, 1-28-2008; Ord. No. 2010-06, §§ 1, 2, 1-24-2011) 
Chapter 78 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 78-1-78-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WRECKER SERVICE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 78-20-78-41. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ROTATION SYSTEM 

Sec. 78-42. - Applicability. 
    This division shall apply only to wrecker service called for by representatives of the police department when the person in possession or operation of the vehicle to be towed does not request a specific wrecker business to be called. 
(Code 1982, § 19-40; Code 1999, § 78-86; Ord. No. 92-04, pt. 1, 6-1-1992) 
Sec. 78-43. - Call rotation system. 
    When representatives of the police department call for wrecker service at the request of operators of disabled vehicles who do not specify the wrecker company to be called, or otherwise call for wrecker service to remove disabled, stolen or abandoned vehicles from roads and streets, rights-of-way or public property, a rotation system shall be used. The rotation system shall consist of two lists, one for vehicles weighing less than 20,000 pounds and one for vehicles weighing 20,000 pounds or more, and shall be established and utilized under the following procedure: 
(1)  All wrecker businesses qualified pursuant to this division that apply to the police department shall be placed on a rotating list in the order in which the applications of qualified businesses are received by the police department. 
(2)  The wrecker business in the number one position on the rotating list will be the first called. Upon being called and rendering service, or failing to respond to the call, the wrecker business in the number one position shall be rotated to the bottom of the list, and each business in the system will move up one place except as provided for hereinbelow. 
(3)  If the person in possession of a disabled vehicle requests that a specific wrecker business be called, that call shall not change any wrecker business's position in the rotation list. 
(4)  If a representative of the police department cancels a call for service without wrecker service being rendered, no change in the rotation position shall result from the call being cancelled. 
(Code 1982, § 19-41; Code 1999, § 78-87; Ord. No. 92-04, pt. 1, 6-1-1992) 
Sec. 78-44. - Qualification. 
    In order to qualify as a wrecker business to be included on the police department call rotation list, a wrecker business must meet all of the requirements of F.A.C. ch. 15B-9, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  It must be state highway patrol certified. 
(2)  It must have in effect applicable current city, county and/or state licenses. 
(3)  It must maintain a place of business in the city or within two miles of the city limits, which place of business must include an office and storage yard. 
(4)  It must maintain office hours no less than from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
(5)  It must have telephone service to respond to calls 24 hours a day, seven days a week (answering services or beepers are acceptable). 
(6)  It must maintain at least one operating wrecker at all times. 
(Code 1982, § 19-42; Code 1999, § 78-88; Ord. No. 92-04, pt. 1, 6-1-1992) 
Sec. 78-45. - General provisions. 
    Wrecker service called for, and responses shall be subject to the following general provisions: 
(1)  Wrecker businesses shall respond to calls with wrecker equipment adequate to handle the service called for. 
(2)  A wrecker business may not assign or transfer its listing or position in the rotation system. 
(3)  A wrecker business rendering service resulting from a call pursuant to this division shall charge no more than the rates established pursuant to this division. 
(4)  The police department may, at its discretion, call for specialized recovery service from the nearest available source, if specialized recovery requirements are required for which the police representative in charge determines that no wrecker business on the rotation system is able to respond in the time or manner required by the circumstances. 
(5)  A wrecker business called shall respond (arrive at the scene to which it is called) within 30 minutes after a call is made. If a response cannot be made within the time allowed, the wrecker business called shall notify the police department of the estimated time of delay and reasons therefor. The police department may cancel the request for service and use the services of the next wrecker business in the rotation sequence, and the wrecker business first called shall rotate to the bottom of the sequence. 
(6)  Calling of the wrecker service by the police department shall not obligate the police department or the city to pay for any such wrecker service. Calls are made purely for the convenience of the person in charge of the disabled vehicle, and payment for wrecker services are to be arranged strictly between the vehicle owner or operator and the wrecker business. 
(Code 1982, § 19-43; Code 1999, § 78-89; Ord. No. 92-04, pt. 1, 6-1-1992) 
Sec. 78-46. - Fees for wrecker services. 
    The fees for wrecker services shall be the same as the fees charged by the Florida Highway Patrol, which are in Appendix A to this Code. 
(1)  Hookup and towing for a motor vehicle weighing less than 20,000 pounds for nonemergency or noncollision related calls and for emergency or collision related calls, day or night, plus any applicable sales tax. 
(2)  Hookup and towing fees for a motor vehicle 20,000 pounds or more, plus applicable sales tax (minimum per call out is allowable). 
(3)  In addition to such towing fee, a charge may be made for removing a vehicle weighing less than 20,000 pounds from a water filled canal, plus any applicable sales tax, plus the amount charged to the wrecker business by a diver, if required. 
(4)  In addition to such towing fee, a charge may be made for removing a vehicle weighing 20,000 pounds or more from a water-filled canal, plus any applicable sales tax, plus the amount charged to the wrecker business by a diver, if required. 
(5)  There shall be no storage fee charged for the first six hours after a vehicle is towed. A storage fee may be charged beginning six hours after the vehicle is towed, for vehicles weighing less than 20,000 pounds. A storage fee for a tractor, for a trailer, for tractor-trailer combination may be charged beginning six hours after the vehicle is towed. In addition, an administrative fee not to exceed may be charged for the execution, filing or mailing of any forms required by state law, ordinances or state division of highway patrol if a vehicle is in storage for more than 24 hours. 
(6)  In addition to the above charges, a wrecker business required to remain at an emergency or collision related scene because of circumstances not within the wrecker operator's control, may charge a fee plus applicable sales tax, for every hour after the first hour on the scene. 
(Code 1982, § 19-44; Code 1999, § 78-90; Ord. No. 92-04, pt. 1, 6-1-1992) 
Chapter 82 - WATERWAYS 

Sec. 82-1. - Dumping, polluting prohibited. 
    The dumping or otherwise depositing or placing of filth, dirt, garbage, shell, trash, human or animal excrement, refuse or other thing from any boat, vessel, or otherwise, into or upon the waters of Lake Okeechobee within the city limits or into or upon the waters of any body of water within the city limits is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1960, § 5-3; Code 1982, § 5-1; Code 1999, § 82-1) 
State Law reference- Pollution control, F.S. ch. 403. 
Sec. 82-2. - Anchoring of houseboats. 
    No houseboat or other boat or vessel upon which any person shall live, reside, cook, eat, or sleep, shall be permanently anchored in the waters of Lake Okeechobee within the city limits, or within one-half mile of such city limits, nor in or upon any waters within the city limits, without special permit from the city manager. The term "permanent anchorage" is hereby declared to mean and be continuous anchorage for the period of ten days or more. 
(Code 1960, § 5-4; Code 1982, § 5-2; Code 1999, § 82-2) 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate live-aboard vessels, F.S. § 327.60(2). 
Sec. 82-3. - Use of public boat recreation area. 
(a)  This section is regarding the city boat basin, dock facilities, boat ramp facilities, parking area and canal connecting said facilities to the Clewiston Canal, which facilities are located in a westerly-northwesterly direction from the north end of Francisco Street and adjacent to and including part of the C-21 Canal right-of-way, and also the boat ramps, docks, picnic area and parking area on the levee west of the hurricane gate (hereinafter together referred to as the Clewiston boat recreation area). 
(b)  The following rules shall apply to the use of the Clewiston boat recreation area: 
(1)  In order to promote efficient and harmonious use of the limited space available on the boat ramps, the boat ramp areas shall not be used for loading or unloading gear or people from boats. To do so unnecessarily inconveniences others waiting to launch or recover their boats. 
(2)  The discarding of trash, litter, cans or other items, other than in appropriate waste disposal containers, is not allowed. Violating this provision shall be subject to a fine in an amount of up to $500.00. 
(3)  No swimming is allowed in the city's boat recreation area. 
(4)  There shall be no overnight mooring or overnight docking of boats in the city boat basin, except during emergency situations as determined by the city manager. 
(5)  No boats shall remain docked at any dock in the city boat basin or the levee docks or be beached on the shore of the city boat basin for longer than 15 minutes. 
(6)  Boats shall not be allowed to make any wake in the city's boat recreation area. 
(7)  Vehicles launching or recovering boats shall have main headlights and fog lights turned off while launching or recovering boats. Parking lights are permissible. 
(8)  No vehicles and/or trailers shall be parked in the city's boat recreation area other than in designated parking areas. 
(9)  Fishing tournament activities conducted in the city boat basin area shall be coordinated with the city recreation department. 
(10)  No overnight camping or sleeping in vehicles is allowed in the city's boat recreation area. 
(11)  Any work done on boats, motors, fish nets or other fishing gear shall be done only in the grassy area located westerly of the parking area west of the restroom facilities of the city boat basin. No repairs involving disassembly of boats and/or engines shall be allowed in any such areas. 
(12)  No boat trailers (with or without boats) shall be allowed to remain in the city's boat basin recreation area for more than 40 consecutive hours. 
(c)  Any revised or changed rules shall be posted at the city's boat basin recreation area. 
(d)  If no other penalty is specified, violation of the above-stated rules will result in: 
(1)  A warning for the first violation; 
(2)  A $50.00 fine for the second violation; 
(3)  A $75.00 fine for the third violation; and 
(4)  A $100.00 fine and impoundment of trailer, and boat, if applicable, for a fourth violation. 
(Code 1960, § 5-5; Code 1982, § 5-3; Code 1999, § 82-3; Ord. No. 77-1131, 1-23-1978; Ord. No. 89-2, pt. 1, 8-7-1989; Ord. No. 2001-01, § 1, 5-21-2001) 
Subpart B - LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
Chapter 90 - CONCURRENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Concurrency, F.S. § 163.3180. 

Sec. 90-1. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  Concurrency is a finding that the public facilities and services necessary to support a proposed development are available, or will be made available, concurrent with the impacts of the development. The provisions of this chapter are designed to provide a systematic process for the review and evaluation of all proposed development for its impact on basic public facilities and services, as required by the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act, F.S. ch. 163, and F.A.C. 9J-50055. 
(b)  No final development order shall be granted for a proposed development until there is a finding that all public facilities and services included in this chapter have sufficient capacity at or above their adopted level-of-service (LOS) to accommodate the impacts of the development, or that improvements necessary to bring facilities up to their adopted LOS will be in place concurrent with the impacts of the development. 
(Code 1999, § 90-1; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(26-1), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 90-2. - Public facilities and services for which concurrency is required. 
    The provisions and requirements of this chapter shall apply only to those public facilities and services listed below: 
(1)  Roads/traffic circulation. 
(2)  Sanitary sewer. 
(3)  Potable water. 
(4)  Solid waste. 
(5)  Stormwater drainage. 
(6)  Recreation and open space. 
(Code 1999, § 90-2; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(26-2(A)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 90-3. - Development subject to review. 
    Unless specifically exempted below, all applications for site development plan or subdivision development plan approval, where the individual lots within the subdivision do not require site development plan approval, shall be subject to concurrency review: 
(1)  Minimum threshold. The following developments shall be exempt from the transportation and other applicable components of concurrency review: 
a.  Residential projects which would result in the creation of one additional single-family dwelling unit or homesite; 
b.  Commercial, institutional or industrial expansions of up to ten percent of the existing or approved gross floor area, provided such expansion is estimated to generate less than 100 vehicle trips per day and create one equivalent residential unit of utility demand or less; and 
c.  Construction of accessory buildings and structures which do not create additional public facility demand. 
In no case, however, shall a development order be issued for a minimum threshold project which would impact a public facility for which a moratorium or deferral on development/expansion of capacity has been placed. 
(2)  Public facilities. Public facilities necessary to ensure the protection of the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city, including public schools (kindergarten through 12th grade), shall be exempt from concurrency review. This shall include all public facility construction projects included in the capital improvements program required to meet any adopted level-of-service standard. 
(Code 1999, § 90-3; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(26-2(B)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 90-4. - Minimum requirements for concurrency. 
    To ensure that public facilities and services necessary to support development are available concurrent with the impacts of such development, the following standards must be met: 
(1)  The necessary facilities and services are in place at the time a development permit is issued, or a development permit is issued subject to the condition that the necessary facilities and services will be in place by a specified date when the impacts of the development are anticipated to occur; 
(2)  The necessary facilities are under construction at the time a development permit is issued; 
(3)  The necessary facilities and services are the subject of a binding executed contract for the construction of the facilities or the provision of services at the time the development permit is issued; 
(4)  The necessary facilities and services have been included in the capital improvements program and are programmed for construction prior to or concurrent with the impacts of the proposed development; 
(5)  In the case of road facilities, the necessary improvements are committed in the first three years of the applicable adopted state department of transportation five-year work program, county five-year work program, or the city five-year transportation plan as may be applicable; or 
(6)  The necessary facilities and services are guaranteed in an enforceable development agreement. An enforceable development agreement may include, but is not limited to, development agreements pursuant to F.S. § 163.3220, or an agreement or development order issued pursuant to F.S. ch. 380, or any other development agreement entered into between the city and a developer. This agreement must guarantee that the necessary facilities and services will be in place prior to or concurrent with the impacts of the development. 
(Code 1999, § 90-4; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(26-2(C)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 90-5. - Concurrency administration. 
    The city shall in the administration of this chapter: 
(1)  Create and maintain an inventory of existing public facilities capacities or deficiencies; 
(2)  Determine concurrency of minor development applications; 
(3)  Provide advisory concurrency assessments and recommending conditions of approval to the city commission for major development applications; and, 
(4)  Report the status of all public facilities capacities covered under this chapter to the city manager as required. 
(Code 1999, § 90-5; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(26-2(D)), 12-19-1994) 
_____
Sec. 90-6. - Adopted level-of-service standards. 
    The adopted level of service standards for those public facilities for which concurrency is required shall be as established in the city's comprehensive plan, and as follows: 
Type of Facility Level of Service Standard (1) Roads/traffic circulation LOS "C" a. Principal arterials LOS "C" 1. Minor arterials (county system, nonexisting) LOS "C" 2. Collector streets LOS "C" 3. Local collector and streets LOS "C" 4. C.R. 832 (Inc. Owen Ave. and Sonora Ave.) LOS "C" 5. U.S. Hwy 27 LOS "C" b. LOS determinations by the city shall be based upon average daily traffic (ADT) data and peak hour data with methods established in the most recent edition of the FDOT Highway Capacity Manual (2) Sanitary sewer Average daily generation 77.3 gallons per capita per day (3) Potable water 125 gallons per capita per day (4) Solid waste 5.3 pounds per capita per day through 1993 3.7 pounds per capita per day beginning 1994 (5) Stormwater drainage a. Primary facilities stormwater pumping stations/canals drainageways and culverts which interconnect these facilities All new development shall be designed to provide removal of 4.0 inches of stormwater runoff per day in developed areas and 2.5 inches of runoff per day in agricultural areas b. Secondary facilities, storm sewer catchbasins swales and ditches All new developments shall be designed to satisfy a three-year, one-hour storm with total rainfall volume of three inches (interim standard until such time a secondary facility capacity analysis is complete) c. Minimum first floor elevation 18.0 ft. NGVD or 18 inches above adjacent road crown, whichever is higher. d. Water quality treatment All new development shall detail the first one inches of runoff or 2.5 inches times the percent of the impervious area, which is greater, in accordance with SFWMD criteria, Permit Information Manual vol. IV, part B, section 3.2.2, including credits for dry retention systems. Existing development shall comply with the city adopted best management practices (BMPs) to the greatest extent feasible. (6) Recreation/open space a. Baseball field 1 field per 5,000 population b. Softball/teeball field 1 field per 2,500 population c. Football field 1 field per 10,000 population d. Multipurpose/open play field 1 field per 2,500 population e. Racquetball court 1 court per 5,000 population f. Basketball court 1 court per 2,500 population g. Tennis court 1 court per 1,500 population h. Youth community activity center 1 court per 10,000 population i. Adult/senior citizens center 1 center per 10,000 population j. Gymnasium 1 gym per 10,000 population k. Outdoor track 1 track per 10,000 population l. Library 1 library per 50,000 population m. Playground (w/apparatus) 1 per 2,500 population n. Swimming pool 1 pool per 10,000 population o. Passive park/open space 6 acres per 1,000 population p. Boat ramp 1 ramp per 2,500 population q. Golf course (18 holes) 1 course per 10,000 population (7) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the prescribed levels-of-service may be degraded during construction of new facilities, if upon completion of the new facilities the prescribed level-of-service will be met.  
(Code 1999, § 90-6; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(26-3), 12-19-1994) 
_____
Sec. 90-7. - Determination of public facility/service impacts-Roads/traffic circulation. 
(a)  Traffic analysis required. All new developments which are anticipated to generate 500 or more trips during the peak hour of use shall be required to submit a traffic analysis which identifies the development's impact on the city's trafficways system. The community development director may also require the submission of a traffic analysis for developments expected to generate less than 500 trips during the peak hour, when site location, anticipated total trip generation, circulation patterns or other such factors warrant a more extensive review of traffic impacts. Such an analysis shall include the following: 
(1)  Total projected average daily trip ends for the proposed development. 1 
(2)  Average projected peak-hour trip ends generated by the development. 1 
(3)  Design capacity of the accessed roads. 
(4)  Analysis of traffic distribution on the road network including all links impacted by more than ten percent of project traffic or 500 trips per day, whichever is greater. 2 
(5)  Projected percentage of truck and bus traffic. 
(6)  Necessary operational improvements to the city's transportation system in order to maintain the appropriate level-of-service for the roadway. 
(7)  Other related information as required by the city. 
Notes: 
1 The Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Manual shall be used to calculate these estimates. Adjustments to these estimates may be made, based on special trip generation information supplied by the applicant. 
2 The analysis of traffic distribution shall use the variable radii approach for traffic analysis, as outlined in this section. Where appropriate, the study area radii may be expanded to include a nearby intersection, or otherwise modified to provide for a more accurate assessment of specific projects, including Development of Regional Impact (DRIs). 
(b)  Variable radii approach for traffic analysis. The following table, entitled Traffic Impact Study Area Radii, shall be utilized in determining the study area radius to be utilized for each type of development. For types of developments not listed, the most compatible land use listed shall establish the study area radius for the unlisted use. 
_____
TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDY AREA RADII (MILES) BY LAND USE AND INTENSITY 
Land Use Avg. Trip Length (Miles) Radii in Miles Over 1,000 Units 500-1,000 Units 250-499 Units 0-249 Units Residential 6-8 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 Hotel/motel 2-3 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.25  
*Gross building area 
Land Use Avg. Trip Length (miles) Radii in Miles Over 200,000 sq. ft. GBA* 100,000-199,999 sq. ft. GBA* 0-99,999 sq. ft. GBA* Office/institution 5-6 1.5 1.0 0.5  
*Gross building area 
Land Use Avg. Trip Length (miles) Over 400,000 sq. ft. GBA* 200,000-399,999 sq. ft. GBA* 100,000-199,999 sq. ft. GBA* 50,000-99,999 sq. ft. GBA* 0.25 0-49,999 sq. ft. GBA* Shopping center and retail business 1-5 1.5 1.0 0.75 0.5 0.25 Restaurant without drive-in/drive-thru 1.0-1.5 0.25 (all categories) Restaurant with drive-in/drive-thru 0.5-1.0 0.25 (all categories) Convenience store, service station 0.5-1.0 0.25 (all categories) Bank with drive-thru 1.5-2.0 0.25 (all categories) Day care center 1.5-2.0 0.25 (all categories) Building materials, wholesale business 3.0-4.0 0.75 (all categories)  
*Gross building area 
Land Use Avg. Trip Length (miles) Over 1,000,000 sq. ft. GBA* 500,000-1,000,000 sq. ft. GBA* 250,000-499,999 sq. ft. GBA* 0-249,999 sq. ft. GBA* Industrial/manufacturer 6-8 2 1.5 1 0.5  
*Gross building area 
_____
(c)  Corridor capacity analysis. A corridor capacity analysis may be used in lieu of individual roadway analyses for all developments defined as major developments by this Code when such proposed developments have direct access to a principal or minor arterial roadway. All roadways located in a corridor having a width equal to one-half the length of the applicable study radius and extending along the arterial highway a distance not less than twice the length of the applicable radius, centered on the subject property, shall be defined as the transportation facility. This facility shall be deemed adequate if the average LOS on roads in each facility class within the corridor meet minimum LOS standards for each such class. 
(Code 1999, § 90-7; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(26-4(A)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 90-8. - Same-Sanitary sewer. 
(a)  Generation standards by land use type and system. Generation standards by land use type and system are as follows: 
(1)  Residential. 230 gallons per equivalent residential connection (ERC) per day (average flow). 
(2)  Commercial/institutional/industrial. One-tenth gallon per square foot GBA per day (average flow). The applicant shall also provide the city with a description and estimate of wastewater generation created by any special processes which will be discharged into the city's system. 
(3)  Existing service. The city shall not extend wastewater collection lines for the purpose of enabling additional direct service connections until a target of at least 70 percent utilization of the potential service connections to the existing collection system has been achieved or authorized by subdivision plat approval or issuance of development permits; provided, however, that improvements intended to improve the quality of existing service shall not be so restricted. 
(b)  Variations. The city may use a different generation standard based on unique circumstances of the proposed use or satisfactory demonstration by the applicant that a different standard is appropriate. 
(Code 1999, § 90-8; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(26-4(B)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 90-9. - Same-Potable water. 
(a)  Generation standards by land use type and system. Generation standards by land use type and system are as follows: 
(1)  Residential. The generation standard shall be the same as for sanitary sewer. 
(2)  Commercial/industrial/institution. The generation standard shall be the same as for sanitary sewer. 
(3)  Existing service. The city shall not extend water distribution lines for the purpose of enabling additional direct service connections until a target of at least 70 percent utilization of the potential service connections to the existing distribution system has been achieved or authorized by subdivision plat approval or issuance of development permits; provided, however, that improvements intended to improve the quality of existing service shall not be so restricted. 
(b)  Variations. The city may use a different generation standard based on unique circumstances of the proposed use or satisfactory demonstration by the applicant that a different standard is appropriate. 
(Code 1999, § 90-9; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(26-4(C)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 90-10. - Same-Solid waste. 
(a)  Generation standards by land use type. The following standards shall be used to estimate the volume of solid waste anticipated to be generated by an individual unit in a proposed development: 
(1)  Residential. 
Single-family 10 lbs. per day Duplex, multifamily 7 lbs. per day Mobile home 6 lbs. per day  
(2)  Commercial/industrial/institutional. The developer shall provide the city with a description and estimate of the weight of solid waste to be generated on an average monthly basis. 
(b)  Hazardous waste. Commercial, institutional and industrial development which are potential hazardous waste generators shall be responsible for coordinating with the county for disposal of such waste. Written approval must be obtained from the county and submitted to the city that the hazardous waste to be generated by the proposed development can be accommodated at the county's landfill or directed to an alternative licensed disposal facility. 
(Code 1999, § 90-10; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(26-4(D)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 90-11. - Same-Stormwater drainage. 
    A stormwater drainage plan based on the stormwater management requirements of this Code shall be prepared for all developments. Such plans shall be based on the level-of-service design storm and demonstrate that such standard is achieved. 
(Code 1999, § 90-11; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(26-4(E)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 90-12. - Same-Recreation and open space. 
(a)  Residential developments. Recreational impacts of proposed residential developments shall be based on the anticipated total number of persons residing in the development, calculated by using the population figures per dwelling unit as follows: 
Unit Type Persons/Dwelling Unit Single-family 2.7 Duplex/single-family attached 2.5 Multifamily 2.3 Mobile home 2.1  
(b)  Commercial/institutional/industrial developments. Commercial, institutional, and industrial developments shall not be assessed as having an impact on recreational facilities. The city may, however, require the provision of recreational facilities as part of planned developments. 
(Code 1999, § 90-12; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(26-4(F)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 90-13. - Concurrency review-Procedures. 
    The community development department shall be responsible for conducting all concurrency reviews as required by this chapter. Concurrency review shall be initiated upon receipt of a completed concurrency review form provided by the city, accompanied by the appropriate fee. The department may also conduct concurrency reviews for developments in the preapplication or conceptual development plan stage, and issue a nonbinding letter of concurrency findings. Such requests for concurrency review shall require submission of a review fee to be established by the city commission. 
(Code 1999, § 90-13; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(26-5), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 90-14. - Same-Application. 
(a)  All development applications subject to concurrency review as required by this chapter shall include a complete concurrency review form containing the following information: 
(1)  Traffic impact study (when required). 
(2)  Description and estimate of water use needs. 
(3)  Description and estimate of wastewater generation. 
(4)  Description and estimate of solid waste generation. 
(5)  Stormwater drainage calculations. 
(6)  Computation of population expected to reside in project for purposes of determining recreational impacts. 
(7)  Other information required by the department to conduct a complete and accurate review. 
(b)  Review and approval of a proposed development may be postponed for a reasonable time period in order for required information to be assembled. Failure of the applicant to provide adequate information on the anticipated project impacts in a timely fashion, however, shall constitute a sufficient grounds to deny the project. 
(Code 1999, § 90-14; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(26-5(A)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 90-15. - Project impact assessment. 
(a)  Existing conditions. To conduct its assessment of the anticipated impacts of a proposed development on public facilities, the department shall use its inventory of public facilities capacities as a base for the establishment of existing conditions. 
(b)  Impact assessment. Using its own information and that supplied by the applicant, in compliance with section 90-14, the department shall calculate the anticipated impacts of a proposed development for all applicable public facilities listed in section 90-2. The impacts of the proposed development shall then be assessed against the existing conditions established above. 
(Code 1999, § 90-15; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(26-5(B)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 90-16. - Project phasing/timing of improvements. 
    Public facility improvements associated with a phased development may be phased, provided that all public facility improvements necessary to accommodate the impacts of the entire development are to be provided and a schedule established for their construction prior to the issuance of a building permit. The schedule of facility improvements shall ensure that all facility improvements necessary to accommodate the impacts of the development (or portion thereof) for which a certificate of occupancy has been applied, shall be in place prior to the issuance of the certificate. Under no circumstances shall the final certificate of occupancy be issued for a project unless all required facility improvements required by the development order or development agreement have been completed. 
(Code 1999, § 90-16; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(26-5(C)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 90-17. - Development agreements. 
    It is the city's policy to require the necessary infrastructure to meet minimum LOS standards. If the minimum requirements for concurrency as outlined in section 90-4(1) through (5) cannot be met, concurrency may be achieved by guaranteeing necessary facility improvements in an enforceable development agreement, as permitted by section 90-4(6). Such guarantees to construct required facility improvements, or to provide funds equivalent to the cost of providing such facility improvements. 
(Code 1999, § 90-17; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(26-5(D)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 90-18. - Concurrency findings. 
    Upon conclusion of the concurrency review, the department shall prepare a written set of findings concerning the proposed development. These findings shall include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  The anticipated public facility impacts of the proposed development; 
(2)  The ability of existing facilities to accommodate the proposed development at the adopted level of service standards; 
(3)  Any existing facility deficiencies that will need to be corrected prior to the completion of the proposed development; 
(4)  The facility improvement or additions necessary to accommodate the impact of the proposed development at the adopted level of service standard and the entity responsible for the design and installation of all required facility improvements or additions; and 
(5)  The date such facility improvements or additions will need to be completed to be concurrent with the impacts on such facility created by the proposed development. 
(Code 1999, § 90-18; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(26-5(E)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 90-19. - Concurrency reservation. 
(a)  Capacity reservation. If the concurrency findings in section 90-18 reveal that the capacity of public facilities is equal to or greater than that required to maintain the adopted level-of-service for such facilities, the department shall reserve or recommend to the city commission the reservation of public facility capacity necessary for the proposed development. Capacity reservations shall be made on a first-come, first-served basis, based on the date of project approval by the department or the city commission. Concurrency shall be reserved in conjunction with a development order and shall be valid only for the specific land uses, densities, intensities and construction and improvement schedules contained in the development order and any applicable development agreements for the property. A finding of concurrency shall reserve public facility capacity for the project for one year from the date of approval and in accordance with the development order. Public facility capacity may be reserved for the first phase of the project for up to one year from the date of approval of the conceptual plan and master development agreement for planned developments. Capacity reservations for concurrency shall expire if the underlying development order or development agreement expires or is revoked. 
(b)  Project deferrals/development moratoriums. If, at anytime the city's inventory of public facilities capacities indicates that a public facility has dropped below its adopted level-of-service, then the city shall cease to issue development orders for projects which would impact the deficient facility or area of facility operations. Such a suspension or moratorium on the issuance of development orders shall continue until such time as the adopted LOS standard is reestablished or the comprehensive plan is amended to reflect a lower, acceptable community standard for the facility in question. 
(c)  Concurrency denials. If the city's concurrency review reveals that the proposed development would generate public facility impacts beyond that which can be absorbed by available capacity, the proposed development shall not be authorized unless there is a financial or other legally binding commitment to ensure that public facilities necessary to correct the anticipated deficiency will be in place concurrent with the impacts of the proposed development. Should the city and/or a developer be unable to provide such assurances, the project shall be denied. Projects denied due to failure to meet requirements, but for which all other land development requirements have been met, shall be placed on a prioritized list for approval of development orders once facility improvements have been made. 
(d)  Capacity reservation for public purpose. The city may reserve capacity for a particular land area or specific land use, providing such reservation is consistent with a specific development or redevelopment strategy identified in the comprehensive plan which serves an overriding public purpose. This would include such community development objectives as providing affordable housing or diversification of the tax base. Any such capacity reservation shall be noted in the annual report on public facilities and capacities made available to the department and the public each January, as required by section 90-20. 
(Code 1999, § 90-19; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(26-6), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 90-20. - Status report/required capital facilities improvement. 
    The city shall regularly monitor the cumulative effect of all approved development orders and development permits on the capacity of public facilities. The department shall prepare a public report on the capacities of the public facilities and level-of-service inventory for concurrency management that shall include the extent of any facility deficiencies and a summary of the impacts the deficiency will have on the approval of future development orders. The city shall then recommend a schedule of improvements necessary to prevent a deferral or moratorium on the issuance of development orders. 
(Code 1999, § 90-20; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(26-7), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 90-21. - Intergovernmental coordination. 
(a)  Intergovernmental communication. The community development department shall regularly transmit to the governing body having jurisdiction over lands adjacent to the city notice of all pending development applications for which concurrency assessments are being conducted and which can be reasonably expected to impact significantly the public facilities therein. A deadline for comments (if any) to be submitted by such adjacent municipalities to the city shall be included in the notice. 
(b)  Development of multijurisdiction impact. Developments which would have a significant impact on a public facility located entirely or partially within the boundaries of an adjacent local governmental entity shall not be approved without a report being provided to the city commission in conjunction with the recommendation of the city's administrative staff. Such report shall include an analysis of the impacts of the pending development application on the current and projected level-of-service of the public facility as reported or recorded by that adjacent local governmental entity. 
(c)  Interlocal agreements. Provisions consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter shall be included in all interlocal agreements to which the city is a party and which are executed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter was derived. 
(Code 1999, § 90-21; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(26-8), 12-19-1994) 
Chapter 94 - PLANNING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 94-1. - Comprehensive plan adopted. 
    The comprehensive plan for the city, adopted by Ordinance Number 91-1, as amended, is hereby adopted as the comprehensive plan for the city. 
(Code 1982, § 14-4; Code 1999, § 94-1; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(14-4), 12-19-1994) 
Secs. 94-2-94-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING BOARD 

Sec. 94-21. - Created, composition. 
    There is hereby created a city planning board to be composed of five members meeting the qualifications set forth in the Charter. 
(Code 1960, § 2-13; Code 1982, § 14-1(a); Code 1999, § 94-31) 
Sec. 94-22. - Appointment, terms, etc. 
    The members of the planning board shall be appointed by the city commission. The term of office shall run from June 1 in the year in which the appointment is made. Each person appointed shall serve for a term of two years, or until his successor is appointed and qualified. Members shall be subject to removal by the city commission for failure to perform their duties or take an active part in the board's duties, or for other misconduct in office. Vacancies on the board may be filled by the commission at any time for the unexpired term. 
(Code 1960, § 2-13; Code 1982, § 14-1(b); Code 1999, § 94-32) 
Sec. 94-23. - Officers, meetings. 
(a)  At the first meeting after June 1 in each year, the planning board shall organize and select one of its members as chairperson and one member as secretary, both to serve until the next organizational meeting. The board shall hold regular meetings at least once every three months, and more often if the members should deem it necessary. 
(b)  The chairperson may call a meeting at any time upon his own volition, or he shall call a meeting when he is requested to do so by three members of the board or by the city commission, such special meetings to be upon reasonable notice to the members and the public if practical. The secretary shall make and keep a record of all proceedings of the board, which shall be transcribed and one copy filed with the city clerk. 
(Code 1960, § 2-14; Code 1982, § 14-2; Code 1999, § 94-33) 
Sec. 94-24. - Local planning agency. 
(a)  The city commission does hereby declare its intent to exercise the authority set out in F.S. §§ 163.3161 through 163.3211, known as the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulations Act, in the in the incorporated areas of the city. 
(b)  The city commission does hereby designate and establish the planning board of the city as the local planning agency for the city. Notwithstanding any special act to the contrary, all local planning agencies or equivalent agencies that first review rezoning and comprehensive plan amendments in each municipality and county shall include a representative of the school district appointed by the school board as a nonvoting member of the local planning agency or equivalent agency to attend those meetings at which the agency considers comprehensive plan amendments and rezonings that would, if approved, increase residential density on the property that is the subject of the application. However, this subsection does not prevent the city commission from granting voting status to the school board member. 
(1)  The method of choosing the members of the local planning agency and the method of choosing its officers shall be as provided by the ordinances of the city. 
(2)  Meetings of the local planning agency shall be public meetings and its records shall be public records. 
(3)  The finances necessary for the local planning agency shall be provided by the city. 
(4)  The local planning agency shall be required to establish in writing a set of rules or procedures. 
(5)  The local planning agency shall have the general responsibility for continuing the comprehensive planning program for the city. 
(6)  As part of the comprehensive planning program the local planning agency shall: 
a.  Hold public hearings for revisions and/or updating of the comprehensive plan. Public notice for each hearing shall include a summary of the planning aspects to be dealt with, an invitation for comments and suggestions from the public and the date, time and place of such hearing. 
b.  Upon completion of revisions and/or updating of the comprehensive plan, or element or portion thereof, the local planning agency shall make a written recommendation to the city commission concerning such comprehensive plan, element or portion thereof. 
(c)  The responsibilities, powers and duties of the local planning agency as set forth above shall be subject to and performed in accordance with the requirements of F.S. §§ 163.3161 through 163.3211. 
(d)  A certified copy of this section has been furnished to the state land planning agency and the Southwest Florida Regional Planning Council. 
(Code 1960, § 2-17.1; Code 1982, § 14-3; Code 1999, § 94-34) 
State Law reference- Designation of local planning agency, F.S. § 163.3174. 
Secs. 94-25-94-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CLEWISTON COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT AREA 

Sec. 94-52. - Approval of redevelopment plan. 
    The community redevelopment plan for the city's community redevelopment area, more specifically referred to as the city's redevelopment plan ("the plan"), attached the ordinance from which this section is derived as exhibit A, and made a part of the ordinance by reference, is hereby approved and adopted. The plan is hereby designated as the official community redevelopment plan for the city's community redevelopment area. The city commission hereby directs that the community redevelopment plan be implemented in the area. 
(Ord. No. 2007-06, § 1, 5-21-2007) 
Editor's note- Exhibit A referred to in this section is not printed herein but is on file and available for inspection in the city clerk's office. 
Sec. 94-53. - Adoption. 
    The city commission has the authority to adopt the ordinance from which this article is derived pursuant to Fla. Const. art. VIII and F.S. chs. 163 and 166. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 94-54. - Creation of trust fund. 
    There is hereby established and created, in accordance with the provisions of the act, a community redevelopment trust fund ("the fund") for the community redevelopment area, which fund shall be utilized and expended for the purposes of and in accordance with the community redevelopment plan, including any amendments or modifications thereto, including any "community redevelopment," as that term is defined in F.S. § 163.340(9) under the plan. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 2, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 94-55. - Utilization of funds. 
    The monies to be allocated to and deposited into the fund shall be used to finance community redevelopment within the community redevelopment area according to tax increment revenues attributed to the community redevelopment area, which shall be appropriated by the community redevelopment agency. The community redevelopment agency shall utilize the funds and revenues paid into and earned by the fund for community redevelopment purposes as provided in the community redevelopment plan and as permitted by law. The fund shall exist for the duration of the community redevelopment undertaken by the community redevelopment agency pursuant to the community redevelopment plan to the extent permitted by the act as stated in the plan. Monies shall be held in the fund by the city, for and on behalf of the agency, and disbursed from the fund as provided by the agency. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 3, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 94-56. - Tax increment. 
    There shall be paid into the fund each year by each of the "taxing authorities," as that term is defined in F.S. § 163.340(2), except for those special districts exempted from such requirement, levying ad valorem taxes within the community redevelopment area, a sum equal to 95 percent of the incremental increase in ad valorem taxes levied each year by that taxing authority, as calculated in accordance with section 94-58 and the act, based on the base tax year established in section 94-57 (such annual sum being hereinafter referred to as the tax increment). 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 4, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 94-57. - Preliminary assessment roll. 
    The most recent assessment roll used in connection with the taxation of property prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be the preliminary assessment roll of taxable real property in the county, prepared by the property appraiser of the county, and certified pursuant to F.S. § 193.122, reflecting valuation of real property for purposes of ad valorem taxation as of July 1, 2007 (the "base year value"), and all deposits into the fund shall be in the amount of tax increment calculated as provided in section 94-58 based upon increases in valuation of taxable real property from the base year value as reflected on the preliminary assessment roll of taxable real property in the community redevelopment area in the city, prepared by the property appraiser of the county, filed with the state department of revenue pursuant to F.S. § 193.1142. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 5, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 94-58. - Annual determination of tax increment. 
    The tax increment shall be determined and appropriated annually by each taxing authority, and shall be an amount equal to 95 percent of the difference between: 
(1)  That amount of ad valorem taxes levied each year specifically by the city and the county, yet excluding all other taxing authorities on taxable real property located within the geographic boundaries of the community redevelopment area; and 
(2)  That amount of ad valorem taxes which would have been produced by the rate upon which the tax is levied each year specifically by the city and the county, yet excluding all other taxing, upon the total of the assessed value of the taxable real property in the community redevelopment area as shown upon the assessment roll used in connection with the taxation of such property by specifically by the city and the county, yet excluding all other taxing, prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 6, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 94-59. - Increment revenue. 
    The city and the county shall annually appropriate to and cause to be deposited in the fund the tax increment determined pursuant to the act and section 94-57 at the beginning of each fiscal year thereof as provided in the act. The obligation of the city and the county to annually appropriate the tax increment for deposit in the fund shall commence immediately upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and continue to the extent permitted by the act so long as any indebtedness pledging increment revenue is to be paid and so long as the plan is in effect. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 7, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 94-60. - Fund administered by community redevelopment agency. 
    The fund shall be established and maintained as a separate trust fund by the community redevelopment agency so that the fund may be promptly and effectively administered and utilized by the agency expeditiously and without undue delay for its statutory purpose pursuant to the plan. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 8, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 94-61. - Governing body to act as trustees of fund. 
    The governing body of the agency shall be the trustees of the fund and shall be responsible for the receipt, custody, disbursement, accountability, management, investment and proper application of all monies paid into the fund. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 9, 5-21-2007) 
Chapter 98 - RESOURCE PROTECTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 98-1. - Purpose. 
(a)  This chapter sets forth regulations for protecting the city's natural and manmade resources from the effects of land development to protect soils and groundwater from harmful pollutants; conserve and promote vegetative communities and wildlife habitats; reduce flood hazards and conserve areas of unique historical or archaeological interest. 
(b)  As such, these regulations supplement the requirements of the state department of natural resources and the state department of environmental regulation. Upon conflict between state requirements and requirements of this chapter, the most stringent requirement shall apply. 
(Code 1999, § 98-1; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(21-1), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 98-2. - Applicability. 
    The requirements of this chapter shall apply to all lands within the city except as may be specifically exempted. 
(Code 1999, § 98-2; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(21-2), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 98-3. - Definitions. 
    The definitions included in section 110-2 shall be applicable to this chapter. In addition thereto, the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cultural resource means a site, object, structure, building or district identified by the city as a cultural resource or included in the city register of historic places. 
    Demolition means the removal or razing of 25 percent or more of a structure's external walls. 
    Historic district means an area, urban or rural, designated as an historic district by the city commission, state or federal authority and which may contain within definable geographic boundaries one or more buildings, objects, sites or structures, or groups of buildings, objects, sites or structures, including their appurtenances, and natural resources having historical, cultural, architectural or archaeological significance, classified as contributing; and which may have within its boundaries other buildings, objects, sites or structures that are not of historical, cultural, architectural or archaeological significance, classified as noncontributing. 
    Historic site means those buildings, objects, sites or structures of the greatest historical, cultural, architectural or archaeological importance, and whose demolition or destruction would constitute an irreplaceable loss to the quality and character of the city. 
    Object means a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical, or scientific value that may be by nature of design, movable, yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
    Ordinary maintenance means work which does not require a construction permit and is necessary to repair damage or to prevent deterioration or decay of a building or structure or part thereof as nearly as practicable to its condition prior to the damage, deterioration, or decay. 
    Original appearance means that appearance (except for color) which, based on available information applicable to the property, similar properties or the relevant historical period, closely resembles the appearance of either: 
(1)  The feature on the building as it was originally built or was likely to have been built; or 
(2)  The feature on the building as it presently exists so long as the present appearance is found to be consistent with the style and materials of the building. 
(Code 1999, § 98-3; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(21-3), 12-19-1994) 
Secs. 98-4-98-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TREES AND SHRUBS 

Sec. 98-25. - Permit required to plant, remove or alter trees and shrubs on public property. 
    The director of public works of the city is hereby authorized, in his discretion, to issue or to refuse permits for the placing, planting, removal, destruction or alteration of trees and shrubs, and plants on, over, or within the streets, avenues, alleys, parks, parkways, and any other public property within the city. It shall be unlawful to do any such work without a permit. 
(Code 1999, § 98-31; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(21-4), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 98-26. - Permit application, contents. 
    Permits required by section 98-25 may be issued upon application to the director of public works and each application and each permit shall be in such form and shall show such information as to location, kind, style, size, and provisions for future care of the poles, wires, trees, shrubbery or plantings as may seem necessary or desirable to the director of public works. 
(Code 1999, § 98-32; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(21-5), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 98-27. - Compliance with permit; correction by city. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, plant, remove, deface, destroy or alter any tree, shrubbery or plant on or over any street, avenue, alley, park, parkway or other public property in the city except in accordance with the terms of the permit issued in accordance herewith. In addition to the penalty for violation of this Code, the director of public works is hereby authorized to summarily correct any violation of this article to the extent possible by replanting or replacing any trees, shrubbery, or plants which may be removed, defaced, or destroyed, and to remove, destroy, or replace any that may be placed or planted in violation thereof. 
(Code 1999, § 98-33; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(21-6), 12-19-1994) 
_____
Sec. 98-28. - Prohibited species. 
    The following trees are considered to be a nuisance and shall be prohibited from use in landscape plantings installed after February 1, 1992: 
Causarina cunninghamiana Beefwood Causarina glauca Scaly-bark beefwood, Brazilian oak Causarina equisetifolia Australian pine Melaleuca quinquenervia Punk tree or cajeput Schinus terebinthifolius Brazilian pepper Mimosa pigra Giant Sensitive Tree  
(Code 1999, § 98-34; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(21-7), 12-19-1994) 
_____
Sec. 98-29. - Removal of nuisance trees. 
    Property owners are encourage to remove nuisance trees listed in section 98-27 so as to reduce potential hazards during storm events and litter caused by broken branches, as well as excessive proliferation of species which prevent growth of native species. 
(Code 1999, § 98-35; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(21-8), 12-19-1994) 
Secs. 98-30-98-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HABITAT AND ENDANGERED/THREATENED SPECIES PROTECTION 

Sec. 98-60. - Applicability. 
    This article shall be interpreted to include both flora and fauna. 
(Code 1999, § 98-61; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(21-21), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 98-61. - Standards for development. 
(a)  Areas subject to the standards of this section shall be those identified in the conservation element of the comprehensive plan of the city as habitat for rare and endangered species, threatened species, or species of special concern. Those areas are identified as the edge of drainage canals. 
(b)  It is the intent of this section to require that an appropriate amount of land shall be available to protect habitat of rare, endangered, or special concern plant and animal species. Development proposed in areas which have been identified pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be required to provide a professionally prepared study to document the presence of affected species, the land needs of the species which may be met on the development site, and to propose habitat management plans or habitat mitigation plans as appropriate. 
(c)  Where land on a proposed development site is to be preserved as habitat of rare, endangered or special concern species, such land shall be adjacent to existing viable habitat, a significant wetland system, floodplain, or wildlife corridor. If such lands are not adjacent to the development site, land to be set aside shall be of such quantity and quality as to provide viable habitat, as documented in the study required above. 
(d)  As an alternative to preservation of land, the city may establish and maintain a nonlapsing trust fund for the purpose of receiving funds deposited by a developer in an amount equal to or greater than the proportional share of the entire development site. The county property appraiser's current assessed value of the land shall be assumed to be the value in the absence of better evidence of value. Funds deposited in the trust fund shall be used solely in connection with acquiring substitute land or for activities intended to protect habitats of threatened and endangered species. 
(Code 1999, § 98-62; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(21-22), 12-19-1994) 
Secs. 98-62-98-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HISTORIC SITES, BUILDINGS, DISTRICTS AND LANDMARKS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Historical resources, F.S. § 267.011. 

Sec. 98-81. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish a program and implementing procedures for the preservation of structures and areas within the city which are considered important to the city's historical and cultural development; and which, if destroyed, altered or otherwise caused to have their authenticity and integrity removed or diminished so as to preclude the opportunity for displaying or interpreting the city's heritage for preservation and future generations, would represent a significant loss to the city's quality of life and cultural awareness of the citizens of the city as well as the environmental character and economy of the city. 
(Code 1999, § 98-91; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(21-23), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 98-82. - City register of historic places-Created. 
    A city register of historic places is hereby created as a means of identifying and classifying various sites, buildings, structures, objects, and districts as historic and/or architecturally significant. The register will be kept by the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1999, § 98-92; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(21-24(a)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 98-83. - Same-Initiation of placement. 
    Placement of sites, buildings, structures, objects or districts included on the city register of historic places may be initiated by the city commission, the owner of the site, building, structure, object, or area; or, in the case of a proposal to establish a historic district, by the owner of a site, building, structure, object, or area within the proposed district. 
(Code 1999, § 98-93; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(21-24(b)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 98-84. - Same-Placement on register. 
    The following procedure shall be followed for placement of sites, buildings, structures, objects, areas, and districts on the city register of historic places: 
(1)  A nomination form, available from the city, shall be completed by the applicant and returned to the city. 
(2)  Upon receipt of the completed nomination form, including necessary documents, the community development director shall place the nomination on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city commission. If the next regularly scheduled meeting of the commission is too close at hand to allow for the required notice to be given, the nomination shall be placed on the agenda of the succeeding regularly scheduled meeting. 
(3)  The nomination form shall be sent to the city commission. The nomination shall then be advertised, considered and acted upon in accordance with all requirements applicable to a zoning map amendment. 
(Code 1999, § 98-94; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(21-24(c)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 98-85. - Same-Criteria for listing. 
(a)  A site, building, or district must meet the following criteria before it may be listed on the city register of historic places: 
(1)  The site, building, or district possesses integrity of location, design, materials, workmanship, and association; and 
(2)  The site, building, or district is associated with events that are significant to local, state, or national history; or the district, site, building, structure, or object embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction; or represents the work of a master; or possesses high artistic values; or represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction. 
(b)  A site or building located in a district included within the register shall be designated as contributing to that district if it meets the following criteria: 
(1)  The property is one which, by its location, design, setting, materials, workmanship and association adds to the district's sense of time and place as well as its historical development. 
(2)  A property should not be considered contributing if the property's integrity of location, design, setting materials, workmanship, and association have been so altered that the overall integrity of the property has been irretrievably lost. 
(3)  Structures that have been built within the past 50 years shall not be considered to contribute to the significance of a district, unless a strong justification concerning their historical or architectural merit is given or the historical attributes of the district are considered to be less than 50 years old. 
(Code 1999, § 98-95; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(21-24(d)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 98-86. - Same-Effect of listing. 
(a)  The city may issue an official certificate of historic significance to the owner of properties listed individually on the city register of historic places or judged as contributing to the character of a district listed on the register. The community development director is authorized to issue and place official signs or markers denoting the geographic boundaries of each district listed on the register. 
(b)  Structures and buildings listed individually on the register or judged as contributing to the character of a district listed on the register shall be deemed historic and entitled to modified enforcement of the Standard Building Code as provided by chapter 1, section 101.5 of the Standard Building Code Congress International, Inc. 
(c)  No demolition, alteration, relocation or construction activities may take place except as provided below. 
(Code 1999, § 98-96; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(21-24(e)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 98-87. - Same-Removal of listing. 
(a)  The owner of a property or a majority of the property owners within a district included on the city register of historic places listing in accordance with the provisions of this article may petition the city commission for removal of the property from such register listing. 
(b)  A petition for removal of a property from the register shall be in letter form and shall include all reasons for requesting the removal. It shall be filed with the community development director. 
(c)  The petition for removal shall be processed in the same manner as a nomination form as set forth in section 98-84. 
(Code 1999, § 98-97; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(22-24(f)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 98-88. - Certificates of appropriateness-When required. 
(a)  A certificate of appropriateness must be obtained before making certain alterations, described below as regulated activities affecting structures determined to make a significant contribution to an approved district as well as structures listed individually on the city register of historic places. 
(b)  In order to determine the applicability of this article to proposed activities, the following guidelines shall apply: 
(1)  Ordinary maintenance. If the work constitutes ordinary maintenance, the work may be done without a certificate of appropriateness. 
(2)  Staff approval. If the work is not ordinary maintenance, but will result in retention of restoration of the original appearance, the certificate of appropriateness may be issued by the community development director. 
(3)  City commission approval. If the work is not ordinary maintenance and will not result in the retention or restoration of the original appearance, a certificate of appropriateness must be obtained from the city commission before the proposed work may be done. 
(c)  The following proposed activities are listed as examples of activities presumed to result in an alteration of the exterior appearance of a site or structure intended to be regulated by this article and are therefore subject to all requirements relative to the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness: 
(1)  Installation of an exterior door or door frame, or the infill of an existing exterior door opening. 
(2)  Installation or removal of any exterior wall, including the enclosure of any porch or other outdoor area with any material other than insect screening. 
(3)  Painting unpainted masonry including stone, brick, terra cotta and concrete. 
(4)  Installation of new roofing materials, or removal of existing roofing materials when such new materials are of a different character than the existing materials. 
(5)  Installation of new exterior siding materials when such new materials are of a different character than the existing materials upon completion of such work. 
(6)  Installation of an exterior window or window frame or the infill of an existing exterior window opening. 
(d)  A certificate of appropriateness must be obtained from the city commission to erect a new building or parking lot within a district or on a site listed on the register. 
(e)  A certificate of appropriateness must be obtained prior to the demolishing of a building, structure, or object listed individually on the register, or designated as contributing to a district listed on the register. 
(f)  A certificate of appropriateness must be obtained prior to relocating a building, structure, or object listed individually on the register, or designated as contributing to a district listed on the register. 
(Code 1999, § 98-98; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(21-25(a)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 98-89. - Same-Criteria for issuing. 
    Issuance of certificates of appropriateness for demolitions shall be guided by the following factors: 
(1)  The historic or architectural significance of the building, structure, or object; 
(2)  The importance of the building, structure, or object to the ambience of a district; 
(3)  The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a building, structure or object because of its design, texture, material, detail, or unique location; 
(4)  Whether the building, structure, or object is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood, the county, or the region; 
(5)  Whether there are definite plans for reuse of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding; 
(6)  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, or object from collapse; and 
(7)  Whether the building, structure, or object is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value. 
(Code 1999, § 98-99; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(21-25(b)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 98-90. - Same-Procedure. 
(a)  A person wishing to undertake any of the activities specified in section 98-87(c) shall file with the community development director a completed application for a certificate of appropriateness and supporting documents. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a completed application and all required submittals and fees, the community development director shall place the application on the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city commission allowing for notice as required herein. Applications for certificates of appropriateness may be heard at specially called meetings of the commission provided all notice requirements are met. Upon mutual agreement, the application may be set for hearing at a meeting later than the next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(c)  At least 15 days, but not more than 30 days, prior to the meeting at which the application is to be heard, the community development director shall give the following notice: 
(1)  Written notice of the time and place of the meeting shall be sent to the applicant and all persons or organizations filing written requests with the community development director's office. 
(2)  One advertised notice in a newspaper of general circulation. 
(d)  The hearing shall be held at the time and place indicated in the notice. The decision of the city commission shall be made at the hearing. 
(e)  The city commission shall use the criteria set forth in section 98-89 to review the completed application and accompanying submittals. After completing the review of the application and fulfilling the public notice and hearing requirements as set forth in above, the city commission shall take one of the following actions: 
(1)  Grant the certificate of appropriateness with an immediate effective date; 
(2)  Grant the certificate of appropriateness with special modifications and conditions; or 
(3)  Deny the certificate of appropriateness. 
(f)  The city manager shall record and keep records of all meetings. The records shall include the vote, absence, or abstention of each member upon each question, all official actions of the city commission, and the findings and conclusions of the board. All records shall be filed in the city manager's office. 
(Code 1999, § 98-100; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(21-25(c)), 12-19-1994) 
Secs. 98-91-98-108. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-01, § 2, adopted Apr. 20, 2015, repealed the former art. V, §§ 98-109-98-117, and § 3 thereof enacted a new art. V as set out herein. Provisions have been renumbered and designated to conform to the Code style; original section numbers are included in history notes. The former art. V pertained to floodplain protection and derived from Code 1999, §§ 98-126-98-134; Ord. No. 2003-04, pt. 1, adopted Oct. 13, 2003. 

DIVISION 1. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 98-109. - General. 
(a)  Title. These regulations shall be known as the floodplain management ordinance of the city, hereinafter referred to as "this article." 
(b)  Scope. The provisions of this article shall apply to all development that is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area, including but not limited to the subdivision of land; filling, grading, and other site improvements and utility installations; construction, alteration, remodeling, enlargement, improvement, replacement, repair, relocation or demolition of buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code; placement, installation, or replacement of manufactured homes and manufactured buildings; installation or replacement of tanks; placement of recreational vehicles; installation of swimming pools; and any other development. 
(c)  Intent. The purposes of this article and the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code are to establish minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flooding through regulation of development in flood hazard areas to: 
(1)  Minimize unnecessary disruption of commerce, access and public service during times of flooding; 
(2)  Require the use of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize future flood damage; 
(3)  Manage filling, grading, dredging, mining, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion potential; 
(4)  Manage the alteration of flood hazard areas, watercourses, and shorelines to minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial functions of the floodplain; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public and private facilities and utilities; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood hazard areas; 
(7)  Minimize the need for future expenditure of public funds for flood control projects and response to and recovery from flood events; and 
(8)  Meet the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program for community participation as set forth in the 44 CFR 59.22. 
(d)  Coordination with the Florida Building Code. This article is intended to be administered and enforced in conjunction with the Florida Building Code. Where cited. ASCE 24 refers to the edition of the standard that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. 
(e)  Warning. The degree of flood protection required by this article and the Florida Building Code, as amended by this community, is considered the minimum reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside of mapped special flood hazard areas, or that uses permitted within such flood hazard areas, will be free from flooding or flood damage. The flood hazard areas and base flood elevations contained in the flood insurance study and shown on flood insurance rate maps and the requirements of 44 CFR 59 and 60 may be revised by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, requiring this community to revise these regulations to remain eligible for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. No guaranty of vested use, existing use, or future use is implied or expressed by compliance with this article. 
(f)  Disclaimer of liability. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city commission or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3(§ 101), 4-20-2015) 
Sec. 98-110. - Applicability. 
(a)  General. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(b)  Areas to which this article applies. This article shall apply to all flood hazard areas within the City of Clewiston, as established in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Basis for establishing flood hazard areas. The Flood Insurance Study for Hendry County, Florida and Incorporated Areas dated July 6, 2015, and all subsequent amendments and revisions, and the accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM), and all subsequent amendments and revisions to such maps, are adopted by reference as a part of this article and shall serve as the minimum basis for establishing flood hazard areas. Studies and maps that establish flood hazard areas are on file at the City Hall, 115 West Ventura Ave., Clewiston, FL 33440. 
(d)  Submission of additional data to establish flood hazard areas. To establish flood hazard areas and base flood elevations, pursuant to section 98-113 of this article, the floodplain administrator may require submission of additional data. Where field surveyed topography prepared by a Florida licensed professional surveyor or digital topography accepted by the community indicates that ground elevations: 
(1)  Are below the closest applicable base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard area on a FIRM, the area shall be considered as flood hazard area and subject to the requirements of this article and, as applicable, the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(2)  Are above the closest applicable base flood elevation, the area shall be regulated as special flood hazard area unless the applicant obtains a letter of map change that removes the area from the special flood hazard area. 
(e)  Other laws. The provisions of this article shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law. 
(f)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article supersedes any ordinance in effect for management of development in flood hazard areas. However, it is not intended to repeal or abrogate any existing ordinances including but not limited to land development regulations, zoning ordinances, stormwater management regulations, or the Florida Building Code. In the event of a conflict between this article and any other ordinance, the more restrictive shall govern. This article shall not impair any deed restriction, covenant or easement, but any land that is subject to such interests shall also be governed by this article. 
(g)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3(§ 102), 4-20-2015) 
Sec. 98-111. - Duties and powers of the floodplain administrator. 
(a)  Designation. The building official is designated as the floodplain administrator. The floodplain administrator may delegate performance of certain duties to other employees. 
(b)  General. The floodplain administrator is authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. The floodplain administrator shall have the authority to render interpretations of this article consistent with the intent and purpose of this article and may establish policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies, and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided in this article without the granting of a variance pursuant to section 98-115 of this article. 
(c)  Applications and permits. The floodplain administrator, in coordination with other pertinent offices of the community, shall: 
(1)  Review applications and plans to determine whether proposed new development will be located in flood hazard areas; 
(2)  Review applications for modification of any existing development in flood hazard areas for compliance with the requirements of this article; 
(3)  Interpret flood hazard area boundaries where such interpretation is necessary to determine the exact location of boundaries; a person contesting the determination shall have the opportunity to appeal the interpretation; 
(4)  Provide available flood elevation and flood hazard information; 
(5)  Determine whether additional flood hazard data shall be obtained from other sources or shall be developed by an applicant; 
(6)  Review applications to determine whether proposed development will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(7)  Issue floodplain development permits or approvals for development other than buildings and structures that are subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, when compliance with this article is demonstrated, or disapprove the same in the event of noncompliance; and 
(8)  Coordinate with and provide comments to the building official to assure that applications, plan reviews, and inspections for buildings and structures in flood hazard areas comply with the applicable provisions of this article. 
(d)  Substantial improvement and substantial damage determinations. For applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and structures, the floodplain administrator, in coordination with the building official, shall: 
(1)  Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed work; in the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are made; 
(2)  Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or structure; 
(3)  Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and 
(4)  Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance with the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code and this article is required. 
(e)  Modifications of the strict application of the requirements of the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall review requests submitted to the building official that seek approval to modify the strict application of the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code to determine whether such requests require the granting of a variance pursuant to section 98-115 of this article. 
(f)  Notices and orders. The floodplain administrator shall coordinate with appropriate local agencies for the issuance of all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this article. 
(g)  Inspections. The floodplain administrator shall make the required inspections as specified in section 98-114 of this article for development that is not subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall inspect flood hazard areas to determine if development is undertaken without issuance of a permit. 
(h)  Other duties of the floodplain administrator. The floodplain administrator shall have other duties, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Establish, in coordination with the building official, procedures for administering and documenting determinations of substantial improvement and substantial damage made pursuant to subsection (d) of this section; 
(2)  Require that applicants proposing alteration of a watercourse notify adjacent communities and the Florida Division of Emergency Management, State Floodplain Management Office, and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(3)  Require applicants who submit hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses to support permit applications to submit to FEMA the data and information necessary to maintain the flood insurance rate maps if the analyses propose to change base flood elevations, flood hazard area boundaries, or floodway designations; such submissions shall be made within six months of such data becoming available; 
(4)  Review required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by this article and the Florida Building Code and this article to determine that such certifications and documentations are complete; and 
(5)  Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency when the corporate boundaries of the City of Clewiston are modified. 
(i)  Floodplain management records. Regardless of any limitation on the period required for retention of public records, the floodplain administrator shall maintain and permanently keep and make available for public inspection all records that are necessary for the administration of this article and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, including flood insurance rate maps; letters of change; records of issuance of permits and denial of permits; determinations of whether proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by the Florida Building Code and this article; notifications to adjacent communities, FEMA, and the state related to alterations of watercourses; assurances that the flood carrying capacity of altered watercourses will be maintained; documentation related to appeals and variances, including justification for issuance or denial; and records of enforcement actions taken pursuant to this article and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. These records shall be available for public inspection at City Hall, 115 West Ventura Ave., Clewiston, FL 33440. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3(§ 103), 4-20-2015) 
Sec. 98-112. - Permits. 
(a)  Permits required. Any owner or owner's authorized agent (hereinafter "applicant") who intends to undertake any development activity within the scope of this article, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, which is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area shall first make application to the floodplain administrator, and the building official if applicable, and shall obtain the required permit(s) and approval(s). No such permit or approval shall be issued until compliance with the requirements of this article and all other applicable codes and regulations has been satisfied. 
(b)  Floodplain development permits or approvals. Floodplain development permits or approvals shall be issued pursuant to this article for any development activities not subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code. including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Depending on the nature and extent of proposed development that includes a building or structure, the floodplain administrator may determine that a floodplain development permit or approval is required in addition to a building permit. 
(c)  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Pursuant to the requirements of federal regulation for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (44 CFR 59 and 60), floodplain development permits or approvals shall be required for the following buildings, structures and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code and any further exemptions provided by law, which are subject to the requirements of this article: 
(1)  Railroads and ancillary facilities associated with the railroad. 
(2)  Nonresidential farm buildings on farms, as provided in F.S. § 604.50. 
(3)  Temporary buildings or sheds used exclusively for construction purposes. 
(4)  Mobile or modular structures used as temporary offices. 
(5)  Those structures or facilities of electric utilities, as defined in F.S. § 366.02, which are directly involved in the generation, transmission, or distribution of electricity. 
(6)  Chickees constructed by the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida or the Seminole Tribe of Florida. As used in this subsection, the term "chickee" means an open-sided wooden hut that has a thatched roof of palm or palmetto or other traditional materials, and that does not incorporate any electrical, plumbing, or other non-wood features. 
(7)  Family mausoleums not exceeding 250 square feet in area which are prefabricated and assembled on site or preassembled and delivered on site and have walls, roofs, and a floor constructed of granite, marble, or reinforced concrete. 
(8)  Temporary housing provided by the department of corrections to any prisoner in the state correctional system. 
(9)  Structures identified in F.S. § 553.73(10)(k) are not exempt from the Florida Building Code if such structures are located in flood hazard areas established on flood insurance rate maps. 
(d)  Application for a permit or approval. To obtain a floodplain development permit or approval the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished by the community. The information provided shall: 
(1)  Identify and describe the development to be covered by the permit or approval. 
(2)  Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be conducted by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitively locate the site. 
(3)  Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed development is intended. 
(4)  Be accompanied by a site plan or construction documents as specified in section 98-113 of this article. 
5.  State the valuation of the proposed work. 
6.  Be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent. 
7.  Give such other data and information as required by the floodplain administrator. 
(e)  Validity of permit or approval. The issuance of a floodplain development permit or approval pursuant to this article shall not be construed to be a permit for, or approval of, any violation of this article, the Florida Building Codes, or any other ordinance of this community. The issuance of permits based on submitted applications, construction documents, and information shall not prevent the floodplain administrator from requiring the correction of errors and omissions. 
(f)  Expiration. A floodplain development permit or approval shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the work commences. Extensions for periods of not more than 180 days each shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause shall be demonstrated. 
(g)  Suspension or revocation. The floodplain administrator is authorized to suspend or revoke a floodplain development permit or approval if the permit was issued in error, on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of this article or any other ordinance, regulation or requirement of this community. 
(h)  Other permits required. Floodplain development permits and building permits shall include a condition that all other applicable state or federal permits be obtained before commencement of the permitted development, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  The South Florida Water Management District; F.S. § 373.036. 
(2)  Florida Department of Health for on-site sewage treatment and disposal systems; F.S. § 381.0065 and F.A.C. ch. 64E-6. 
(3)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities subject to the joint coastal permit; F.S. § 161.055. 
(4)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities that affect wetlands and alter surface water flows, in conjunction with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(5)  Federal permits and approvals. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3(§ 104), 4-20-2015) 
Sec. 98-113. - Site plans and construction documents. 
(a)  Information for development in flood hazard areas. The site plan or construction documents for any development subject to the requirements of this article shall be drawn to scale and shall include, as applicable to the proposed development: 
(1)  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zone(s), base flood elevation(s), and ground elevations if necessary for review of the proposed development. 
(2)  Where flood hazard areas, base flood elevations, or floodway data are not included on the FIRM or in the flood insurance study, they shall be established in accordance with subsection (b)(2) or (3) of this section. 
(3)  Where the parcel on which the proposed development will take place will have more than 50 lots or is larger than five acres and the base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM or in the flood insurance study, such elevations shall be established in accordance with subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(4)  Location of the proposed activity and proposed structures, and locations of existing buildings and structures. 
(5)  Location, extent, amount, and proposed final grades of any filling, grading, or excavation. 
(6)  Where the placement of fill is proposed, the amount, type, and source of fill material; compaction specifications; a description of the intended purpose of the fill areas; and evidence that the proposed fill areas are the minimum necessary to achieve the intended purpose. 
(7)  Existing and proposed alignment of any proposed alteration of a watercourse. 
The floodplain administrator is authorized to waive the submission of site plans, construction documents, and other data that are required by this article but that are not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the proposed development is such that the review of such submissions is not necessary to ascertain compliance with this article. 
(b)  Information in flood hazard areas without base flood elevations (approximate Zone A). Where flood hazard areas are delineated on the FIRM and base flood elevation data have not been provided, the floodplain administrator shall: 
(1)  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices. 
(2)  Obtain, review, and provide to applicants base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source or require the applicant to obtain and use base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source. 
(3)  Where base flood elevation and floodway data are not available from another source, where the available data are deemed by the floodplain administrator to not reasonably reflect flooding conditions, or where the available data are known to be scientifically or technically incorrect or otherwise inadequate: 
a.  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices; or 
b.  Specify that the base flood elevation is two feet above the highest adjacent grade at the location of the development, provided there is no evidence indicating flood depths have been or may be greater than two feet. 
(4)  Where the base flood elevation data are to be used to support a letter of map change from FEMA, advise the applicant that the analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA, and that it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to satisfy the submittal requirements and pay the processing fees. 
(c)  Additional analyses and certifications. As applicable to the location and nature of the proposed development activity, and in addition to the requirements of this section, the applicant shall have the following analyses signed and sealed by a Florida licensed engineer for submission with the site plan and construction documents: 
(1)  For development activities proposed to be located in a regulatory floodway, a floodway encroachment analysis that demonstrates that the encroachment of the proposed development will not cause any increase in base flood elevations; where the applicant proposes to undertake development activities that do increase base flood elevations, the applicant shall submit such analysis to FEMA as specified in subsection (d) of this section and shall submit the conditional letter of map revision, if issued by FEMA, with the site plan and construction documents. 
(2)  For development activities proposed to be located in a riverine flood hazard area for which base flood elevations are included in the flood insurance study or on the FIRM and floodways have not been designated, hydrologic and hydraulic analyses that demonstrate that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated flood hazard area encroachments, will not increase the base flood elevation more than one foot at any point within the community. This requirement does not apply in isolated flood hazard areas not connected to a riverine flood hazard area or in flood hazard areas identified as Zone AO or Zone AH. 
(3)  For alteration of a watercourse, an engineering analysis prepared in accordance with standard engineering practices which demonstrates that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse will not be decreased, and certification that the altered watercourse shall be maintained in a manner which preserves the channel's flood-carrying capacity; the applicant shall submit the analysis to FEMA as specified in subsection (d) of this section. 
(d)  Submission of additional data. When additional hydrologic, hydraulic or other engineering data, studies, and additional analyses are submitted to support an application, the applicant has the right to seek a letter of map change from FEMA to change the base flood elevations, change floodway boundaries, or change boundaries of flood hazard areas shown on FIRMs, and to submit such data to FEMA for such purposes. The analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3(§ 105), 4-20-2015) 
Sec. 98-114. - Inspections. 
(a)  General. Development for which a floodplain development permit or approval is required shall be subject to inspection. 
(b)  Development other than buildings and structures. The floodplain administrator shall inspect all development to determine compliance with the requirements of this article and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
(c)  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall inspect buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code to determine compliance with the requirements of this article and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
(1)  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, lowest floor inspection. Upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the owner of a building, structure or facility exempt from the Florida Building Code, or the owner's authorized agent, shall submit to the floodplain administrator. 
a.  If a design flood elevation was used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor, the certification of elevation of the lowest floor prepared and sealed by a Florida licensed professional surveyor; or 
b.  If the elevation used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor was determined in accordance with section 98-113(b)(3)b. of this article, the documentation of height of the lowest floor above highest adjacent grade, prepared by the owner or the owner's authorized agent. 
(2)  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, final inspection. As part of the final inspection, the owner or owner's authorized agent shall submit to the floodplain administrator a final certification of elevation of the lowest floor or final documentation of the height of the lowest floor above the highest adjacent grade; such certifications and documentations shall be prepared as specified in subsection (c)(1) of this section. 
(d)  Manufactured homes. The floodplain administrator shall inspect manufactured homes that are installed or replaced in flood hazard areas to determine compliance with the requirements of this article and the conditions of the issued permit. Upon placement of a manufactured home, certification of the elevation of the lowest floor shall be submitted to the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3(§ 106), 4-20-2015) 
Sec. 98-115. - Variances and appeals. 
(a)  General. The planning and zoning board shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of this article. Pursuant to F.S. § 553.73(5), the planning and zoning board shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(b)  Appeals. The planning and zoning board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the administration and enforcement of this article. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the planning and zoning board may appeal such decision to the circuit court, as provided by Florida Statutes. 
(c)  Limitations on authority to grant variances. The planning and zoning board shall base its decisions on variances on technical justifications submitted by applicants, the considerations for issuance in subsection (g) of this section, the conditions of issuance set forth in subsection (h) of this section, and the comments and recommendations of the floodplain administrator and the building official. The planning and zoning board has the right to attach such conditions as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this article. 
(d)  Restrictions in floodways. A variance shall not be issued for any proposed development in a floodway if any increase in base flood elevations would result, as evidenced by the applicable analyses and certifications required in section 98-113(c) of this article. 
(e)  Historic buildings. A variance is authorized to be issued for the repair, improvement, or rehabilitation of a historic building that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 11 Historic Buildings, upon a determination that the proposed repair, improvement, or rehabilitation will not preclude the building's continued designation as a historic building and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the building. If the proposed work precludes the building's continued designation as a historic building, a variance shall not be granted and the building and any repair, improvement, and rehabilitation shall be subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(f)  Functionally dependent uses. A variance is authorized to be issued for the construction or substantial improvement necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, as defined in this article, provided the variance meets the requirements of subsection (d) of this section, is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, and all due consideration has been given to use of methods and materials that minimize flood damage during occurrence of the base flood. 
(g)  Considerations for issuance of variances. In reviewing requests for variances, the planning and zoning board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all other applicable provisions of the Florida Building Code, this article, and the following: 
(1)  The danger that materials and debris may be swept onto other lands resulting in further injury or damage; 
(2)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)  The susceptibility of the proposed development, including contents, to flood damage and the effect of such damage on current and future owners; 
(4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed development to the community; 
(5)  The availability of alternate locations for the proposed development that are subject to lower risk of flooding or erosion; 
(6)  The compatibility of the proposed development with existing and anticipated development; 
(7)  The relationship of the proposed development to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area; 
(8)  The safety of access to the property in times of flooding for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(9)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and debris and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(10)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets and bridges. 
(h)  Conditions for issuance of variances. Variances shall be issued only upon: 
1.  Submission by the applicant, of a showing of good and sufficient cause that the unique characteristics of the size, configuration, or topography of the site limit compliance with any provision of this article or the required elevation standards; 
2.  Determination by the planning and zoning board that: 
a.  Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the land that render the lot undevelopable; increased costs to satisfy the requirements or inconvenience do not constitute hardship; 
b.  The granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws and ordinances; and 
c.  The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; 
3.  Receipt of a signed statement by the applicant that the variance, if granted, shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the court in such a manner that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land; and 
4.  If the request is for a variance to allow construction of the lowest floor of a new building, or substantial improvement of a building, below the required elevation, a copy in the record of a written notice from the floodplain administrator to the applicant for the variance, specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the proposed elevation of the lowest floor, stating that the cost of federal flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced floor elevation (up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage), and stating that construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3(§ 107), 4-20-2015) 
Sec. 98-116. - Violations. 
(a)  Violations. Any development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this article that is performed without an issued permit, that is in conflict with an issued permit, or that does not fully comply with this article, shall be deemed a violation of this article. A building or structure without the documentation of elevation of the lowest floor, other required design certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article or the Florida Building Code is presumed to be a violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(b)  Authority. For development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this article and that is determined to be a violation, the floodplain administrator is authorized to serve notices of violation or stop work orders to owners of the property involved, to the owner's agent, or to the person or persons performing the work. 
(c)  Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a notice of violation or a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove or remedy a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3(§ 108), 4-20-2015) 
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 98-117. - General. 
(a)  Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this article, have the meanings shown in this section. 
(b)  Terms defined in the Florida Building Code. Where terms are not defined in this article and are defined in the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in that code. 
(c)  Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined in this article or the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3(§ 201), 4-20-2015) 
Sec. 98-118. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Alteration of a watercourse. A dam, impoundment, channel relocation, change in channel alignment, channelization, or change in cross-sectional area of the channel or the channel capacity, or any other form of modification which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the riverine flow of water during conditions of the base flood. 
    Appeal. A request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance. 
    ASCE 24. A standard titled Flood Resistant Design and Construction that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. ASCE 24 is developed and published by the American Society of Civil Engineers, Reston, VA. 
    Base flood. A flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. (Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.) The base flood is commonly referred to as the "100-year flood" or the "one-percent-annual chance flood." 
    Base flood elevation. The elevation of the base flood, including wave height, relative to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). (Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.) 
    Basement. The portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. (Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.) 
    Design flood. The flood associated with the greater of the following two areas: (Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.) 
(1)  Area with a floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any year; or 
(2)  Area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
    Design flood elevation. The elevation of the "design flood," including wave height, relative to the datum specified on the community's legally designated flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO, the design flood elevation shall be the elevation of the highest existing grade of the building's perimeter plus the depth number (in feet) specified on the flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO where the depth number is not specified on the map, the depth number shall be taken as being equal to two feet. (Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.) 
    Development. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, tanks, temporary structures, temporary or permanent storage of equipment or materials, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavations, drilling operations or any other land disturbing activities. 
    Encroachment. The placement of fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or other development into a flood hazard area which may impede or alter the flow capacity of riverine flood hazard areas. 
    Existing building and existing structure. Any buildings and structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before March 15, 1977. (Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.) 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before March 15, 1977. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The federal agency that, in addition to carrying out other functions, administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land from: (Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.) 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood damage-resistant materials. Any construction material capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair. (Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.) 
    Flood hazard area. The greater of the following two areas: (Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.) 
(1)  The area within a floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any year. 
(2)  The area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The official map of the community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. (Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.) 
    Flood insurance study (FIS). The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that contains the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map (if applicable), the water surface elevations of the base flood, and supporting technical data. (Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.) 
    Floodplain administrator. The office or position designated and charged with the administration and enforcement of this article (may be referred to as the floodplain manager). 
    Floodplain development permit or approval. An official document or certificate issued by the community, or other evidence of approval or concurrence, which authorizes performance of specific development activities that are located in flood hazard areas and that are determined to be compliant with this article. 
    Floodway. The channel of a river or other riverine watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. (Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.) 
    Floodway encroachment analysis. An engineering analysis of the impact that a proposed encroachment into a floodway is expected to have on the floodway boundaries and base flood elevations; the evaluation shall be prepared by a qualified Florida licensed engineer using standard engineering methods and models. 
    Florida Building Code. The family of codes adopted by the Florida Building Commission, including: Florida Building Code, Building; Florida Building Code, Residential; Florida Building Code, Existing Building; Florida Building Code, Mechanical; Florida Building Code, Plumbing; Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas. 
    Functionally dependent use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, including only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities; the term does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls or foundation of a structure. 
    Historic structure. Any structure that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood hazard area requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 11 Historic Buildings. 
    Letter of map change (LOMC). An official determination issued by FEMA that amends or revises an effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study. Letters of map change include: 
    Letter of map amendment (LOMA): An amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and establishes that a specific property, portion of a property, or structure is not located in a special flood hazard area. 
    Letter of map revision (LOMR): A revision based on technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood hazard area boundaries and floodway delineations, and other planimetric features. 
    Letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F): A determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer located within the special flood hazard area. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance with the community's floodplain management regulations. 
    Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study; upon submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a letter of map revision may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM. 
    Light-duty truck. As defined in 40 CFR 86.082-2, any motor vehicle rated at 8.500 pounds gross vehicular weight rating or less which has a vehicular curb weight of 6,000 pounds or less and which has a basic vehicle frontal area of 45 square feet or less, which is: 
(1)  Designed primarily for purposes of transportation of property or is a derivation of such a vehicle; 
(2)  Designed primarily for transportation of persons and has a capacity of more than 12 persons; or 
(3)  Available with special features enabling off-street or off-highway operation and use. 
    Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area of a building or structure, including basement, but excluding any unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, other than a basement, usable solely for vehicle parking, building access or limited storage provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the non-elevation requirements of the Florida Building Code or ASCE 24. (Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.) 
    Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is eight feet or more in width and greater than 400 square feet, and which is built on a permanent, integral chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle" or "park trailer." (Also defined in 15C-1.0101, F.A.C.) 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Market value. The price at which a property will change hands between a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither party being under compulsion to buy or sell and both having reasonable knowledge of relevant facts. As used in this article, the term refers to the market value of buildings and structures, excluding the land and other improvements on the parcel. Market value may be established by a qualified independent appraiser, actual cash value (replacement cost depreciated for age and quality of construction), or tax assessment value adjusted to approximate market value by a factor provided by the property appraiser. 
    New construction. For the purposes of administration of this article and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after March 15, 1977 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after March 15, 1977. 
    Park trailer. A transportable unit which has a body width not exceeding 14 feet and which is built on a single chassis and is designed to provide seasonal or temporary living quarters when connected to utilities necessary for operation of installed fixtures and appliances. (Defined in F.S. § 320.01.) 
    Recreational vehicle. A vehicle, including a park trailer, which is: (See F.S. § 320.01.) 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Special flood hazard area. An area in the floodplain subject to a 1 percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are shown on FIRMs as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, V1-V30, VE or V. (Also defined in FBC, B Section 1612.2.) 
    Start of construction. The date of issuance for new construction and substantial improvements to existing structures, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement is within 180 days of the date of the issuance. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns. 
    Permanent construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing, grading, or filling), the installation of streets or walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations, the erection of temporary forms or the installation of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main buildings. For a substantial improvement, the actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. (Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.) 
    Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a building or structure whereby the cost of restoring the building or structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the damage occurred. (Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.) 
    Substantial improvement. Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the structure has incurred "substantial damage," any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either (Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.) 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure provided the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the alteration is approved by variance issued pursuant to section 98-115 of this article. 
    Variance. A grant of relief from the requirements of this article, or the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, which permits construction in a manner that would not otherwise be permitted by this article or the Florida Building Code. 
    Watercourse. A river, creek, stream, channel or other topographic feature in, on, through, or over which water flows at least periodically. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3(§ 202), 4-20-2015) 
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD RESISTANT DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 98-119. - Buildings and structures. 
    Design and construction of buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Pursuant to section 98-112(c) of this article, buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code, including substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage of such buildings, structures and facilities, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of ASCE 24. Structures exempt from the Florida Building Code that are not walled and roofed buildings shall comply with the requirements of section 98-125 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3(§ 301), 4-20-2015) 
Sec. 98-120. - Subdivisions. 
(a)  Minimum requirements. Subdivision proposals, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be reviewed to determine that: 
(1)  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(b)  Subdivision plats. Where any portion of proposed subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, lies within a flood hazard area, the following shall be required: 
(1)  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zones, and design flood elevations, as appropriate, shall be shown on preliminary plats; 
(2)  Where the subdivision has more than 50 lots or is larger than five acres and base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM, the base flood elevations determined in accordance with section 98-113(b)(1) of this article; and 
3.  Compliance with the site improvement and utilities requirements of section 98-121 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3(§ 302), 4-20-2015) 
Sec. 98-121. - Site improvements, utilities and limitations. 
(a)  Minimum requirements. All proposed new development shall be reviewed to determine that: 
(1)  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(b)  Sanitary sewage facilities. All new and replacement sanitary sewage facilities, private sewage treatment plants (including all pumping stations and collector systems), and on-site waste disposal systems shall be designed in accordance with the standards for on-site sewage treatment and disposal systems in F.A.C. ch. 64E-6 and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the facilities and discharge from the facilities into flood waters, and impairment of the facilities and systems. 
(c)  Water supply facilities. All new and replacement water supply facilities shall be designed in accordance with the water well construction standards in F.A.C. ch. 62-532.500 and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. 
(d)  Limitations on sites in regulatory floodways. No development, including but not limited to site improvements, and land disturbing activity involving fill or regrading, shall be authorized in the regulatory floodway unless the floodway encroachment analysis required in section 98-113(c)(1) of this article demonstrates that the proposed development or land disturbing activity will not result in any increase in the base flood elevation. 
(e)  Limitations on placement of fill. Subject to the limitations of this article, fill shall be designed to be stable under conditions of flooding including rapid rise and rapid drawdown of floodwaters, prolonged inundation, and protection against flood-related erosion and scour. In addition to these requirements, if intended to support buildings and structures (Zone A only), fill shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3(§ 303), 4-20-2015) 
Sec. 98-122. - Manufactured homes. 
(a)  General. All manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed by an installer that is licensed pursuant to F.S. § 320.8249, and shall comply with the requirements of F.A.C. ch. 15C-1 and the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Foundations. All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed on permanent, reinforced foundations that are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential, Section R322.2 and this article. 
(c)  Anchoring. All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-too or frame ties to around anchors. This anchoring requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for wind resistance. 
(d)  Elevation. Manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved shall comply with subsection (d)(1) or (2) of this section, as applicable. 
(1)  General elevation requirement. Unless subject to the requirements of subsection (d)(2) of this section, all manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located: 
a.  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
b.  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
c.  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
d.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, 
shall be elevated such that the bottom of the frame is at or above the elevation required, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in the Florida Building Code, Residential, Section R322.2 (Zone A). 
(2)  Elevation requirement for certain existing manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Manufactured homes that are not subject to subsection (d)(1) of this section, including manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, unless on a site where substantial damage as result of flooding has occurred, shall be elevated such that either the: 
a.  Bottom of the frame of the manufactured home is at or above the elevation required in the Florida Building Code, Residential, Section R322.2 (Zone A); or 
b.  Bottom of the frame is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are not less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
(e)  Enclosures. Enclosed areas below elevated manufactured homes shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential, Section R322 for such enclosed areas. 
(f)  Utility equipment. Utility equipment that serves manufactured homes, including electric, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential, Section R322. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3(§ 304), 4-20-2015) 
Sec. 98-123. - Recreational vehicles and park trailers. 
(a)  Temporary placement. Recreational vehicles and park trailers placed temporarily in flood hazard areas shall: 
(1)  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or 
(2)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, which means the recreational vehicle or park model is on wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanent attachments such as additions, rooms, stairs, decks and porches. 
(b)  Permanent placement. Recreational vehicles and park trailers that do not meet the limitations in subsection (a) of this section for temporary placement shall meet the requirements of section 98-122 of this article for manufactured homes. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3(§ 305), 4-20-2015) 
Sec. 98-124. - Tanks. 
(a)  Underground tanks. Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty. 
(b)  Above-ground tanks, not elevated. Above-ground tanks that do not meet the elevation requirements of subsection (c) of this section shall be permitted in flood hazard areas provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty and the effects of flood-borne debris. 
(c)  Above-ground tanks, elevated. Above-ground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be attached to and elevated to or above the design flood elevation on a supporting structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement during conditions of the design flood. Tank-supporting structures shall meet the foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area. 
(d)  Tank inlets and vents. Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be: 
(1)  At or above the design flood elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tanks during conditions of the design flood; and 
(2)  Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3(§ 306), 4-20-2015) 
Sec. 98-125. - Other development. 
(a)  General requirements for other development. All development, including manmade changes to improved or unimproved real estate for which specific provisions are not specified in this article or the Florida Building Code, shall: 
1.  Be located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
2.  Meet the limitations of section 98-121(d) of this article if located in a regulated floodway; 
3.  Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood; 
4.  Be constructed of flood damage-resistant materials; and 
5.  Have mechanical, plumbing, and electrical systems above the design flood elevation, except that minimum electric service required to address life safety and electric code requirements is permitted below the design flood elevation provided it conforms to the provisions of the electrical part of building code for wet locations. 
(b)  Fences in regulated floodways. Fences in regulated floodways that have the potential to block the passage of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, shall meet the limitations of section 98-121(d) of this article. 
(c)  Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways in regulated floodways. Retaining walls and sidewalks and driveways that involve the placement of fill in regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of section 98-121(d) of this article. 
(d)  Roads and watercourse crossings in regulated floodways. Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts, low-water crossings and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel from one side of a watercourse to the other side, that encroach into regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of section 98-121(d) of this article. Alteration of a watercourse that is part of a road or watercourse crossing shall meet the requirements of section 98-113(c)(3) of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3(§ 307), 4-20-2015) 
Secs. 98-126-98-147. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - WELLFIELD PROTECTION 

Sec. 98-148. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this article is to safeguard the public health, safety and welfare of the people of the city and adjacent areas by providing for regulation of the storage, handling, use or production of hazardous substances within zones of protection surrounding potable water supply wellfields, thereby protecting the potable water supply from contamination. 
(Code 1999, § 98-156; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(21-40), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 98-149. - Scope. 
    The regulations set forth in this article shall apply to all areas surrounding a wellfield and the designated wellfield protection zones and other areas of the city as provided herein. 
(Code 1999, § 98-157; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(21-41), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 98-150. - Powers and duties of administrative official. 
    The city manager shall designate an administrative official whose duties shall include, the experience, knowledge, and inspection, recordkeeping, and administration in implementing this article. The city may adopt a fee schedule to provide for the funding of this program. 
(Code 1999, § 98-158; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(21-42), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 98-151. - Establishment of zones. 
    The city shall adopt primary and secondary wellfield protection zones to protect public potable water supplies. These zones shall show the geographic extent of such zones which shall be delineated on maps as now or hereafter updated and supplemented and which are on file with the city. Such maps may be adopted by reference by the city. The city may provide for rules of interpretation for buildings of lots lying wholly or partially in a particular wellfield protection zone. 
(1)  Primary wellfield protection zone. The land area immediately surrounding any potable water supply well and extending a radial distance of 300 feet from said well. 
(2)  Secondary wellfield protection zone. The land area surrounding the primary wellfield protection zone, and defined by a radial distance of 1,000 feet from the well defining the primary wellfield protection zone. 
(Code 1999, § 98-159; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(21-43), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 98-152. - Restrictions within zones. 
(a)  For the primary wellfield protection zone, except as otherwise provided in this article, any new nonresidential use, handling, production or storage of hazardous substances shall be prohibited; provided, however, any existing nonresidential use, handling, production or storage of hazardous substances shall be considered a regulated use, and shall apply for a wellfield protection permit as provided in this article. Any component of a new septic disposal system, new stormwater retention/detention areas and wastewater treatment plant effluent discharge shall be prohibited. 
(b)  For the secondary wellfield protection zone, except as otherwise provided in this article, any new or existing nonresidential use, handling, production or storage of hazardous substances shall be considered a regulated use, and shall apply for a wellfield protection permit as provided in this article. 
(Code 1999, § 98-160; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(21-44), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 98-153. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The following activities or uses are exempt from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  The transportation of any hazardous substance through either or both the primary or secondary wellfield protection zone, provided the transporting vehicle is in transit. 
(2)  Agricultural uses, including mosquito control, except that said uses shall comply with F.S. ch. 487 (the Florida Pesticide Application Act of 1974) and F.A.C. ch. 5E-2 and 5E-0. 
(3)  The use of any hazardous substance solely as fuel in a vehicle tank or as lubricant in a vehicle. 
(4)  Fire, police, emergency medical services, emergency management center facilities, and public utilities, except for landfills. 
(5)  Retail sales establishments that store and handle hazardous substances for resale in their original unopened containers. 
(6)  Office uses, except for the storage, handling or use of hazardous substances as provided for in applicable administrative codes. 
(7)  Repairing or maintaining any existing facility or improvement on lands within the primary or secondary wellfield protection zone. 
(8)  Storage tanks which are constructed and operated in accordance with the storage tanks regulations as set forth in F.A.C. ch. 17-61. 
(9)  Geotechnical borings. 
(10)  Residential activities. 
(11)  Public utility emergency generating facilities, except that permanently installed fuel storage facilities exempted under F.A.C. ch. 17-61, shall have secondary containment. 
(b)  Provided, however, that the city may at its option delete in whole or in part, any of the above described exemptions, but in no case shall the city include any additional exemptions in this article unless otherwise approved by the city commission. 
(Code 1999, § 98-161; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(21-45), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 98-154. - Hazardous substances regulated. 
(a)  The hazardous substances regulated by this section shall consist of the following: 
(1)  F.A.C. ch. 38F-41 (Florida Substance List). 
(2)  40 CFR 261 (Identification and Listing of Hazardous Wastes). 
(3)  40 CFR 355, appendix A and B (List of Extremely Hazardous Substances). 
(b)  A hazardous substance, as defined herein, includes any solution, mixture, or formulation containing such materials, and also includes any material which, due to its chemical or physical characteristics, as determined by the city, poses a substantial threat to the life, health, or safety of persons or property or to the environment. 
(Code 1999, § 98-162; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(21-46), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 98-155. - Zone permits. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall construct, modify, install, or replace a hazardous substance storage system, or component thereof, within the primary or secondary potable wellfield protection zone or allow the discharge of a hazardous substance into the soils, groundwater or surface water within said zone. Underground vehicular fuel storage subject to F.A.C. ch. 17-61, is exempt from these permit requirements. 
(1)  Application procedure. Application for a wellfield protection permit, or renewal thereof, shall be made on the form provided by the city. The application shall be completed with all requested information and shall be signed by the owner or operator, as applicable. The completed application shall be submitted to the department, along with the appropriate permit fee, and including construction plans and specifications for the hazardous substance storage system, including, but not limited to, details of tanks, conveyance and pumping systems, secondary containment, leak detection, overfill protection, and access. At the option of the city, a professional engineer licensed by the state may be required to certify compliance with this section. 
a.  Where a permit is submitted, including construction requiring the issuance of other development orders or development permits, it shall be reviewed in conjunction with the applications for those development order or permits. 
b.  Said permit, when issued, shall be in the name of the owner or operator, as applicable, which name may be that of an individual, firm, association, joint venture, corporation, partnership, governmental entity, or other legal entity. A permit shall specify the regulated facility covered by the permit. Such permit shall provide conditions necessary to ensure that the provisions of this article are met. Commencement of construction of a regulated facility under a wellfield permit shall be deemed acceptance of all conditions specified in the permit. 
(2)  Application review and permit issuance. The city shall review the application, along with the site development plan or building permit application as appropriate, or within 30 days if independent from other applications. The city shall issue or renew such permit upon the applicant's demonstration that all standards required by this article and other applicable regulations have been met. Permits for construction requiring other development permits shall be issued in conjunction with and contingent upon those permits. 
a.  Prior to any person causing, allowing, permitting, or suffering the placement of any hazardous substance in a storage system covered by a wellfield protection permit, pursuant to this article, such permit may not be approved unless the owner, operator or contractor demonstrated that the system has been constructed in substantial conformity with the permit. 
b.  Upon closure of a hazardous substance storage systems, the facility owner or operator shall notify the city of intention to close the storage system. 
(3)  Denial, suspension or revocation of permits. The city may deny, suspend, or revoke a permit for failure to comply with this article and/or the conditions of any permit issued pursuant to this article. The city may revoke any permit issued pursuant to this article on a finding that the permit holder or his agent: 
a.  Knowingly submitted false or inaccurate information in the application or operational reports. 
b.  Has violated the provisions of this article or permit conditions. 
c.  Has refused lawful inspections as required by this article. 
(Code 1999, § 98-163; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(21-47), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 98-156. - Containment standards. 
(a)  Monitoring capacity. Except as provided in this section, all storage systems intended for the storage of hazardous substances shall be designed with the capacity of detecting that the hazardous substance stored in the primary containment has entered the secondary containment. Visual inspection of the primary containment is the preferred method; however, other means of monitoring may be required by the city. 
(b)  Containment requirements. Primary and secondary levels of containment shall be required for all storage systems intended for the storage of hazardous substances, except as provided in this article. 
(1)  Primary containment. Primary containment is the first level of containment, such as the inside layer of the container which comes into immediate contact on its inner surface with the hazardous material being contained. All primary containment shall be product-tight. 
(2)  Secondary containment. Secondary containment is the level of containment external to and separate from the primary containment. All secondary containment shall be constructed of materials of sufficient thickness, density, and composition so as not to be structurally weakened as a result of contact with the discharge hazardous substances and sufficient to preclude any hazardous substances loss to the external environment. 
a.  Leakproof trays under containers, floor curbing, or other containment systems to provide secondary liquid containment shall be installed of adequate size to handle 110 percent of the volume of the largest container in order to contain all spills, leaks, overflows, and precipitation until appropriate action can be taken. 
b.  Secondary containment systems shall be sheltered so that the intrusion of precipitation is inhibited. These requirements shall apply to all areas of use, production, and handling, to all storage areas, and to aboveground and underground storage areas. 
c.  Vacuum suction devices, absorbent scavenger materials, or other devices approved by the city shall be present on-site or available within a time set by the city. Devices or materials shall be available in sufficient magnitude so as to control and collect the total quantity of hazardous substances. To the degree feasible, emergency containers shall be present and of such capacity as to hold the total quantity of hazardous substances plus absorbent material. 
(c)  Inspection and maintenance. Procedures shall be established for periodic in-house inspection and maintenance of containment and emergency equipment. Such procedures shall be in writing. A regular checklist and schedule of maintenance shall be established and a log shall be kept of inspections and maintenance. Such logs and records shall be kept on-site for inspection by the local government. 
(1)  Any substance modification or repair of a storage system other than minor repairs or emergency repairs shall be in accordance with plans to be submitted to the city and approved prior to the initiation of such work. 
(2)  A facility owner or operator may make emergency repairs to a storage system in advance of seeking an approval whenever an immediate repair is required to prevent or contain an unauthorized discharge or to protect the integrity of the containment. 
(3)  Replacement of any existing storage system for hazardous substances must be in accordance with the new installation standards. 
(d)  Out-of-service storage systems. 
(1)  Storage systems which are temporarily out of service and are intended to be returned to use shall continue to be monitored and inspected. 
(2)  Any storage system which is not being monitored and inspected in accordance with this article shall be closed or removed in a manner approved by the city. 
(3)  Whenever an abandoned storage system is located, a plan for the closing or removing or upgrading and permitting of such storage system shall be filed at a reasonable time as determined by the city. 
(Code 1999, § 98-164; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(21-48), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 98-157. - Hazardous substance inspection program to comply with federal law. 
    The city shall continue to administer a hazardous substance inspection and clean up program for the incorporated areas of the city. Such inspection program shall insure compliance with 40 CFR 260-265. This regulatory program will be in addition to the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1999, § 98-165; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(21-49), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 98-158. - Variances. 
(a)  No variance will be considered, where the action or requirement in question clearly is derived from the actions or requirements of federal, state or regional agencies as part of their permitting processes. 
(b)  When the city commission finds that compliance with any of the requirements of this article would result in undue hardship for any reason, a variance from any one or more of such requirements may be granted by the city commission, provided it is the minimum necessary to alleviate such undue hardship for the person and to the extent such variance can be granted without impairing the intent and purpose of this article. 
(c)  A petition for variance shall be in writing and contain the following: 
(1)  The petitioner's name and address. 
(2)  The specific provision from which the petitioner is requesting a variance. 
(3)  A detailed statement of the facts which the petitioner believes demonstrates that the request qualifies for variance under subsection (d) of this section. 
(4)  A description of the variance described. 
(5)  The period of time for which the variance is sought, including the reasons and facts in support thereof. 
(6)  The damage or harm resulting or which may result to the petitioner from compliance with the provision. 
(7)  The steps which the petitioner is taking to meet the provisions from which the variance is sought and when compliance could be achieved. 
(8)  Other relevant information the petitioner believes supports the petition for variance. 
(d)  No petition for variance shall be approved unless the petitioner affirmatively demonstrates that one or more of the following circumstances exist: 
(1)  The variance is essential to protect health or safety. 
(2)  Compliance with the provision from which a variance is sought will require measures which, because of their extent or cost, cannot be accomplished. 
(3)  Compliance with the provision from which a variance is sought will result in substantial economic, social or health burden on the petitioner, compared to other properties within the wellfield protection zone. 
(4)  Alternative measures which achieve the same objective as these provisions are available and satisfy the intent and purpose of this article. 
(Code 1999, § 98-166; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(21-50), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 98-159. - Violations. 
(a)  If the designated administrative official finds that any of the provisions of this article are being violated, he shall notify the persons responsible for such violation, in writing, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering any action necessary to correct the violation. 
(b)  Any person found in violation of any provision of this article shall be fined or punished as provided by law. Each day the violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  In addition to any other remedies, whether civil or criminal, a violation of this article may be restrained by injunction, including a mandatory injunction, and otherwise abating as provided by law. 
(d)  A stop work order shall be issued for any property in violation where any permit has been previously approved. No further city permits shall be issued for the subject property, nor any attendant inspection made, until such violation is corrected. 
(Code 1999, § 98-167; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(21-51), 12-19-1994) 
Secs. 98-160-98-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - REGULATION OF NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2013-06, §§ 1-25, adopted Sept. 16, 2013, allowed for the codification of its provisions but did not specify manner of inclusion. At the editor's discretion, §§ 1-20 have been codified as set out herein. 

Sec. 98-181. - Purpose/intent. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to provide for the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the city's storm drainage system, to the maximum extent practicable, as required by federal and state law, and to establish methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4), in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. 
(b)  The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To regulate the contribution of pollutants, to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4), by stormwater discharges, by any user. 
(2)  To prohibit illicit connections and illegal discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(3)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 98-182. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
    Authorized enforcement agency means the City of Clewiston Director of Public Works, or his staff or designees assigned to enforce this article. 
    Best management practices (BMPs) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
    Clean Water Act means the federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
    Construction activity means construction projects resulting in land disturbance of a half-acre or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
    Hazardous materials means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard, to human health, safety, property, or the environment, when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
    Illegal discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the storm drainage system, except as exempted in section 98-187. 
    Illicit connection is defined as either of the following: 
(1)  Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drainage system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, processed wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drainage system and any connections to the storm drainage system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by the authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drainage system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and has not been approved by the authorized enforcement agency. 
    Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits, as defined in 40 CFR 122.26 (b)(14). 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit means a permit issued by the EPA (or by a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
    Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drainage system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
    Person means any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent. 
    Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
    Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
    Storm drainage system means publicly-owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures. 
    Stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
    Stormwater pollution prevention plan means a document which describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business, to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters, to the maximum extent practicable. 
    Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 2, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 98-183. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all water entering the storm drainage system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands, unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 3, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 98-184. - Responsibility for administration. 
    The director of the city's public works department shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the director of public works to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the authorized enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 4, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 98-185. - Ultimate responsibility. 
    The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are minimum standards; therefore, this article does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 5, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 98-186. - Discharge prohibitions. 
(a)  [ Prohibition of non-stormwater discharges; exemptions. ] No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drainage system or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drainage system is prohibited except as described as follows: 
(1)  The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this article: water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated-typically less than one PPM chlorine), firefighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants. 
(2)  Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(3)  Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time of the test. 
(4)  The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drainage system. 
(b)  Prohibition of illicit connections. 
(1)  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drainage system is prohibited. 
(2)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(3)  A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 6, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 98-187. - Suspension of MS4 access. 
(a)  Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The authorized enforcement agency may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons. 
(b)  Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the authorized enforcement agency for a reconsideration and hearing. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the authorized enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 7, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 98-188. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
    Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 8, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 98-189. - Monitoring of discharges. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction activity. 
(b)  Access to facilities. 
(1)  The authorized enforcement agency shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency. 
(2)  Facility operators shall allow the authorized enforcement agency ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES stormwater discharge permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. 
(3)  The authorized enforcement agency shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices, as are necessary in the opinion of the authorized enforcement agency, to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge. 
(4)  The authorized enforcement agency shall have the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the authorized enforcement agency and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the authorized enforcement agency access to a permitted facility is a violation of an NPDES stormwater discharge permit and of this article. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES stormwater discharge permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this article. 
(7)  If the authorized enforcement agency has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the authorized enforcement agency is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 9, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 98-190. - Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants by the use of best management practices. 
    The city shall adopt, by resolution, requirements identifying best management practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drainage system, or waters of the United States. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drainage system or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premise, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES stormwater discharge permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES stormwater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 10, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 98-191. - Notification of spills. 
    Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drainage system, or waters of the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the authorized enforcement agency within three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 11, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 98-192. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Notice of violation. Whenever the authorized enforcement agency finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation: 
(1)  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
(2)  The elimination of illicit connections or illegal discharges; 
(3)  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
(4)  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; and 
(5)  Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and 
(6)  The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 
(b)  [ Abatement. ] If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 12, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 98-193. - Appeal of notice of violation. 
    Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the authorized enforcement agency. The notice of appeal must be received within five calendar days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the appropriate authority or his/her designee shall take place within 30 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the municipal authority or their designee shall be final. The city may designate the city's code enforcement special magistrate as the appropriate authority for any appeals or hearings provided for or required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 13, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 98-194. - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
    In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist, in violation of any of the provisions of this article, is deem[ed] to be a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 14, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 98-195. - Abatement of the violation. 
    If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within ten calendar days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the authorized enforcement agency, then representatives of the authorized enforcement agency may, as provide[d] by law, and in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the city, enter upon the subject private property and abate the violation and/or restore the property.. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 15, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 98-196. - Cost of abatement of the violation. 
    Within 60 calendar days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within 30 calendar days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the municipal authority or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 16, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 98-197. - Injunctive relief. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, the authorized enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 17, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 98-198. - Compensatory action. 
    In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this article, the authorized enforcement agency may impose, upon a violator, alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, ditch or canal cleanup, etc. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 18, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 98-199. - Prosecution. 
(a)  Any person that has violated or continues to violate this article shall be liable to prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 per violation per day and/or imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed 60 days. 
(b)  The authorized enforcement agency may recover all attorney's fees court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 19, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 98-200. - Remedies not exclusive. 
    The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law, and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 20, 9-16-2013) 
Chapter 100 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Sign ordinances, F.S. § 166.0425. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 100-1. - Regulation of signs. 
    No sign shall be placed or maintained on any property, building or other structure within the incorporated boundaries of the city except in conformity with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-386), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-2. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to support the economic vitality of the city through adequate identification of occupants, services, and events; to safeguard life and public welfare; and to afford adequate opportunity for self-expression through free speech. These purposes are realized by regulating and controlling the number, location, size, sign type, and type of illumination of signs and sign structures so that all persons have ample opportunity to be equally heard and the public health, safety and general welfare are adequately protected and secured. Notwithstanding any other restrictions in this chapter, any sign authorized under this chapter may contain any commercial or non-commercial message, other than messages containing nudity or obscenity as defined herein, or other than a sign that advertises an activity that is illegal under state or federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-387), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-3. - Zoning categories. 
    The zoning categories listed herein are defined in chapter 110. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-388), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-4. - Definitions of words and phrases. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animated and flashing sign means a sign (other than automatic changeable copy signs) that flashes, blinks, rotates, revolves, or has moving parts of visible bulbs, or contains reflective elements that sparkle in the sunlight or that contain luminous paint that glows in the dark. 
    Awning means a roof-like cover that projects from the wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a doorway, or window from the elements. Awnings are often made of fabric or flexible plastic supported by a rigid frame, and may be retracted into the face of the building. 
    Awning Sign. See Building sign. 
    Banner means a sign, other than an official flag, made of paper, cloth, thin plastic, or similar light-weight material, and usually containing a message or logo. 
    Building and zoning means the city community development department. 
    Building sign means a sign that in any manner is fastened to, projects from, or is placed or painted upon the exterior wall, window, door or roof of a building. The term "building sign" includes, but is not limited to, the following (see Figure 1 at the end of this definition): 
    Awning sign means a sign imposed, mounted or painted upon an awning. 
    Mansard sign means a sign imposed, mounted or painted upon a mansard and not extending above the top of a mansard. 
    Marquee sign means any sign attached flat against the marquee or permanent sidewalk canopy of a building and not extending above the top of the marquee. 
    Parapet sign means a sign imposed, mounted or painted on a parapet and not extending above the top of the parapet. 
    Projecting sign means a sign affixed to a wall and extending more than 12 inches from the surface of such wall, usually perpendicular to the wall surface. 
    Roof sign means a sign that is mounted on, applied to, or otherwise structurally supported by the roof of a building. 
    Under-canopy sign means a display attached to the underside of a marquee, awning or canopy and protruding over public or private sidewalks. 
    Wall or facade sign means a sign that is fastened directly to or is placed or painted directly upon the exterior wall of a building, with the sign face parallel to the wall, and extending from the surface of the wall no more than 12 inches. 
    Window sign means a sign that is placed on or behind a windowpane or glass door and is intended to be viewed from outside the building. 
_____

_____
    Canopy means a permanent roof-like structure projecting from a building and open on at least one side for the purpose of shielding a pedestrian walkway from the elements, or a freestanding roof-like structure supported by columns intended to shield a vehicular drive-way or service area from elements. 
    Changeable copy sign. 
(1)  Automatic changeable copy sign means a sign on which the copy changes automatically on a lamp bank or through mechanical means, e.g., electrical or electronic time and temperature units. The term "copy" means words or numbers. 
(2)  Manual changeable copy sign means a sign on which copy is changed manually in the field, e.g., reader boards with changeable letters. The term "copy" means words or numbers. 
    Channeled letters. 
(1)  Internally channeled letters means letters or other symbols with a recessed surface designed to accommodate incandescent bulbs or luminous tubing. 
(2)  Reverse channeled letters means letters or other symbols with a raised surface designed to be lighted from behind by incandescent bulbs or luminous tubing. 
    Code enforcement means the city code enforcement department. 
    Code enforcement director means the director of the city code enforcement department or the code enforcement director's designee. 
    Community development director means the director of the city building and zoning department or the director's designee. 
    Double-faced sign means a sign structure with two sign faces that are parallel (back-to-back) or that form an angle to one another, where each sign face is designed to be seen from a different direction and the two sign faces are separated from each other at their nearest point by no more than three feet. Sign faces on a single sign structure that are separated by more than three feet are treated as separate signs. 
    Freestanding sign means a sign permanently attached to the ground and that is wholly independent of any building or other structure. The term "freestanding sign" includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Ground sign means a freestanding sign in which the entire bottom of the sign face or structure is in contact with the ground, providing a solid and continuous background from the sign face from the ground to the top of the sign. A ground sign is also referred to as a "monument sign." 
(2)  Pole sign means a sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole, column, or similar support such that the bottom of the sign face or lowest sign module is not in contact with the ground, including billboards. 
    Illuminated signs. 
(1)  Internally illuminated sign means any sign that is illuminated by an artificial light source from within the sign structure over any or all of its sign face. 
(2)  Externally illuminated sign means any sign that is partially or completely illuminated at any time by an artificial light source that directly or indirectly illuminates the face of the sign from outside the sign structure. 
    Incidental sign means a small sign, emblem, or decal no larger than one square foot. Such signs are normally located on doors, windows, and gas pumps, and are generally not readily visible or legible from the public right-of-way. 
    Internally channeled letters. See Channeled letters. 
    Kiosk means a freestanding sign structure, usually cylindrical in shape, intended to be viewed from all sides and erected for the purpose of posting signs, notices or other public announcements. Kiosks that are composed of flat faces are treated as multi-faced signs. 
    Mansard means a steeply sloped, roof-like facade architecturally similar to a building wall. 
    Marquee means a permanent roof-like structure or canopy of rigid materials supported by and extending from the facade of a building. 
    Marquee sign. See Building sign. 
    Minimum street-side setback means the minimum distance required by the zoning on a property between an adjoining right of way and the facade of a principal building on the property. 
    Monument sign. See Ground sign under Freestanding sign. 
    Multi-faced sign means a single sign structure consisting of two sign faces (see Double-faced sign ) or three or more sign faces that are separate from each other at their nearest point by no more than three feet. Sign faces on a single sign structure that are separated by more than three feet are treated as separate signs. 
    Pennant/streamer means any lightweight plastic, fabric or similar material designed to move in the wind; pennants are often suspended from a rope, wire, or string in series. The term "pennant/streamer" shall not include a banner or an official or personal flag as regulated in this Code. 
    Planned center means a single office, commercial, or industrial property that is designed or intended for occupancy by two or more principal businesses that are separately owned and have no corporate relationship. 
    Principal freestanding sign means the main, most prominent or largest freestanding sign or signs on a property. 
    Principal use means the primary purpose for which land or a building is used. 
    Project entrance sign means a permanent freestanding sign located at the entrance designed and permitted for vehicular access into a multifamily development, or into a development containing multiple lots or condominium units, such as but not limited to a particular residential or commercial subdivision, business center, office park or industrial park. Designs for project entrance signs are classified as two types: 
(1)  Dual sign means a project entrance sign designed as two separate sign structures (each up to the maximum allowed size), each with a single sign face (each up to the maximum allowed size) individually oriented toward the intersection so as to be viewed from only one direction on the road adjacent to the development, and each located on opposite sides of the project entrance. 
(2)  Single sign means a project entrance sign designed as a single sign structure with two back-to back faces, oriented to be seen from both directions on the road adjacent to the development. (See Figure 2 at the end of this definition.) 
_____

    Projecting sign. See Building sign. (See Figure 3 below.) 

_____
    Reverse channeled letters. See Channeled letters. 
    Road, controlled access, means a state or federal highway (usually median divided) that, by design, may only be accessed from: 
(1)  Public streets where such access is provided by grade separated interchanges consisting of bridges and ramps so that traffic entering and exiting said highway can safely merge into and exit from the highway at the posted speed limit; 
(2)  Public streets where such access is provided at grade level intersections which are designed and permitted by the state DOT as part of the highway construction project; or 
(3)  Right in/right out only private drives without median cuts and where such private drives are permitted by the state DOT due to extenuating circumstances such as no other means of access. 
Controlled access roadways are distinguished from other state and federal roads in that private driveway access is the exception to the rule rather than the norm. This definition does not include limited access roadways. 
    Road, limited access, means a median divided state or federal highway which, by design, may only be accessed from public streets and where such access is provided by grade separated interchanges consisting of bridges and ramps so that traffic entering and exiting said highway can safely merge into and exit from the highway at the posted speed limit, e.g., an interstate highway. This definition does not include controlled access roads. 
    Roof sign. See Building sign. 
    Sign means any sign structure, display, or device that is used to advertise, identify, direct, or attract attention to a business, institution, organization, person, idea, product, services, event, or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, design characteristics, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, movement, or illumination. 
    Sign face means that portion of the surface of a sign structure where words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements are or may be located in order to convey the message, idea, or intent for which the sign was erected or placed. The sign face may be composed of two or more modules on the same surface that are separated or surrounded by open space or by portions of a sign structure not intended to contain any advertising message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature. 
    Sign module means each portion or unit of a sign face that is clearly separable from other such units by virtue of the expression of a complete thought, message, logo, or idea. 
    Sign structure means a structure exclusively or primarily intended to support a sign face and which, in combination with the sign face, comprises a sign as defined in this section. A sign structure comprises all elements of a freestanding sign, including the sign face, background, or decorative elements related to the presentation or support of the sign's message, and structural supports. A structure that incidentally supports a sign face but whose primary purpose is other than providing such support, such as, but not limited to, an exterior wall of a building, a roof, a structural retaining wall or decorative freestanding fence or wall at a project entrance is not considered a sign structure. 
    Temporary event means an activity having a specific duration or the end of which is related to a specific action, usually lasting for only a few days or months at a time. Temporary events include, but are not limited to, such activities as: 
(1)  The offering of a property or premises for sale or rent. 
(2)  An election, political campaign, referendum, or ballot proposition put to the voters as part of city, county, state, or federal governance. 
(3)  Special business promotions, such as, but not limited to, grand openings, closeout sales, and seasonal sales events. 
(4)  A yard sale. 
(5)  The construction of a building or development project, or the rehabilitation, remodeling, or renovation of a building. 
(6)  A special event by a nonprofit organization. 
    Tenant means a natural person, business or other entity that occupies land or buildings by title, under a lease, or through payment of rent; an occupant, inhabitant, or dweller of a place. 
    Under-canopy sign. See Building sign. 
    Vehicular sign means any sign placed, mounted, painted on or affixed to a motor vehicle, freight, flatbed or storage trailer or other conveyance when same are placed or parked in such a manner as to be viewed or intended to be viewed from the public rights-of-way except that this definition shall not apply when: 
(1)  Such conveyances are actively being used to transport persons, goods or services in the normal course of business; 
(2)  Such conveyances are parked in an inconspicuous area; or 
(3)  Such conveyances are actively being used for storage of construction materials for, and on the same lot with, a bona fide construction project for which building and other applicable permits have been issued and where construction is underway, provided said conveyances are located within designated storage areas. 
    Wall Sign. See Building Sign. 
    Window Sign. See Building Sign. 
(Code 1982, § 6-223; Code 1999, § 18-386; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(6-223), 12-19-1994; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-389), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-5. - Signs that are regulated. 
    The regulations and requirements of this chapter apply to all signs that are or are intended to be viewed from a public right-of-way or adjacent property, or that are intended to be viewed from outdoor areas of a public property, except as otherwise exempt under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-390), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-6. - Signs that are exempt from regulation. 
    Each of the following types of signs are allowed on any property, with permission of the landowner, and are exempt from the restrictions imposed by this chapter: 
(1)  Official signs. Signs placed by or at the direction of a governmental body, governmental agency or public authority, on a right-of-way or other property controlled by such governmental body, agency or public authority. Official signs include, but are not limited to, traffic signs, signals, regulatory devices or warnings, or direction signs for mass gatherings as approved by the code enforcement director; official emblems or locations; signs of historical interest; signs designating special events or areas of architectural or historic significance or gateways, and banners. 
(2)  Resident's last name signs and street address signs. Resident's last name signs and street address signs consisting of lettering no larger than eight inches in height on a building or four inches on a mailbox. 
(3)  Incidental signs. Small signs and postings as defined in this chapter of no more than four square feet, provided that the aggregate of all such signs on a property may not exceed 12 square feet. 
(4)  An A-frame or sandwich board sign. These signs may be placed in any commercial district, provided they do not exceed six square feet per side (12 square feet total) of sign structure area and they are only placed during business hours. Any A-frame or sandwich board sign that does not meet this criterion must have a permit and will be included in the total building signage allowed under article V of this chapter. Under no circumstances are these signs allowed on public rights-of-way. 
(Code 1982, § 6-225; Code 1999, § 18-388; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(6-225), 12-19-1994; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-391), 7-19-2010) 
Secs. 100-7-100-31. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROHIBITED SIGNS 

Sec. 100-32. - Attached and painted signs. 
    Signs that are painted on or attached to trees, fence posts, or rocks or other natural features are not allowed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-392), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-33. - Banners. 
    Banners are not allowed except as provided for temporary signage under this chapter. When allowed as temporary signage, a banner shall be allowed only as wall or window signage and shall be placed flush upon the wall or window to which it is attached. Banners shall not be hung as under-canopy signs, flown as flags, or used as any other form of sign. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-393), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-34. - Dilapidated signs. 
    Signs that are dilapidated or in such condition as to create a hazard, nuisance or to be unsafe or fail to comply with any provision of the building code of the city are not allowed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-394), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-35. - Display of nudity. 
    Signs displaying nudity, as defined by state law, are not allowed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-395), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-36. - Festoons. 
    Strings of ribbons, tinsels, small flags, pennants, streamers, pinwheels, or other devices or long narrow strips of fabric, plastic, or other pliable material designed to move in the wind, are not allowed, except as provided for temporary signage under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-396), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-37. - Obscene signs. 
    Obscene signs, as defined by state law, are not allowed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-397), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-38. - Obstructions. 
    No sign shall obstruct any fire escape, window, door, or opening usable for fire prevention or suppression, or prevent free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof. No sign shall extend above a parapet wall, be affixed to a fire escape, or interfere with any opening required for ventilation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-398), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-39. - Portable signs. 
    A sign designed to be transported or easily relocated and not permanently attached to the ground is not allowed, except as provided for temporary signage under this chapter, or except as, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  A sign designed to be temporarily placed upon the ground and not otherwise affixed to it. 
(2)  A sign mounted on a trailer, with or without wheels. 
(3)  An umbrella used for advertising. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-399), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-40. - Private signs placed on public property. 
    Any sign posted or erected on utility poles, governmental signs, public rights-of-way or any other public property is not allowed, except those placed by agencies of the federal, state, or local government. Directional signs for mass gatherings placed by organizations exempted by the Internal Revenue Code, section 501(c)(3) are exempted, provided they are approved by the code enforcement director. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-400), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-41. - Roof signs. 
    Roof signs, including signs painted or adhered on roofs, are not allowed. This prohibition does not apply to the fascia portion of a mansard roof, or to the face of a parapet wall, provided that the sign must not extend above the top of the mansard roof or parapet wall. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-401), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-42. - Signs imitating public warnings or traffic devices. 
    Any sign that displays intermittent lights resembling the flashing lights customarily used in traffic signals or in police, fire, ambulance, or rescue vehicles, and any sign that uses the words "stop," "danger," or other message or content in a manner that might mislead or confuse a driver, is not allowed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-402), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-43. - Sound or smoke emitting signs. 
    A sign that emits or utilizes in any manner any sound capable of being detected on any traveled road or highway by a person with normal hearing, or a sign that emits smoke, vapor or odors, is not allowed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-403), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-44. - Signs advertising illegal activity. 
    Signs that advertise an activity illegal under state or federal law are not allowed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-404), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-45. - Signs placed on unlicensed motor vehicles. 
    Any sign placed, mounted, painted on or affixed to an unlicensed motor vehicle, freight, flatbed or storage trailer or other conveyances when same are placed or parked in such a manner as to be viewed or intended to be viewed from the public rights-of-way is not allowed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-405), 7-19-2010) 
Secs. 100-46-100-63. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS APPLYING TO ALL SIGNS 

Sec. 100-64. - Conformance to building codes. 
(a)  In addition to any sign approval required under this chapter, a building permit shall be obtained from the community development director prior to installation or placement of any freestanding sign having a sign structure area greater than 15 square feet or any building sign having a sign face area greater than six square feet. All signs for which a building permit is required shall be constructed and maintained in conformance with all building code and electrical code requirements. 
(b)  Plans required for issuance of building permit for a sign shall be certified as to conformance with all structural and wind-load resistive standards of the building code by a qualified structural engineer when deemed necessary by the community development director, or be prepared using standard drawings prepared by a structural engineer or other qualified professional meeting or exceeding all requirements of the building code. 
(c)  All signs involving internal lights or other electrical devices or circuits shall display a label certifying it as being approved by the Underwriter's Laboratories, Inc. 
(d)  All electrical services to a sign shall be in compliance with the electrical code. 
(e)  Clearance from all electrical power lines shall be in conformance with the requirements of the electrical code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-406), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-65. - Conformance to state law. 
    The following applies to any sign located or to be located within 660 feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way of a U.S. or state-numbered highway (or any other road designated as a primary highway by the state and approved by the U.S. Department of Transportation), or located or to be located beyond 660 feet of such highway but visible and intended to be read from such highway: 
(1)  Such sign shall comply with all requirements as provided in F.S. ch. 479. 
(2)  Such sign shall comply with all requirements of this chapter. 
Between state and city regulations, such sign must comply with the most restrictive requirements with respect to each and every item of regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-407), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-66. - Sign maintenance. 
(a)  All signs, together with all their supports, braces, guys and anchors shall be kept in good repair and, unless constructed of galvanized or non-corroding metal, shall be given a protective coating as necessary to maintain a clean appearance and safe condition. 
(b)  All signs shall be maintained in accordance with all city regulations, including any regulations concerning nuisances and vegetation. 
(c)  Signs found to be in disrepair by the community development director shall be repaired or removed within 30 days. The final opinion of disrepair is determined by the community development director. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-408), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-67. - Minimum sign setback. 
(a)  No sign or sign structure of any kind is authorized to extend into or above, or be anchored or placed in any portion of a public right-of-way (except official signs). 
(b)  Unless provided otherwise in this chapter, all signs on a property are subject to the setback requirement for accessory uses under the property's zoning classification, but in no case may any portion of a sign be located less than five feet from a public right-of-way or any other property line, except in the commercial district, subject to approval of the community development director. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-409), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-68. - Principal freestanding signs; distance between. 
(a)  Signs 100 square feet in area or less. Each principal freestanding sign having an area of 100 square feet or less shall be located at least 50 feet from any other principal freestanding sign on the same side of the street. This distance may be reduced upon approval by the community development director if it cannot be met due to the location of existing signs on separate but adjoining lots. Such reduction shall be the minimum required in order to maintain the greatest separation possible from such existing signs. 
(b)  Signs from 100 square feet to 240 square feet in area. Each principal freestanding sign having an area from 100 square feet to 240 square feet shall be located at least 200 feet from any other freestanding sign, on the same side of the street, having an area from 100 square feet to 240 square feet, and at least 150 feet in any direction from a property where signs having an area of at least 100 square feet are not allowed. Distance measurements are to be made horizontally from the nearest edge of the sign structure. 
(c)  Signs greater than 240 square feet in area. Each principal freestanding sign having an area greater than 240 square feet shall be located at least 500 feet from any other freestanding sign, on the same side of the street, having an area greater than 240 square feet, and at least 200 feet from a property where signs having an area of at least 100 square feet are not allowed. Distance measurements are to be made horizontally from the nearest edge of the sign structure. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-410), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-69. - Ground clearance under signs. 
(a)  Projecting signs shall not project more than three feet beyond the face of the building. Projecting signs shall provide a minimum of eight feet of clearance from ground level to the bottom of the sign. 
(b)  Under-canopy signs of greater than four square feet shall be rigidly mounted, and there shall be eight feet of clearance below the base of any rigidly mounted under-canopy sign. There shall be a minimum clearance of eight feet below the base of any non-rigidly mounted under-canopy sign. 
(c)  Awning, mansard and marquee signs shall be no less than eight feet above the ground when erected over pedestrian walkways at the lowest extremity of the sign. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-411), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-70. - Visibility clearance area. 
(a)  No portion of a sign face, and no portion of a sign structure wider than 12 inches, between the heights of three feet and 15 feet shall be located within 25 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of streets, roads, highways or railroads, or within 25 feet of the intersection of a street right-of-way and either edge of a driveway. 
(b)  No sign shall be erected or maintained where, by reason of its position, wording, illuminations, size, shape or color; it may obstruct the view of oncoming vehicles or impair, obscure, interfere with the view of, or be confused with, any authorized traffic control sign, signal or device. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-412), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-71. - Illuminated signs. 
(a)  Where restricted. Signs are allowed to be externally or internally illuminated, except as follows: 
(1)  A sign located on an agricultural property may not be internally illuminated. External illumination must be installed so that it illuminates only the sign face and does not shine onto public right-of-way or neighboring properties. The source of the external illumination shall be shielded from view from public rights-of-way and neighboring properties. 
(2)  A sign located on single or two-family residential property may be internally illuminated. External illumination must be installed so that it illuminates only the sign face and does not shine onto public right-of-way or neighboring properties. The source of the external illumination shall be shielded from view from public right-of-way and neighboring properties. 
(3)  Temporary signs allowed under article VI of this chapter shall not be illuminated. 
(b)  Traffic control. No sign illumination device shall resemble an official traffic control or warning sign, nor shall it hide from view or distract from any traffic or street sign or signal. 
(c)  Hazards. Illumination devices shall be placed, filtered and shielded so direct rays will not be cast into the eyes of drivers or pedestrians. 
(d)  Light pollution. Sign illumination shall not cast light directly upon adjacent properties or roadways. No illuminated signs are allowed within 100 feet of any property line of a single-family or two-family residential property or multifamily property. Illuminated signs at places of worship located within a residential zoning district are not allowed within 25 feet of any property line of a single-family or two-family residential property or multifamily property. 
(e)  Neon tubes. No sign that has exposed neon tubes or other exposed tubes containing luminescent gas shall be used outside a building. 
(f)  Exposed wire. All wiring must meet local building code requirements. 
(g)  String of bulbs. Strings of bulbs are not permitted, except as part of a holiday celebration. 
(h)  Hours of illumination. No sign shall be illuminated between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. except for those hours during which the premises on which the sign is located is open for business. 
(i)  Types of illumination. 
(1)  Externally-illuminated sign. An externally-illuminated sign, when permitted, shall have concealed wiring and controls, and shall have shielded and screened external light source. 
(2)  Internally-illuminated sign. Internally-illuminated signs, when permitted, must completely shield the source of light from direct view. Internal open face channeled or reverse-channeled letters are permitted only in instances of wall signs affixed to buildings that are set back from the street more than 250 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-413), 7-19-2010; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 3-21-2011) 
Secs. 100-72-100-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MEASUREMENT OF SIGN AREA AND HEIGHT 

Sec. 100-101. - Computation of sign area. 
    In order to determine compliance with the maximum allowable sign areas permitted under this chapter, the following shall establish how sign areas are measured. The terms "sign area" and "sign face area" are interchangeable and have the same meaning for the purpose of regulating maximum sign size. 
(1)  Sign face area. (See Figure 4 at the end of this section.) 
a.  The area of a sign face shall be computed as the area within the smallest rectangle enclosing the limits of a sign face, or the combination of the areas of all such rectangles delimiting each sign module, together with any frame or material, texture, or color forming an integral part of the sign face or used to differentiate the sign face from the structure upon which it is placed. 
b.  For signs that have an identifiable frame or border, the smallest rectangle that includes all of the sign's words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements intended to convey the sign's message shall establish the area of the sign's face. (See Figure 6 at the end of this section.) 
c.  For signs applied to a kiosk or other cylindrical sign structure, the area of the sign face shall be computed as the largest rectangular area achieved from any one view of the sign. Measurements shall be made as a flat plane rectangle projected on the sign. (See Figure 7 at the end of this section.) 
d.  The computation of the area of a sign face shall not include the structure, supports, or uprights on which the sign face is placed or any portions of a sign structure that are not intended to contain any message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature, other than those portions contained within the rectangle that delimits the sign face or sign module. 
e.  Manual changeable copy signs. For any sign on which any of the words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements are routinely changed or are intended to be changed from time to time, the sign face area shall include the entire area within which any words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors or other design elements may be placed together with any frame or material, texture, or color forming an integral part of the sign face or used to differentiate the sign face from the structure upon which it is placed. 
(2)  Sign structure area. (See Figure 5 at the end of this section.) 
a.  The area of a sign structure shall be computed as the area within the smallest rectangle enclosing the limits of the surface of a sign whereon the sign face or sign modules may be placed, including all portions of a sign structure that provide a background from the sign face but are not intended to contain any message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature. 
b.  For the kiosk or other cylindrical sign structure, the area of the sign structure shall be the largest measurement achieved from any view of the sign structure. Measurements shall be made as a flat plane rectangle projected on or bisecting the sign structure. 
c.  For project entrance signs or other signs that are imposed, mounted or painted on a wall or other decorative structure, the sign structure area shall be computed as the portion of such wall or other decorative structure that is discernibly devoted to the support of the sign or, by its design or architectural treatment, intended to provide a background or frame for the sign. 
(3)  Treatment of open spaces. Any open space contained within the limits of the rectangle delimiting the sign face, sign module, or sign structure shall be included in the computation of the area of such sign face, sign module, or sign structure. 
(4)  Multi-faced signs. 
a.  Double-faced signs. For double-faced signs, when the sign face surfaces are parallel (back-to-back), or where the smallest angle formed between the two faces is 60 degrees or less, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area on the largest side. For double-faced signs where the interior angle formed by the faces is more than 60 degrees, the area of the sign shall be the total area of all sides. 
b.  Signs with three or more faces. For sign structures having only three faces and the interior angle formed between all the faces is 60 degrees, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area on the largest side. For all other multi-faced signs with three or more sides, the area of the sign shall be the largest total of all faces that are joined by an interior angle of more than 60 degrees that can be viewed from any one direction. 
_____




(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-414), 7-19-2010) 
_____
Sec. 100-102. - Measurement of sign height. 
    The height of a sign shall be equal to the vertical distance from the average grade at the base of the sign, or from the crown of the roadway of the nearest street within 50 feet of any portion of the sign, to the highest point of any portion of the sign, whichever results in the greater sign height. Any earthen berms and elevated foundations supporting signs, sign posts or other sign supports shall be included in the height of the sign. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-415), 7-19-2010) 
Secs. 100-103-100-132. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SIGN TYPES PERMITTED BY ZONING 

Sec. 100-133. - Purpose. 
    The following sections present the maximum number, size, height, and other restrictions relating to specific signature that are permitted by right in each land use category. Additional signage is permitted under article VI of this chapter. 
Sec. 100-134. - Principal freestanding sign-One use on property. 
    "Principal Freestanding Sign-One Use on Property" on table 1 in section 100-144 applies to a lot where there is only one use being made of the property, such as, but not limited to, one single-family or two-family dwelling, one multifamily development, one public or community institution, or one business occupant. A predominately agricultural property, with or without a residence on the property, is considered a single agricultural use. Properties that are vacant but zoned or offered for sale or lease for a particular land use also fall under this category. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-416), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-135. - Same-Planned center. 
    "Principal Freestanding Sign-Planned Center" on table 1 in section 100-144 applies to single or commercial or industrial property that is designed or intended for occupancy by two or more principal businesses that are separately owned and have no corporate relationship. A planned center may consist of several businesses in single building or individual businesses in several buildings on the property. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-417), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-136. - Project entrance signs. 
    Project entrance signs are signs located at an entrance into a development. Each project entrance sign shall not exceed the number, area or height limitations shown on table 1 in section 100-144. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-418), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-137. - Maximum number of principal freestanding signs. 
    Only one principal freestanding sign is allowed on each street frontage, whether the sign is located on a property occupied by only one use, is a planned center sign or is a project entrance sign. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-419), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-138. - Building signs (table 2 in section 100-144). 
(a)  For buildings, the maximum allowed area for a building sign on a wall shall be calculated on the basis of the percentage of the entire area of said wall, including all windows and doors. 
(b)  In no case shall the combined area of a window sign or signs obscure more than 25 percent of a window. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-420), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-139. - Miscellaneous freestanding signs. 
    Freestanding signs in addition to those shown on table 1 in section 100-144 are allowed as accessory uses on a property occupied by any multifamily, commercial, industrial, public or community use if each sign complies with all of the following: 
(1)  Within the area between a street and the minimum street-side setback required for the zoning district, additional signs may be located within three feet of driveways that provide access into or from the property. There shall be no more than two such signs per driveway and each such sign shall not exceed four square feet in sign area nor be more than three feet in height. 
(2)  Miscellaneous signs located farther from the street than the minimum required street-side setback shall be allowed as follows: 
a.  One miscellaneous sign not to exceed 32 square feet in area nor more than eight feet in height may be located on the property for each principal building on the lot. 
b.  Other miscellaneous freestanding signs are allowed beyond the minimum street-side yard setback on the property developed for multifamily, commercial, industrial, public or community use, provided that such signs shall have no more than four square feet in sign face area nor more than three feet in height (except signs that are required by law to be higher than three feet high, such as those marking a handicapped parking space). 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-421), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-140. - Outdoor recreational facility. 
    Signs erected on walls, fences, dugouts, press boxes, stadium stands, concession stands, ticket booths, benches and locker rooms on any public or community use outdoor recreational facility (such as a baseball stadium or soccer field) are permitted with the following restrictions: 
(1)  Each individual sign shall not exceed eight feet in height and 32 square feet in area and must face inward to the recreational activity area. 
(2)  There shall be no limit on the number of signs per site. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-422), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-141. - Flags. 
    Any cloth, paper, thin plastic, or similar pliable material that is displayed by hanging or flying is allowed as an accessory use on any property that is used in any zoning category if it complies with all of the following: 
(1)  Number and size of flags. 
a.  No more than four flags may be displayed on a lot occupied by an agricultural use, a single-family or two-family residential use, or a multifamily residential use. No single flag shall be larger than 24 square feet in size, and the total area for all flags collectively shall not exceed 45 square feet. 
b.  No more than four flags may be displayed on a lot occupied by a commercial use, an industrial use, or a public or community use. No single flag shall be larger than 40 square feet in size, and the total area for all flags collectively shall not exceed 72 square feet. For any flag larger than 35 square feet, engineering drawings for the proposed supporting structure shall be submitted to the community development director for review prior to construction. 
(2)  The official flag of the United States of America shall be flown in accordance with protocol established by the Congress of the United States for the Stars and Stripes. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-423), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-142. - Automatic changeable copy signs; animated and flashing signs. 
    Automatic changeable copy signs and animated and flashing signs are only allowed on commercial, industrial, or municipal zoned properties, but must comply with regulations contained in section 100-71. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-424), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-143. - Vehicular signs. 
    Vehicular signs may only be located on a commercial or industrial property. Each such lot, tract or parcel may contain one vehicular sign as defined herein, except that double frontage lots may have two such signs, one per front. Vehicular signs shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  The area of such signs, when combined with the total area of other signs shall not exceed the total area authorized for signs for that lot within the land use category. 
(2)  The heights of such signs shall not exceed the height limit for signs authorized in the land use category. 
(3)  Such signs shall not exceed a maximum of two per lot nor a maximum of one per road front. 
(4)  Such signs shall not be lighted. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-425), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-144. - Tables. 
TABLE 1. PERMITTED FREESTANDING SIGNS-BY ZONING 
Agricultural Residential (Single- and Two-Family) Residential (Multifamily) Commercial Industrial Principal Freestanding Sign-One Use on Property Maximum Number 1 per lot N/A N/A 1 per street frontage 1 per street frontage Maximum sign face or sign structure area 4 16 sf 100 sf 100 sf Maximum height 6 feet 15 feet 1 15 feet 1 Principal Freestanding Sign-Planned Center Maximum Number N/A N/A N/A 1 per street frontage 1 per street frontage Maximum sign face or sign structure area 4 240 sf 300 sf Maximum height 35 feet 35 feet Project Entrance Sign Maximum number N/A 1 per project entrance 2 1 per project entrance 2 1 per project entrance 3 1 per project entrance 3 Maximum sign face or sign structure area 4 64 sf 64 sf 240 sf 300 sf Maximum height 8 feet 8 feet 15 feet 1 15 feet 1  
TABLE 2. PERMITTED BUILDING SIGNAGE-BY ZONING 
Agricultural Residential (Single- and Two-Family) Residential (Multifamily) Commercial Industrial Wall, Awning, Under-Canopy, Projecting and Window Signs on a Building

(any permitted building sign) Max. number of all building signs 1 1 1 per building No Maximum No Maximum Maximum total sign face area 1 square foot 1 square foot 4 square feet 25% of the area of the wall on which the sign is placed, up to a maximum of 100 square feet 4 25% of the area of the wall on which the sign is placed, up to a maximum of 100 square feet 4  
Notes for Table 1 and Table 2: 
1 On a lot in a commercial subdivision, office or industrial park, the maximum sign height is 35 feet adjacent to the lot frontage on an Interstate or 4-Lane U.S. or state-numbered highway, 25 feet along other U.S. or state-numbered highway and 15 feet along all other streets/roads. 
2 These developments may have project entrance signs at a maximum of two entrances per project street from For these developments, project entrance signs may be either single sign or dual sign structures, each type counting as on sign under "Maximum Number" on the table. 
3 For these developments, project entrance signs may only be single sign project entrance signs. 
4 In a commercial or industrial district, for a tenant occupying 50,000 to 100,000 square feet of floor area, the maximum sign area is 150 square feet, and for a tenant occupying more than 100,000 square feet of floor area, the maximum sign is 200 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, tables, 7-19-2010) 
_____
Secs. 100-145-100-169. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TEMPORARY SIGNS 

Sec. 100-170. - Temporary signs; allowed. 
    The following temporary signs are allowed under the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Signs in addition to those allowed under article V of this chapter are allowed on a property for the duration of a temporary event (as defined in section 100-171). Such additional signs shall not be restricted as to the message displayed on the sign, but must comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Inflatable signs. A sign that is intended to be expanded by air or other gas for its proper display or support is allowed, but must comply with the provisions of this chapter. Inflatable signs shall not be used in calculation of total temporary sign area. Inflatable signs under six feet in height are exempt. 
(3)  Temporary signs must comply with all requirements of this chapter, except as modified by the provisions of this article, including the prohibitions of article II of this chapter and the general requirements applying to all signs under article III of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-426), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-171. - Temporary event; defined. 
    A temporary event is an activity having a specific duration the end of which is related to a specific action, usually lasting for only a few days or months at a time. Temporary events include, but are not limited to, such activities as: 
(1)  The offering of a property or premises for sale or rent. 
(2)  An election, political campaign, referendum, or ballot proposition put to the voters as part of the city, county, state, or federal governments. 
(3)  Special business promotions, such as, but not limited to grand openings, close-out sales, and seasonal sales events. 
(4)  A yard sale. 
(5)  The construction of a building or development project, or the rehabilitation, remodeling, or renovation of a building. 
(6)  A special event by a nonprofit organization. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-427), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-172. - Duration of temporary signs. 
    Except for temporary signs that offer a property or premises for sale or rent, a temporary sign shall be permitted for a period of 30 days. Approval of one additional 30 days may be granted with a 365-day duration by the community development director upon request of the applicant. Property must be devoid of all temporary signage for 15 days prior to the application for a new temporary sign permit. Temporary signs that offer a property or premises for sale or rent shall be permitted for a period of 180 days, and the community development director can grant an additional 180-day extension upon receiving written request of the owner. Nothing within this section should be construed to extend the duration of a garage sale sign beyond the three days permitted by section 110-529(e)(3). 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-428), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-173. - Number of temporary signs. 
    There shall be no limit to the number of temporary signs allowed on a property; however the total sign area may not exceed the limits listed in section 100-174. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-429), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-174. - Size of temporary signs. 
    Temporary signs are restricted to the following sign face areas and sign heights, by land use category (as defined in this Code): 
(1)  Agricultural property. Individual temporary signs located on an agricultural property shall not exceed 16 square feet in area and six feet in height. In no event shall the cumulative temporary sign area exceed 24 square feet. 
(2)  Single- and two-family residential property. Individual temporary signs located on a single- or two-family residential property shall not exceed six square feet in area and five feet in height. In no event shall be cumulative temporary sign area exceed ten square feet. 
(3)  Multifamily, commercial, or industrial property. Individual temporary event signs located on multifamily, commercial, or industrial property shall not exceed 32 square feet in area and ten feet in height. In no event shall the cumulative temporary sign area exceed 48 square feet. 
(4)  Exceptions. Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, these exemptions shall not be used in calculation of total temporary sign area: 
a.  During the construction or remodeling of a commercial, industrial, or public or community use building containing 100,000 square feet of gross floor area or more, one freestanding or wall sign shall be allowed, not exceeding 48 square feet in area nor more than 15 feet in height. 
b.  During the start-up period while a commercial, industrial, or public or community use building containing 100,000 square feet of gross floor area or more is initially for sale or lease, one additional freestanding sign shall be allowed, not exceeding 48 square feet in area nor more than 15 feet in height. 
c.  Additional signage during construction of a residential or nonresidential subdivision: one sign per entrance into the subdivision not to exceed 32 square feet in area and ten feet in height. Such signs shall be removed when the last lot or house has been sold or if no building permit has been issued for construction within the subdivision or development during a period of 12 months, whichever comes first. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-430), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-175. - Location of temporary signs. 
(a)  All temporary signs shall be located at least five feet from any street right-of-way line, any side or rear property line, and the pavement edge of a driveway. 
(b)  Temporary signs are not allowed to be placed within or over a public street right-of-way or private street easement. 
(c)  A temporary sign must be a freestanding sign or a building sign (as defined in this chapter), and shall not be affixed to any tree, utility pole or official traffic sign or structure. 
(d)  A temporary sign must be located at least ten feet from any other sign, including another temporary event sign. 
(e)  A temporary sign shall be erected and maintained only with the permission of the owner of the property upon which the sign is located. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-431), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-176. - Construction and lighting standards of temporary signs. 
(a)  Construction standards for signs requiring building permits. Except for portable signs and banners, a temporary sign that exceeds 15 square feet for a freestanding sign or six square feet for a building sign must be authorized by a building permit prior to placement. Construction for such signs shall meet the same engineering design and materials standards as for permanent signs as required by the building code. 
(b)  Construction standards for signs not requiring building permits. 
(1)  Nonpermanent but water-resistant construction materials may be used, such as, but not limited to, poster board, foam core board or illustration board. 
(2)  The words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements that convey the sign's message shall be permanently applied to the sign's face. Automatic changeable copy signs shall not be allowed. 
(c)  Self-illuminated temporary signs are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-432), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-177. - Portable signs and streamers. 
    During a special business promotion event, portable signs and streamers are allowed as temporary signs on a property zoned commercial or industrial subject to all provisions that pertain to temporary signs and the following additional restrictions: 
(1)  Portable signs. One portable sign per developed lot or business is allowed under the following conditions and requirements: 
a.  Prior to the erection or placement of these signs or devices, all required fees and taxes shall be paid by the owner of the sign. 
b.  The maximum size allowance for these devices and signs shall not exceed 32 square feet. The square footage of said portable sign, when combined with other signs on the same lot, shall not exceed the total square footage authorized for signs in the land use category. Said sign shall not have flashing lights. 
c.  No portable sign shall be placed on a lot that is used for residential purposes. 
d.  The sign must be placed on the site in such a manner as to be at least five feet from the right-of-way and not an obstruction for traffic or visibility. The location of the sign is subject to approval of the community development director. 
e.  To prevent wind damage to the sign or other property, the sign must be securely anchored to the site in a manner acceptable to the community development director. 
f.  All electrical connections to the sign must be in compliance with the electrical codes as adopted by the city, and must be inspected prior to use. 
g.  The maximum number of portable sign approvals to be issued to a single location or site at any given time shall be one sign. 
h.  A site or location for the purpose of this section shall be defined as land under common ownership. 
(2)  Streamers. 
a.  Streamers shall be counted towards the total square foot sign area permitted for the lot on which they are placed, and when added to the area of all other signs on said lot shall not exceed the total sign area permitted for the lot. 
b.  No part of any such sign shall be located in, on or within five feet of a public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-433), 7-19-2010) 
Secs. 100-178-100-207. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SIGN APPROVALS AND PERMITTING 

Sec. 100-208. - Sign approvals; when required. 
    In addition to a building permit (for signs that require a building permit) as may be required under the building code, a sign approval review (required whether or not a building permit is required) shall first be conducted by the community development director prior to installation, relocations, expansion or construction or issuance of a permit of any sign regulated under this article except for those signs specifically exempted under section 100-209. 
(Code 1960, §§ 19-4, 19-4; Code 1982, §§ 6-228, 6-230; Code 1999, §§ 18-421, 18-423; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-434), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-209. - Exemptions from requirement for sign approval. 
(a)  Sign approval will not be required for legally existing signs for which a sign approval has previously been issued, under the following conditions: 
(1)  Replacing or altering the words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements that compose a sign's message, in whole or in part, shall not require a sign approval unless a structural or size change is made. 
(2)  Painting, repairing, cleaning, or maintaining a sign shall not require a sign approval unless a structural change is made. 
(b)  Sign approval and permitting will not be required for any signs that are exempt according to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-435), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-210. - Issuance of sign approval. 
(a)  Sign review required. For any sign requiring sign approval under the provisions of this article, sign review shall be required prior to installation, relocation, renovation, expansion, construction or reconstruction of the sign. The sign application, with the non-refundable application fee established by the city commission, shall be submitted to the community development director. 
(b)  Sign approval application. 
(1)  Application for signs other than temporary signs must include: 
a.  An itemized list and a keyed site plan at a suitable scale showing the location of all existing signs and sign structures currently on the property. 
b.  An itemized list and a keyed site plan at a suitable scale showing the location of all proposed signs to be located on the property and all existing signs proposed to be removed. 
c.  A scaled drawing with dimensions and specifications, specifying materials, illumination, character sizes, colors, and support systems for each proposed sign. 
d.  The estimated cost of construction for each proposed sign. 
e.  An agreement wherein the applicant shall indemnify the city against all damages, demands, or expenses of any kind caused by the sign or sign structure. 
f.  Any other information as may be reasonably required by the community development director to determine compliance with all provisions of this Code. 
(2)  Application for temporary signs must include: 
a.  A list of the temporary signs to be placed on the property. 
b.  A description of the temporary signs to be placed on the property. 
c.  For the portable signs, banners, streamers and flags, written and graphic evidence of compliance with all requirements of section 100-177. 
(c)  Issuance of sign approval. Once a complete application for a sign approval, complete in all respects, has been received by the community development director, the community development director shall then review the application for compliance with applicable regulations and within 20 business days either issue the approval or inform the applicant of the reasons why the approval cannot be issued. Upon determination that the application fully complies with the provisions of this Code, and all other applicable laws, regulations, and ordinances, the sign approval shall be issued by the community development director within the above-prescribed times. 
(d)  Building permit required. For any sign requiring sign approval under the provisions of this article, issuance of a building permit shall be required prior to installation, relocation, renovation, expansion, construction or reconstruction of the sign, consistent with such sign approval. The building permit application, with the non-refundable application fee established by the city commission, shall be submitted to the community development director. 
(e)  Permit identification to be placed on the sign. Every permanent sign for which a permit is issued shall be plainly marked with the name of the permittees and shall have the number of the sign approval affixed on the framework in the lower right-hand area of the sign or on the sign face using a durable material so that it is easily seen and weatherproof. 
(f)  Expiration of sign approval for uncompleted construction. A sign approval shall expire if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been substantially completed (to the extent of at least 60 percent completion based on the estimated cost of construction from the application for sign approval) within six months of issuance. One six-month extension may be approved by the community development director for circumstances deemed extenuating and reasonable. Expiration of a sign approval shall automatically void any building permit issued for the construction of the sign. 
(g)  Fee schedule. The city commission may, from time to time by resolution, establish and/or modify said fee schedule as necessary to include, but not necessarily be limited to, the cost of issuing permits, making inspections and other administrative matters related to this section. 
(Code 1960, § 19-7; Code 1982, §§ 6-231, 6-232; Code 1999, §§ 18-424, 18-425; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-436), 7-19-2010) 
Secs. 100-211-100-228. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - NONCONFORMING SIGNS 

Sec. 100-229. - Nonconforming signs; defined. 
    A nonconforming sign is a sign that was lawfully erected and maintained prior to the adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and which by reason of such adoption or amendment fails to conform to all applicable regulations and restrictions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-437), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-230. - Grandfathered nonconforming signs. 
    A nonconforming sign that is permanently affixed to the ground or to a building may continue to be used, except that the nonconforming sign shall not be replaced, expanded, relocated or substantially renovated except in conformity with the provisions of this article, as determined by the community development director. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-438), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-231. - Temporary signs to be removed. 
    Any nonconforming sign that is temporary in nature and not permanently affixed to the ground or to a building, such as but not limited to a portable sign, a streamer or pennant, shall be removed within 30 days of becoming a nonconforming sign. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-439), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-232. - Treatment of illegal signs. 
(a)  Illegal signs located within the public right-of-way or on public lands shall be removed as follows: 
(1)  Signs located illegally within any public right-of-way or other public lands shall be removed immediately upon adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(2)  The community development director or other city employees (and/or private individuals, corporations and entities, if so authorized by the city commission) shall be authorized to remove and dispose of nonconforming signs from public rights-of-way and other public lands with or without notice to and at the expense of the owner, builder or other parties responsible for placement of said sign. 
(b)  Illegal signs not located within a public right-of-way or on public lands shall be removed as follows: 
(1)  A sign that was not lawfully existing under the city's regulations prior to adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall, within 30 days of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, either be removed or be brought into conformance with all provisions of this article. 
(2)  Failure to remove such illegal sign or bring it into conformance following 30 days' notice to the owner or occupant of the property by the community development director shall authorize the city to remove the sign at the expense of the owner or occupant of the property. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-440), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-233. - Removal due to road improvements. 
    If a nonconforming sign must be removed due to a city, county, state or federal road improvement project, the city commission may authorize the relocation of said sign even though the new locations may not meet the setbacks, location and/or spacing or other provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-441), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-234. - Community development director. 
    It shall be the duty of the community development director, and he is hereby given the authority, to administer the provisions of this chapter and to issue sign approvals consistent with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-442), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-235. - Code enforcement director. 
    It shall be the duty of the community development director, and he is hereby given the authority, to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to issue building permits for signs based on sign approvals. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-443), 7-19-2010) 
Editor's note- Sign approvals and permitting are located in article VII of this chapter. 
Sec. 100-236. - Permits required. 
    No sign or sign structure shall be erected, moved, added to or structurally altered without a sign approval and a building permit issued by the community development director as required by the provisions of this chapter. No permit shall be issued except in conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-444), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-237. - Penalties for violation. 
    Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished for each offense according to law. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1960, § 19-35; Code 1982, § 6-226; Code 1999, § 18-390; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-445), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-238. - Remedies. 
    If any sign or sign structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained in violation of this chapter, the city commission of the city, the community development director or any adjacent or other property owner who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action in proceeding to stop the violation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-446), 7-19-2010) 
Sec. 100-239. - Required action. 
    In each case in this chapter where the issuance of a sign permit, a building permit or other action by any official of the city is required and a time period for such action is specified, then the failure of the official responsible for same to take such action or issue such permit shall be deemed an approval of the matter or the issuance of the permit, as the case may be. If, at any place in the chapter, an action is required by any such official and no timeframe is provided herein, then such timeframe shall be deemed to be 45 days and the failure to act to either approve or to deny same shall be deemed an approval of the matter or the issuance of the permit, as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-440), 7-19-2010) 
Secs. 100-240-100-256. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - APPEALS 

Sec. 100-257. - Purpose. 
    This article is established to identify the procedure whereby any aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the community development director or any other party in the administration of this chapter. 
Sec. 100-258. - Appeals process. 
(a)  Any party aggrieved because of the alleged error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the community development director or any other party in the administration of this chapter, may appeal in writing to the city clerk for an interpretation of this chapter by the special magistrate. In exercising this power of interpretation, the special magistrate may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the community development director or any other party. 
(b)  Appeals must be filed within 30 days of the date on which the action by the community development director was taken. 
(c)  Should the special magistrate fail to act within the subsequent 90-day period, then the appeal shall be deemed to have been concluded in favor of the appealing party. Any permit which is the subject of such appeal shall be deemed to be issued as a result of such failure of the special magistrate to make a determination. 
(Code 1960, § 19-33; Code 1982, § 6-227; Code 1999, § 18-389; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(18-448), 7-19-2010) 
Chapter 102 - SITE DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 102-1-102-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS 

Sec. 102-19. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to set forth regulations which apply to parking of vehicles, loading, on-site circulation, and pedestrian access. This article shall be construed and implemented to create an efficient, safe, and balanced system of on-site traffic circulation accommodating vehicles, bicycles and pedestrians, and providing for adequate parking and loading in a manner which ensures compatibility of such activities with environmental characteristics of adjacent and nearby properties. 
(Code 1999, § 102-31; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-1), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 102-20. - General provisions. 
(a)  Every new building erected after the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be required to provide off-street parking facilities in accordance with this article. 
(b)  No building shall be erected or moved into a district nor shall any building be enlarged by more than ten percent of the existing gross floor area or increased in capacity by adding dwelling units, guest rooms or seats, nor shall the use classification of any building be changed, unless there be provided adequate off-street parking facilities as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1999, § 102-32; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-2), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 102-21. - Certificate of occupancy. 
    A certificate of occupancy for the given structure or premises shall not be issued until the required parking area has been, in accordance with this article, inspected and improved. 
(Code 1999, § 102-33; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-3), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 102-22. - Computation. 
(a)  Fractional measurements. When units or measurements determining the number of required off-street parking spaces result in the requirement of a fractional space, any such fraction of one-fourth or greater shall require a full space. 
(b)  Fixed seats. In stadiums, sports arenas, churches and other places of assembly in which the occupants occupy benches, pews or other similar seating facilities, each 20 lineal inches of such seating facilities shall be counted as one seat for the purpose of computing off-street parking requirements. The number of employees shall be based on the number of people working on the shift of greatest employment. 
(Code 1999, § 102-34; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-4), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 102-23. - Design and construction. 
    Design and construction of on-site circulation systems, parking areas, and loading facilities shall be in accordance with engineering standards of the city. At a minimum, the parking facility shall consist of a base of six inches lime rock with one inch bituminous asphaltic concrete, or its approved equivalent. All off-street parking facilities shall be drained so as not to cause any nuisance or hazard to adjacent property or traffic or pedestrian safety. 
(Code 1999, § 102-35; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-5), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 102-24. - Maintenance. 
    All off-street vehicular use areas shall be well-maintained; free of potholes, debris, weeds, broken curbs and broken wheel stops; clearly striped; and with all lighting in working condition. 
(Code 1999, § 102-36; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-7), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 102-25. - Site plan requirements. 
    In addition to the site plan requirements as set forth at the time of the application for a development plan, site plan or a building permit approval for any use for which parking spaces are required to be constructed, a site plan for the parking facilities shall be submitted. Such plan shall include: 
(1)  Entrances and exits to public roads. 
(2)  The location and size of buildings, accessory structures, fences and walls. 
(3)  Location and dimensions of parking spaces and aisles, directional markings, traffic control devices and signs; and the location of planned future parking areas. 
(4)  When the parking facilities are housed in a garage, a multistoried structure or on the roofs of buildings, the site plan shall indicate: 
a.  Interior traffic circulation. 
b.  Slope of ramp. 
c.  Ease of access and utilization of ramps. 
d.  Parking stall and aisle dimensions, proper traffic control signing and pavement marking for safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation. 
e.  Location of entrances and exits on public roads. 
f.  Queuing and sight distances at such entrances and exits. 
g.  Screening of the cars located in or on the parking structures from adjoining properties and from public roads. 
(5)  Such other information that may be required by the community development director to meet the requirements of this section. 
(Code 1999, § 102-37; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-7), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 102-26. - Nighttime use of parking area. 
    The parking area of any commercial or public area for nighttime use shall be illuminated by electric lights, but such illumination shall be designed and arranged so that the light source is directed away from all residential areas. 
(Code 1999, § 102-38; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-8), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 102-27. - Parking regulations in residential and mobile home districts. 
    No person shall park either a truck with a chassis capacity greater than two tons, or a commercial trailer, or both, in use districts R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R-2, R-3, RM-1 and RM-2, except on a temporary basis for loading and unloading, or in connection with the construction of a building on such property, excepting further that such a truck or commercial trailer may be parked in such district if parked within a totally enclosed building. 
(Code 1999, § 102-39; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-9), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 102-28. - Discontinuance of off-street parking. 
    Discontinuance of off-street parking facilities which are required by this article is prohibited unless alternative parking facilities are provided subject to the approval of the city commission. 
(Code 1999, § 102-40; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-10), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 102-29. - Location of standard parking spaces. 
(a)  Except as provided herein, all required off-street parking spaces and the use they are intended to serve shall be located on the same parcel. 
(b)  Driveways may be utilized in meeting off-street parking requirements for single-family, two-family duplex dwellings, and mobile homes in residential districts, provided that sufficient spaces are available on such driveways to meet the requirements of this section. 
(c)  All parking spaces required by this article for multifamily residential uses shall be located no further than the following distances from the building they serve: 
Resident parking 200 feet Visitor parking 300 feet  
(1)  All parking spaces required by this article for nonresidential uses shall be located within 600 feet of the building or use they serve. 
(2)  Distances shall be measured from a building's entry to the parking space. Where a stairway or elevator provides access to dwelling units, the stairway or elevator shall be considered to be the entrance to the building. For purposes of measuring these distances, each required parking space shall be assigned to a specific unit on the development plan, whether or not the developer will actually assign spaces for the exclusive use of the specific unit. In the case of active recreational uses, the distance shall be measured from the parking lot to the particular recreational facility. 
(d)  Garages and parking areas shall not be below grade level. 
(e)  The community development director may approve off-site parking facilities as part of the parking requirements by this Code, provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The location of the off-site parking spaces will adequately serve the use for which it is intended. The following factors shall be considered: 
a.  Proximity of the off-site spaces to the use that they will serve. In the case of a passive recreational use the parking shall be measured from the parking lot to the entrance of the recreational area. 
b.  Ease of pedestrian access to the off-site parking spaces. 
c.  Whether or not off-site parking spaces are compatible with the use intended to be served. 
(2)  The location of the off-site parking spaces will not create unreasonable: 
a.  Hazards to pedestrians. 
b.  Hazards to vehicular traffic. 
c.  Traffic congestion. 
d.  Interference with access to other parking spaces in the vicinity. 
e.  Detriment to any nearby use. 
(3)  The off-site parking spaces are located in a district which permits the principal use for which the parking is intended to serve. 
(4)  The developer supplies a written agreement, approved in form by the city attorney, assuring the continued availability of the off-site parking facilities for the use they are intended to serve. 
(5)  Joint use of off-street parking facilities. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent collective provision for, or joint use of, off-street parking facilities for two or more buildings or uses by two or more owners or operators, provided that the total of such spaces, when combined or used together, shall not be less than the sum of the requirements of the several individual uses computed separately in accordance with this section. Such facilities shall be permanently maintained for such joint use and shall not be discounted in whole or in part unless other suitable facilities conforming with this section are provided. The owner of any building which is required to provide off-street parking shall be the owner or joint owner of the land upon which the parking facility is located. A long-term noncancellable lease may be substituted by approval of the city commission. 
(Code 1999, § 102-41; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-11), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 102-30. - Location of handicapped parking spaces. 
    The location of handicapped spaces shall be in accordance with F.S. §§ 316.1955 and 316.1956, as amended. 
(Code 1999, § 102-42; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-12), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 102-31. - Size/dimensions of standard parking spaces. 
    A standard parking space shall be a minimum of ten feet in width, and 20 feet in length, unless located in the U.S. 27 Corridor District, or Downtown District, whereby a parking space shall be a minimum of nine feet in width and 18 feet in length. Each parking space shall be provided an access aisle backup distances of not less than 24 feet unless otherwise provided in Figure 1, entitled Parking Area Arrangements and Dimensions . Each garage space shall be a minimum of ten feet by 20 feet (200 square feet) exclusive of wall thickness and storage area. The total area for a garage may be calculated by multiplying the number of cars required to be kept in the garage by 200 square feet. Furthermore, alternative parking methods, such as shared parking strategies, may be approved by the city commission on a case-by-case basis. 
(Code 1999, § 102-43; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-13), 12-19-1994; Ord. No. 2016-07, § 1, 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 102-32. - Size/dimensions of handicap parking spaces. 
    Size for handicap parking shall be the size specified in F.S. § 316.1955. 
(Code 1999, § 102-44; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-14), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 102-33. - Parking area arrangements. 
    Figure 1 depicts the minimum dimensions of all parking spaces for various parking area arrangements. 
(Code 1999, § 102-45; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-15), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 102-34. - Design standards for parking areas and loading areas. 
(a)  Each parking area and loading area shall be designed so as to reflect the type of use, hours of operation, number of cars to be accommodated, uses and size of parking area, surrounding street pattern, adjacent buildings and other improvements in the general neighborhood. The parking area shall be designed to cause the least amount of adverse effects on adjoining or neighborhood properties. 
(b)  Except for single-family residences and mobile home park, each parking space shall be marked either by painted lines, precast curbs or in a similar fashion to indicate the individual parking spaces. Traffic control signs and other pavement markings shall be used as necessary to insure safe and efficient traffic operation of the parking area. Such signing and marking shall be subject to the approval of the community development director. 
(c)  Any parking area to be used by the general public shall provide suitable, marked parking spaces for handicapped persons. The number, design, and location of these spaces shall be consistent with the requirements of F.S. § 316.1955, or succeeding provisions. Handicapped spaces provided for private use or additional handicap spaces provided above the minimum required shall meet the design, marking and location requirements of F.S. § 316.1955, as amended. All spaces for the handicapped shall be paved. 
(d)  All parking spaces shall have an unobstructed access to a public street or alley. 
(e)  Parking and loading areas, aisles, pedestrian walks, landscaping, and open space shall be designed as integral parts of an overall development plan and shall be properly related to existing and proposed buildings. 
(f)  Buildings, parking and loading areas, landscaping and open spaces shall be designed so that pedestrians moving from parking areas to buildings and between buildings are not unreasonably exposed to vehicular traffic. 
(g)  Landscaped, paved, and gradually inclined or flat pedestrian walks shall be provided along major pedestrian circulation routes, particularly from building entrances to streets, parking areas, and adjacent buildings. Pedestrian walks should be designed to discourage incursions into landscaped areas except at designated crossings. 
(h)  Channelization and division of parking areas within the interior of the parking lot for pedestrian and vehicular circulation shall be accomplished by the use of landscaped areas in accordance with article IV of this chapter. 
(i)  Each parking space, excluding single-family, duplex and triplex, shall have appropriate access to a street or alley and maneuvering and access aisle area sufficient to permit vehicles to enter and exit the site in a forward motion. 
(j)  Aisles and driveways shall not be used for an unloading area or for parking vehicles, except that the driveway of a single-family or two-family residence shall be counted as a parking space for the dwelling unit. 
(k)  The design shall be based on a definite and logical system of drive lanes to serve the parking and loading spaces. A physical separation or barrier, such as landscaping, may be required to separate parking spaces from travel lanes. 
(l)  Each parking space and loading space shall be directly accessible without driving over or through any other parking or loading space except for spaces located in the single-family residential zoning districts. In such districts where garages are provided, at least one garage space for a single-family dwelling shall have unimpeded access. 
_____

MINIMUM PARKING BAY DIMENSIONS BY PARKING ANGLE 
AND PARKING BAY ILLUSTRATIONS 
A B C Parking 
Angle A' B' C' 22' 32' 30' 0 2' 42' 42' 32' 55' 39' 20 39' 55' 46' 34' 53' 45' 30 41' 60' 52' 36' 56' 48' 40 43' 63' 57' 36' 57' 52' 45 43' 64' 59' 36' 58' 52' 50 44' 65' 59' 44' 63' 59' 60 44' 66' 62' 43' 64' 63' 70 45' 67' 69' 44' 65' 63' 80 44' 65' 63' 42' 62' 62' 90 42' 62' 62'  
Notes. 
(1) All examples show 45-degree angle parking. 
(2) Wheel stops or curbs are required when the parking spaces face the property line. 
(3) A minimum backup distance of 20 feet is required between the property line and the first stall as shown in examples above. 
(Code 1999, § 102-46; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-16), 12-19-1994) 
_____
Sec. 102-35. - Number of standard parking spaces required. 
(a)  The following list specifies the required minimum number of off-street vehicle spaces according to use. 
(b)  The number of parking spaces required for uses not specifically listed shall be determined by the community development director. The community development director shall consider requirements for similar uses and appropriate traffic engineering and planning data, and shall establish a minimum number of parking spaces based upon the purpose of this article. 
(c)  Minimum parking space requirements. 
(1)  Single-family dwellings: two spaces. 
(2)  Two-family and multiple-family dwelling structures: two spaces for each dwelling unit. 
(3)  Group homes, type I: two spaces. 
(4)  Group homes, type II and type III: one per six beds, one per 300 square feet of office area in addition to the minimum required for a single-family residence, plus one for each employee. 
(5)  General retail establishments including, but not limited to, bakeries, convenience food and beverage stores, newsstands, hardware, paint and garden supply, pharmacy, department store: one space for each 300 square feet of gross floor space. 
(6)  Places of public assembly, including, but not limited to, private clubs, lodges and fraternal buildings, assembly halls, exhibition halls, convention halls, community centers, libraries, museums, dance halls and skating rinks: one space for each three seats provided for patron use or one space for each 75 square feet of gross floor area occupied by customers, patrons, or members, whichever may be greater, plus one space for each employee. 
(7)  Beauty and barber shops and other similar personal services uses: two spaces per beauty or barber chair. 
(8)  Bowling alleys: four spaces for each bowling lane. If a restaurant or eating place is located within the structure or in connection therewith, off-street parking shall be provided in the amount of 50 percent of that required in other subsections of this section. 
(9)  Business, professional, governmental offices and other similar business service uses: one space for each 300 square feet of gross floor space. 
(10)  Churches, temples and other places of worship: one space for each three fixed seats. For those using a multi-purpose assembly area without fixed seats: one space for each 75 square feet of assembly area. 
(11)  Convalescent and/or nursing homes: one space per four patient beds, plus one space per employee. 
(12)  Hospitals: 11/2 spaces per each patient bed, plus one space per employee. 
(13)  Kindergarten and day care facilities: five spaces, plus one space per employee. 
(14)  Laundromats and self-service dry cleaning establishments: one space per each two washing and/or dry cleaning machines, or one space for each 300 square feet of building, whichever is the greater. 
(15)  Limited repair and service shop: one space for each 300 square feet gross floor area. 
(16)  Lumber and building supplies: one space for each 400 square feet of gross floor area with a building plus one space for each 800 square feet of outdoor sales area. 
(17)  Manufacturing and industrial businesses: 
a.  Not catering to the retail trade: one space for each 400 square feet of gross floor area. 
b.  Catering to the retail trade: one space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area. 
(18)  Medical, dental offices and clinics: six spaces for each doctor, or one space for each 200 square feet of building, whichever is greater. 
(19)  Mobile homes: two spaces per mobile home. 
(20)  Funeral homes and mortuaries: one space for each three persons seating capacity in rooms where services are conducted. 
(21)  Motor vehicle sales and service establishments: one space per each 500 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space per each 4,500 square feet of outdoor sales, rental and display area, plus one space per service bay, plus one space per employee. 
(22)  Hotels and motels: one space for each guest bedroom, plus one space for resident manager or owner. If, in addition to guest bedrooms, there are other accessory uses to the motel, off-street parking shall be provided for these uses in the amount of 50 percent of that required in other subsections of this section. 
(23)  Outdoor sales area: one space for each 3,000 square feet of site area so used, and one space for each employee. 
(24)  Restaurants, bars, nightclubs and other similar establishments: one space for each three employees, one space per three seats provided for patron use, and two spaces for each meal pickup window, other than a drive-through window. 
(25)  Restaurant, drive-in: one space for each 15 square feet of gross floor area. 
(26)  Restaurant with drive-through window: one space for each three seats and one space for each employee plus queuing per section 102-25(4)f. 
(27)  Roominghouses and boardinghouses: one space for each two bedrooms. Dormitories: one space for each 250 square feet of sleeping area or fraction thereof, whichever may be greater. Roominghouses, boardinghouses and dormitories: add one space for manager, owner or operator plus one space for each employee. 
(28)  Schools (public, private or parochial): 
a.  Elementary schools: one space for each classroom, plus one space for each noninstructional employee, plus one space for each 100 square feet of any room used for public assembly. 
b.  Junior high or middle schools: one space for each student classroom, plus one space for each noninstructional employee, plus one space for each 100 square feet of any room used for public safety, plus one space for each 25 students. 
c.  Senior high schools, vocational or trade schools, and colleges: one space for each student classroom, plus one space for each noninstructional employee, plus one space for each three students. If a sports stadium is included on the site, the off-street parking for such use as provided in this section shall be required in lieu of the above requirements, if greater. 
(29)  Service stations, gasoline: two spaces per each service bay (other than those normally provided for pump islands), or a minimum of two spaces plus one space for each 250 square feet of gross building area (excluding the service bay). 
(30)  Shopping centers: 51/2 spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross leasable area, exclusive of floor area used for a multiscreen theatre. When a multiscreen theatre is located in a shopping center, the off-street parking requirement for such theatre shall be computed independently of and in addition to the parking requirements for the shopping center; however, the number of spaces provided for the theatre, based on such computation, may be reduced by 20 percent. 
(31)  Showroom-type establishments, including stores for the retail sale of furniture, major appliances and household equipment, or other similar showroom-type establishments: one space per each 700 square feet of gross floor area. 
(32)  Stadiums and sports arenas: one space for each four seats, plus one space for each employee. 
(33)  Supermarkets: one space per each 150 square feet of gross floor area. 
(34)  Theatres, auditoriums and other places of assembly having fixed seats: one space for each three seats, plus one space for each employee. 
(35)  Warehousing: one space per 2,000 square feet of gross leasable area, plus one space per employee. 
(36)  Uses not specifically mentioned: for any use not specifically mentioned in this section, the requirements for off-street parking for a use which is so mentioned and to which the said use is similar shall apply. 
(37)  Mixed uses: in the case of mixed uses, other than shopping centers, the total requirement for off-street parking shall be the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately. 
(Code 1999, § 102-47; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-17), 12-19-1994; Ord. No. 2006-04, pt. 1, 6-19-2006) 
Sec. 102-36. - Number of handicap parking spaces. 
    The number of handicap spaces to be provided shall be consistent with the requirements of F.S. § 316.1955, as amended. 
(Code 1999, § 102-48; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-18), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 102-37. - Off-street loading. 
    Spaces to accommodate off-street loading needs for materials customarily associated with commercial, industrial, institutional and other similar uses shall be provided as required below. 
(Code 1999, § 102-49; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-21), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 102-38. - Number of loading spaces required. 
(a)  Every hospital, institution, hotel, commercial or industrial building, or similar use, having a floor area in excess of 10,000 square feet requiring the receipt or distribution by vehicle of materials and merchandise, shall have at least one permanently maintained off-street loading space for each 10,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof. 
(b)  Retail operations, wholesale operations and industrial operations, with a gross floor area of less than 10,000 square feet, shall provide sufficient space (not necessarily a full berth). 
(Code 1999, § 102-50; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-22), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 102-39. - Loading space size. 
    Each space shall have a minimum length of 30 feet, a minimum width of 12 feet and a minimum vertical clearance of 14 feet. 
(Code 1999, § 102-51; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-23), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 102-40. - Loading space access. 
    Each space shall be provided with adequate area for maneuvering, ingress and egress and shall have direct access to an alley or street. 
(Code 1999, § 102-52; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-24), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 102-41. - Loading space and circulation design standards. 
    Loading areas shall be designed in accordance with section 102-34. 
(Code 1999, § 102-53; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-25), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 102-42. - Queuing. 
    Certain uses shall be provided with a queuing lane which is a one-way aisle that provides a waiting area for vehicles utilizing drive-through establishments. The queuing area shall meet the criteria listed below in order to avoid unsafe traffic conditions and congestion on public streets and private access driveways: 
(1)  Each queuing lane must be clearly defined and designed so as not to conflict or interfere with other traffic utilizing the site. 
(2)  A bypass lane a minimum of ten feet wide shall be provided if one-way traffic flow pattern is used in the parking lot. The bypass lane shall be clearly designated and distinct from the queuing area. 
(3)  Where turns are required in the exit lane, the minimum distance from any transaction station to the beginning point of the curve shall be 34 feet. The minimum inside turning radius shall be 25 feet. 
(4)  The minimum number of required queuing spaces, including the vehicle being serviced, shall be as provided in the table entitled Queuing Requirements for Drive-Throughs. Each queuing space shall be a minimum of ten feet by 20 feet in size. Unless otherwise indicated, queuing shall be measured from the point of ultimate service to the rear of the queuing lane. 
_____
QUEUING REQUIREMENTS FOR DRIVE-THROUGHS 
Land Use Number of Queuing Spaces 
for Each Drive-Through Lane Drive-through financial institution 5 Drive-through restaurant 7 Minimum before menu board 4 Drive-through car wash Automatic 5 Self service 3 Drive-through oil change 4 Gasoline pump at service station 30 ft. of queuing from each 
end of pump island Drive-through convenience store 3 Drive-through dry cleaning or laundry 3 Drive-through general retail (bakery, photo lab, etc.) 4  
(Code 1999, § 102-54; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-26), 12-19-1994) 
_____
Secs. 102-43-102-72. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ACCESS LOCATION, CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS AND INTERSECTION VISIBILITY 

Sec. 102-73. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate access to parking lots from streets. This article shall be construed and implemented to create efficient and safe access to sites, regulate minimum distances between intersections, and provide for clear visibility at intersections and access points. 
(Code 1999, § 102-81; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-30), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 102-74. - Requirements for permitted access points. 
    The number and location of access points shall be as follows: 
(1)  All lots or parcels having access to a public right-of-way under the regulatory jurisdiction of the state or county shall conform with the access location and design requirements of the appropriate governmental entity. 
(2)  All lots and parcels having access to a public right-of-way under the regulatory jurisdiction of the city shall conform with the following requirements: 
a.  Except for single-family and two-family lots and those lots excluded within an approved mobile home park or subdivision, driveways, measured at the right-of-way line, shall be a minimum width of 15 feet for one-way traffic and 24 feet for two-way traffic; provided that no single curb-cut shall be wider than 50 feet measured at the outside of the curbline. 
b.  Not more than one curb-cut shall be made or shall exist for each separately-owned business or business property having an abutting frontage of 100 feet or less. For each additional 100 feet of street frontage or major fractional portion thereof, one additional curb-cut may be installed. 
c.  Driveways for all single-family, two-family and mobile home lots or parcels shall be measured at the right-of-way line, shall be a minimum width of ten feet for one car space and a maximum of 22 feet for two car spaces. Driveways shall be a measured minimum of four feet from the side or real property line. 
d.  For all single-family, two-family and mobile home lots or parcels, no curb break or driveway shall be located in any side easement except to transverse the easement nor within 25 feet of any intersection measured from the closest edge of the driveway to the street right-of-way line of the side street. 
e.  Driveways accessing nonresidential development shall be at least 50 feet apart measured from the closest driveway edge of the right-of-way line and located not closer than 30 feet from the nearest street intersection measured at its nearest right-of-way line. 
(3)  Adjacent developments may share a common access point, provided that appropriate access easements are granted between or among adjacent property owners in a form acceptable to the city. 
(Code 1999, § 102-82; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-31), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 102-75. - Construction requirements for curbs, curb cuts and driveways. 
(a)  At each side of the curb-cut, there shall be constructed curbing following the edge of the driveway or entrance across the parkway, which curbing shall run from the street to the sidewalk, and the top of which curbing shall be in a plane common with the top of the street curb and the sidewalk. In no case, however, shall a driveway or curb-cut be permitted to encroach upon the curb return of any intersection. 
(b)  The entire portion of the drive or entrance from the street pavement to the edge of the sidewalk shall be paved with concrete or asphalt pavement at least equal to that required for secondary roads by the state department of transportation. 
(c)  Except as otherwise required above, the plans shall conform to or meet the requirements of the specifications and policies of the state department of transportation as to curb-cuts or turnouts including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, curb transitions, minimum distances between turnouts, minimum distances from property line, and return on corner lots. 
(d)  Driveways which intersect or abut streets under the control or jurisdiction of the state and the county shall be constructed in accordance with the construction standards and details of the state department of transportation. 
(e)  Every landowner whose existing driveway is being used, and every landowner on whose land a structure is being constructed which will use a driveway, and which driveway crosses or will cross a swale located on a city street right-of-way, shall pave the driveway with asphalt or concrete, in accordance with the specifications adopted by the city by resolution. An existing unpaved driveway apron shall be paved from the edge of the paved street to the edge of the landowner's property. The adjacent landowner shall be required to pay the cost of said driveway apron paving. The adjacent landowner shall pave the unpaved driveway apron not later than February 1, 2019. A driveway constructed with a new structure shall be paved not later than the completion of the structure and prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. When a permit is issued for improvements, excluding repairs, and the value of the improvements are $2,500.00 or more, an existing unpaved driveway shall be paved not later than the completion of the improvements. 
(f)  Every landowner whose existing driveway is being used, and every landowner on whose land a structure is being constructed which will use a driveway and which driveway crosses or will cross a swale located on a city street right-of-way, shall install a culvert in the ditch for the driveway in accordance with the specifications adopted by the city by resolution. A culvert shall be installed for an existing driveway concurrently with the paving of the adjacent street, or if no street paving project is in progress, not later than February 1, 2019. A culvert shall be installed in a new driveway constructed with a new structure not later than the completion of the new structure. 
(Code 1999, § 102-83; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-32), 12-19-1994; Ord. No. 2010-05, § 1, 1-24-2011; Ord. No. 2014-01, § 1, 9-15-2014; Ord. No. 2017-21, § 1, 1-22-2018) 
Sec. 102-76. - Permits required for construction. 
    It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to cut, alter, deface, repair, or construct any curb or curbing without having first obtained a permit for such work as required by this article. 
(Code 1999, § 102-84; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-33), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 102-77. - Application for permit required. 
    An applicant for a permit under this article shall file with the city manager an application showing: 
(1)  Name and address of owner of the property abutting the curb upon which the work is proposed. 
(2)  Name of the party doing the proposed work. 
(3)  Attached plans showing details of the proposed work. 
(Code 1999, § 102-85; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-34), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 102-78. - Permit issuance; work to follow plans; deviations; completion of work by city. 
    Whenever an application has met the foregoing requirements and restrictions and the approval of the district engineer of the state department of transportation has been obtained (where the curb is on a state highway), a permit shall be issued, and thereafter the work shall be performed in accordance with the plans attached to the application. If upon an inspection of the work, either in progress, or after completion, the city manager should find that a deviation from the plans has occurred, it shall be the duty of the owner of the abutting property for whose interest or convenience the curb-cut was made to immediately correct such deviation so as to conform to the plans as submitted and approved. Should the property owner fail to correct such deviation after receiving notice and a reasonable time in which to perform, the city shall have the work performed and shall assess the cost thereof, including a reasonable charge for supervision, to such owner, and the same shall be a lien upon the abutting property until paid. 
(Code 1999, § 102-86; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-35), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 102-79. - Clearing of site; safeguards; bond. 
    Every applicant to whom a permit has been issued hereunder shall be responsible for clearing from the site any trash or rubble caused by such curb-cut, and shall, during the time required to complete the work, erect adequate safeguards and barriers to protect vehicles and pedestrians from any injury caused by the performance of such work, or by the work being in progress. If the nature of the work is such that in the opinion of the city manager there is any unusual hazard to the public, he may require, prior to issuance of the permit, that the applicant furnish a bond in the penal sum of not less than $10,000.00 conditioned to save the city harmless from all such claims for damages or injury arising out or by reason of such work. 
(Code 1999, § 102-87; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-36), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 102-80. - Duty of owner as to sidewalks used in turnouts. 
    Whenever a curb-cut shall be made, and the turnout is thereafter used for vehicular traffic, it shall be the responsibility of the owner of the abutting property to maintain in a good condition the sidewalks over which any part of the vehicular traffic passes or could pass by virtue of using such turnouts. When any sidewalk shall have been damaged, it shall be repaired or replaced, as the necessity requires, by the property owner at his own expense, if in the opinion of the city such sidewalk has been damaged to an extent as to become hazardous to pedestrians. Failure or refusal of the property owner to comply with the requirements of this section within ten days after receiving notice from the city manager shall be deemed a violation of this article and thereafter the city shall have the right to repair or replace such damaged sidewalk and to charge the reasonable cost thereof to the property owner. 
(Code 1999, § 102-88; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-37), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 102-81. - Street connections, intersections and offset intersections. 
    Local street connections to a street designated as a collector street on the future traffic circulation map of the comprehensive plan shall have a minimum spacing of 200 feet, centerline. Intersections which warrant traffic signalization shall be spaced a minimum distance of 1,300 feet, centerline to centerline. Connection of local streets to arterial streets may be permitted by the city manager or other approval authority when other access is unavailable. Street intersections with centerline off-sets of less than 125 feet are prohibited. 
(Code 1999, § 102-89; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-38), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 102-82. - Required minimum clear visibility triangles. 
    Minimum clear visibility triangles shall be provided as follows on private-owned property adjacent to intersections formed by private driveways and streets; and when such property is adjacent to two or more streets in accordance with the following design standards: 
(1)  Where a driveway intersects a street right-of-way, visibility triangles shall be created on both sides of the driveway. Two sides of the triangle shall extend not less than ten feet each way from the point of intersection of the driveway pavement and the public right-of-way. The third side of the triangle shall be a line connecting the ends of the other two sides (see Figure 2 below). 
(2)  Where a property abuts the intersection of two street rights-of-way, a visibility triangle shall be created at such intersection in addition to visibility triangles as may be required for driveways. Two sides of the triangle provided at an intersection shall extend not less than 25 feet along the edge of pavement of both streets, measured from their point of intersection or point of intersection established when said lines are extended in a straight line so as to intersect. The third side of the triangle shall be a line connecting the ends of the other two sides (see Figure 2). 

(3)  Alternative clear visibility triangles may be required in individual cases if they are deemed necessary to the community development director to ensure adequate traffic safety. If alternative safe distance triangles are required, they shall result in traffic safety which is equivalent or superior to the minimum requirements of this subsection. 
(Code 1999, § 102-90; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-39), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 102-83. - Maintenance of clear visibility triangles. 
    The clear visibility triangles described in section 102-82 shall be maintained as follows: 
(1)  In order to provide safe access to or egress from rights-of-way or driveways, the clear visibility triangle shall be maintained in a way that provides unobstructed visibility at a level between 24 inches and six feet above the crown of the adjacent roadway. 
(2)  Vegetation shall be trimmed so that no limbs or foliage extend into the required visibility area. 
(3)  Vegetation shall not be planted, nor shall improvements or devices such as bus benches or shelters or newspaper vending machines, be located in a clear visibility area in a way that creates a traffic hazard. 
(4)  Landscaping shall be located in accordance with the roadside recovery area provisions of the state department of transportation's Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design, Construction, and Maintenance of Streets and Highways (commonly known as the DOT Green Book), as amended. 
(5)  No parking spaces may be established within the required safe clear visibility triangular areas. 
(Code 1999, § 102-91; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-40), 12-19-1994) 
Secs. 102-84-102-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LANDSCAPE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

Sec. 102-110. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish minimum standards for the development, installation, and maintenance of landscape areas without inhibiting creative landscape design, construction and management. This article is further intended to minimize the potential for adverse impacts associated with adjacent land uses of varying intensities. 
(Code 1999, § 102-121; Ord. No. 2005-13, pt. 2, 12-19-2005) 
Sec. 102-111. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to the development, redevelopment, rehabilitation, and maintenance of all property within present or future incorporated areas of the city that are subject to the provisions of the city's land development code. Exempted from the provisions of this article are: 
(1)  Bona fide agricultural activities. 
(2)  Golf courses and specialized athletic fields. 
(3)  Rights-of-way for public utilities, including electrical transmission/distribution lines. 
(Code 1999, § 102-122; Ord. No. 2005-13, pt. 2, 12-19-2005) 
Sec. 102-112. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Buffer means a landscape area that may include walls, fences, berms, trees, shrubs, hedges, ground cover and other plant materials. 
    Buffer screen means a portion of a buffer which includes a six-foot high, opaque vegetative landscape screen designed and maintained to visually screen a development or portion thereof from adjacent property. 
    Foundation plantings consist of landscape material placed in a minimum of three distinct tiers (e.g., shrubs, ground covers, trees) so as to hide structure foundations from view at eye level from the center of the structure as seen from the adjacent street rights-of-way. Foundation plantings are required to be planted in the front of building structures and shall screen the foundation portions of the structure not covered by driveways or doorways. 
    Ground cover means plant species up to 24 inches upon maturity and may be used in lieu of grass. Lawn grass shall not be considered ground cover. Ground cover must present a finished appearance and reasonably complete coverage at time of planting. 
    Hedge means a row of closely planted shrubs or other vegetative screening forming a boundary or restrictive barrier of a height of 24 inches or more at planting. This vegetation should be 42 inches in height and 80 percent opaque within one year after planting. 
    Impervious area means a surface not allowing the passage of air and water to the root system of trees and other vegetation. Runoff is water applied to the soil or landscape that is not absorbed and flows from the area. A pervious area is a permeable surface area allowing passage of surface water and air to the root system of a tree. A pervious area shall be free of significant amounts of clay, shell, marl, limestone or other road-base material unless expressly permitted in the context thereof but the owner may surface it with turf blocks or similar nontoxic products. 
    Irrigation system means a permanent, supplemental watering system designed to transport and distribute water to plants. 
    Land clearing means any development or other activity that disturbs or alters the land it is located on, except for sodding and minor clearing of underbrush. 
    Landscape plan means a plan prepared in accordance with professional standards meeting the requirements set forth in this landscape code. 
    Landscape strip means a strip containing trees, barriers, ground cover or other plant material as required by this section. 
    Landscaping means and consists of the following or a combination thereof: living plants such as grass, ground cover, shrubs, vines, hedges, or trees; and non-living durable material commonly used in landscaping such as rocks, pebbles, sand, mulch, walls and fences, but excluding paving. Decorative statues or symbols are permissible but shall not substitute for any requirement. 
    Lawn grass includes all species normally grown as permanent lawns in the city. Grass may be sodded, plugged, sprigged or seeded, except that solid sod shall be used on newly developed sites and in areas subject to erosion. In areas where other than solid sod or grass is used, nurse grass seed shall be sown for immediate effect and protection until coverage is otherwise achieved. Grass sod shall be clean and reasonably free of weeds and noxious pests or diseases. 
    Mulch means non-living, organic, or synthetic materials used in landscape design to retard erosion and retain moisture, as well as enrich the soil and reduce soil temperature. 
    New development means the construction of a building or structure on unimproved real property. 
    Nuisance species means species of flora, including, but not limited to, Australian Pine ( Casuarina equisetifolia ), Brazilian Pepper ( Schinus terebinthifolius ), and Punk Tree/Melaleuca ( Melaleuca quinquenervia ), River oak ( Casuarina glauca ) and Giant Sensitive ( Mimosa pigra ). 
    Parking area means all property used for off-street parking, vehicular aisles and access ways, loading zones, interior and perimeter landscaping, and other outdoor vehicular use areas. 
    Renovation development means a development that includes: 
(1)  Additions to existing buildings or structures totaling 25 percent or more of the total gross floor area of all existing buildings or structures on the site inclusive of any additions made during the previous three years; or 
(2)  Improvements to existing buildings and site improvements consisting of any combination of repairs, reconstruction and alteration to a building or site the cumulative costs equal or exceed $25,000.00. 
    Restoration plan means a landscape plan required to address violations of this landscape code and prepared in accordance with the requirements outlined herein. 
    Shade tree means a hardwood tree that locally reaches a minimum height of 25 feet at maturity, and provides relief from direct sunlight for at least six months of the year. 
    Shrub means any woody perennial plant of low height, characterized by multiple stems and branches continuous from the base. Shrubs shall be a minimum of 24 inches in height and have a minimum 12-inch spread or be a three-gallon container size at planting. 
    Tree means a self-supporting, woody, perennial plant, growing locally to a 15 feet or greater height with a minimum mature crown spread of 15 feet or greater. It also has a trunk the owner can maintain with over six feet of clear wood. 
    Visibility triangle means the area of land described as either of the following: 
(1)  The isosceles triangle area of property on each side of a driveway formed by the intersection of the driveway and the public right-of-way line with two sides of each triangle being ten feet in length from the point of intersection and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the two equal length sides; or 
(2)  The triangular area of property located at a corner formed by the intersection of two or more public rights-of-way. Two sides being 25 feet in length along the abutting public right-of-way lines and pavement edges, measured from their point of intersection, and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the two other sides. Refer to the landscaping exhibit A for a visual representation of a visibility triangle. 
    Xeriscape means a type of landscaping utilizing native plants and ground cover and needs little maintenance, which is detailed in the South Florida Water Management District publication, Xeriscape, Plan Guide II, incorporated herein by reference. 
(Code 1999, § 102-123; Ord. No. 2005-13, pt. 2, 12-19-2005) 
Sec. 102-113. - Land clearing and modification. 
    A building permit must be acquired prior to the start of construction or modification to any city land areas except as follows: 
(1)  The installation and maintenance of fire hydrants, water meters, pumping stations, and drainage infrastructure by the city or its authorized contractors. 
(2)  Removal of trees and groundcover in emergencies involving immediate danger to life or property or substantial fire hazards. 
(3)  Removal of diseased groundcover or trees upon approval by the city community development director. 
(4)  Selective removal of trees or ground covers for purposes of general property and utility maintenance, landscaping or gardening, provided that this exemption shall not apply to any land clearing which eliminates both trees and groundcover from 25 percent of the area of a lot or parcel of land or which includes the use of a bulldozer or similar mechanical equipment. This exception shall not be construed to eliminate the requirement of permits for land clearing for the purpose of developing the property with substantial permanent improvements such as roads, parking, driveways, utilities, or buildings. 
(Code 1999, § 102-124; Ord. No. 2005-13, pt. 2, 12-19-2005) 
Sec. 102-114. - General landscaping requirements. 
    All proposed landscaping, whether required by this chapter or not, shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Landscaping should be used to minimize potential erosion by the use of plant materials which aid in soil and sand stabilization. 
(2)  Landscaping should maximize the shading of streets and off-street parking areas. 
(3)  The use of plant materials indigenous to the area is recommended. Plants which are not adaptable to the area because of cultural requirements, such as additional or supplemental water, herbicides, pesticides or fertilizers, shall not be used. 
(4)  All vegetation to be planted shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  All plants shall be Florida Grade No. 1 or better in accordance with Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants (GSNP), published by the State Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services. Nursery stock shall be in accordance with minimum requirements of the American Standards for Nursery Stock (ASNS), published by the American Association of Nurserymen. 
b.  Plants shall be sound, healthy, vigorous, free from mutilation, plant diseases, insect pests or their eggs, and fungus, and shall have healthy, normal root systems. Plants shall be nursery grown stock in containers or freshly dug, balled and burlapped. 
c.  Caliper measurement, height measurement, height relation to caliper, spread, bare root and ball dimensions, number of canes, types of vines and ground covers, etc., shall conform to the applicable standards given in the American Standards for Nursery Stock published by the American Association of Nurserymen, Inc. 
d.  Trees shall be a minimum of 11/2-inch diameter at breast height by ten feet in height, installed. In case of palms, the height shall be six feet from the ground elevation to the base of the fronds. When palms are used in internal landscaped areas to meet the requirements of this article, three palms shall be used for each tree required. Trees shall not be planted any closer than three feet from the edge of any landscaped area within and along the edges of parking areas and ingress/egress points. Trees shall require a minimum area of 25 square feet per tree. 
e.  Shrubs, when installed, shall be a minimum of 24 inches high for internal landscaped areas of parking areas, and for landscaped strips lying between parking areas, public rights-of-way, and private roads. Shrubs shall be a minimum of 36 inches high for buffers where a continuous hedge is required. 
f.  Vines shall be of a size reasonably expected to become a minimum of 30 inches high one year after planting. Vines shall be used in conjunction with walls and fences to meet the minimum landscaping screening requirements. 
g.  Ground covers other than grass shall be planted in such a manner as to provide reasonably complete coverage within one year after planting. 
h.  Grass species shall be a species appropriate to stabilize the site location or shall be grasses that require minimal water, pesticides and fertilizers of the types which are normally grown for water conservation-minded lawns. Turf establishment areas may be sodded, plugged, or sprigged, except solid sod must be used on newly developed sites and solid sod or ground cover is required for slopes greater than a 4:1 ratio of horizontal to vertical distance, (i.e., a slope of greater than 25 percent). 
(5)  All landscaped areas shall be provided with an irrigation system or reliable water supply within 25 feet. Rain sensors shall be installed on all irrigation systems. The irrigation requirement shall be waived if xeric landscaping is provided and a water supply is available within 100 feet of all areas where xeric material is used. 
(6)  Where berms are used within a landscaped area, ground slopes shall not exceed a 3:1 slope, and shall be completely covered with vegetation. 
(7)  Landscaping materials shall meet the requirements of clear visibility triangles provided for in section 102-82. 
(8)  It shall be unlawful to plant the following trees: 
a.  Punk tree ( Melaleuca quinquenervia ); 
b.  Ear tree ( Enterolobium cyclocarpum ); 
c.  Cajeput tree ( Melaleuca lencadendia ); 
d.  Beefwood ( Causarina Cunninghamiana ); 
e.  Brazilian pepper ( Schenus teremfinthi folius ); 
f.  Australian pine ( Casuarina spp.); 
g.  Eucalyptus ( Eucalyptus spp.); or 
h.  Laurel fig ( Ficus microcarpa ) or Ficus ( Ficus spp.) 
If such trees exist on-site at the time of development or major reconstruction/redevelopment, they must be removed by the applicant. A permit is not required for their removal. 
(9)  An opaque, minimum six-foot high masonry wall or wood fence shall screen the location of all commercial trash receptacles, including dumpsters. A hedge shall be installed around the perimeter of this screen. Where possible, dumpsters shall be sited so as not to be visible from the public right-of-way. Gates shall be used to screen trash receptacles from view from the public right-of-way. 
(10)  Visibility triangles. All landscaping within a visibility triangle shall provide unobstructed cross-visibility at a level between two feet and six feet above ground level. The city shall allow trees or palms having limbs and foliage trimmed so no limbs or foliage extends into the cross-visibility area provided the location does not itself create a traffic hazard. Within a visibility triangle, the owner shall not locate landscaping except grass or ground cover closer than three feet from the edge of any driveway pavement. Refer to section 102-82. 
(Code 1999, § 102-125; Ord. No. 2005-13, pt. 2, 12-19-2005) 
Sec. 102-115. - Minimum landscape requirements for zoning districts. 
(a)  R-1A, R-1B, R-1C and R-2 zoning districts. Each plot shall have a minimum of: 
(1)  One existing or planted tree for every 2,500 square feet of plot area or fraction thereof, not utilized for structures or impervious area. A minimum of one tree shall be located in the front yard and a minimum of one tree shall be located in the rear yard of each single unit or duplex. 
(2)  The front and side yard tree requirement may be waived by the community development director if the plot preserves existing trees and underlying vegetation in a substantial portion (50 percent of front yard setback) in front or side yard setback area. 
(3)  Foundation plantings are required. 
(4)  Corner lots shall contain a minimum of one shade tree and four shrubs in the required street side yard in addition to other requirements of this section. 
(5)  Turf establishment must be solid sod. 
(b)  R-3, RM-1 and RM-2 zoning districts. Each plot shall have a minimum of: 
(1)  One tree and five shrubs for every 2,000 square feet of plot area, or portion thereof, not utilized for structures, outdoor storage, or vehicular use areas. A minimum of 50 percent of these trees shall be shade trees. 
(2)  Foundation plantings are required. 
(3)  Multifamily development shall provide a landscaped strip of land not less than ten feet wide between building walls and parking areas. Landscape materials shall be provided as follows: 
a.  The greater of one tree for every 20 linear feet of required landscape perimeter area, or one tree for every 200 square feet of planting area or a major portion thereof. Not less than 50 percent of trees, located between the building walls and parking areas shall be shade trees; and 
b.  A hedge or other durable landscape barrier not less than 24 inches in height at installation placed in a continuous manner along the building walls. 
(4)  Turf establishment must be solid sod. 
(c)  Commercial (C) and Industrial (I) zoning districts. Each plot shall have a minimum of: 
(1)  One tree and five shrubs for every 1,000 square feet of plot area, or portion thereof, not utilized for structures, outdoor storage, or vehicular use areas in addition to landscaping required in other portions of this chapter. A minimum of 50 percent of these trees shall be shade trees. 
(2)  Foundation plantings are required. 
(3)  Turf establishment must be solid sod. 
(d)  Special provisions. 
(1)  In all districts where a planting strip or roadway median is designated or required, landscaping shall be installed in the median or planting easement of a minimum of one tree per 40 lineal feet. 
(2)  Common areas, including dedicated parks and recreation areas, shall have a minimum of one tree for each 1,000 square feet of site area or portion thereof, not utilized for structures or vehicular use areas. 
(3)  The community development director may grant special written permission to allow the planting of trees or shrubs less than the required sizes outlined in this article if quality plants, such as state department of agriculture "Florida Fancy" grade, are used; or, if a greater number of plants than the minimum number required by the ordinance are planted. However, the increased number of trees that may be required shall not exceed 50 percent of those otherwise required by this article. No such permitted tree shall be less than six feet in height, nor shall any permitted shrub be less than nine inches in height by 18 inches in width at the time of planting. Written approval for such deviation shall be obtained prior to the planting of such trees and/or shrubs. 
(Code 1999, § 102-126; Ord. No. 2005-13, pt. 2, 12-19-2005) 
Sec. 102-116. - Landscape design and planting plan. 
(a)  Site designs and landscape construction documents shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of applicable state statutes. The plan shall consider natural drainage features to minimize runoff. The use of pervious surfaces and areas is preferred; therefore impervious surfaces and materials within the landscaped area shall be limited to borders, sidewalks, step stones, and other similar materials, and shall not exceed 25 percent of the landscaped area. 
(b)  All invasive exotic plant species shall be removed from each site prior to the beginning of construction. For purposes of determining plant species to remove, refer to Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services "Noxious Weeds" Rule, F.A.C. ch. 5B-57, and Department of Environmental Protection "Prohibited Plants" Rule, F.A.C. ch. 62C-52 
(c)  Gravel, river rock, shell and similar materials shall not be used as a major landscape ground cover or mulch. Small amounts of these materials may be used around pool areas, in select beds, or as part of a french-drain system. In no case may these materials occupy over five percent of the landscape surface area as they increase the need for herbicide use, have low habitat value, reflect rather than absorb heat, and do not produce oxygen like plants do. 
(d)  For single-family and duplex homes that are not part of a larger planned development, conceptual drawings by the owner or a landscape designer will be acceptable. The concept plan shall reflect all pertinent dimensions and clearly delineate the location and size of all landscape materials and shall designate plantings by name and shall locate the plant material to be installed. For all others, landscape design and planting plans must accurately identify and locate, but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  New and existing trees, shrubs, ground covers and turf areas within the developed landscape area. 
(2)  Plants by common name, spacing, and quantities of each type of plant by container size. 
(3)  Property lines, streets and street names. 
(4)  Driveways, sidewalks and other hardscape features as necessary. 
(5)  Pools, fountains, fences and retaining walls. 
(6)  Existing and proposed buildings. 
(7)  Indicate in a table the total square footages of the various landscape hydrozones on the plan. If more than one water meter serves the site, the total hydrozone square footages of the various hydrozones must be identified with each point of connection (POC) and meter providing water service. 
(8)  The property owner shall not place impervious areas within five feet of the base of an existing tree. 
(9)  The property owner shall design and install mulch in all planting areas to a depth of two to three inches. The type of mulch shall be specified on the landscape plan. 
(10)  For all development projects, the developer shall provide legal mechanisms insuring the protection of landscaping after building construction has occurred on the site. Such mechanisms may include, but are not limited to, conservation easements, common open space, tree protection easements, deed restrictions, and homeowner association documents. 
(Code 1999, § 102-127; Ord. No. 2005-13, pt. 2, 12-19-2005) 
Sec. 102-117. - Off-street parking areas. 
(a)  Off-street parking areas in excess of 1,500 square feet or five off-street parking spaces shall have at least ten square feet of interior landscaping for each parking space, excluding those spaces abutting a perimeter for which landscaping is required by other provisions of this division. Other vehicular use areas in excess of 1,500 square feet shall have ten square feet of landscaped area for each 500 square feet or fraction thereof of vehicular use area. 
(b)  Each separate landscaped area shall contain a minimum of 100 square feet, with a minimum dimension of at least five feet, and shall include at least one tree, with the remaining area adequately landscaped with shrubs, ground cover or other landscaping material. The total number of trees shall not be less than one for each 100 square feet or fraction thereof of required interior landscaping area. Number of tree species shall be determined as reflected in table 102-1 in this section. Such landscaped areas shall be located in such a manner as to divide and break up the expanse of paving and at strategic points to guide traffic flow and direction. Where a landscaped area between abutting tiers of parking is provided, one tree shall be provided for each 50 linear feet of such landscaped area. 
(c)  Not less than 50 percent of the required landscaping for a multifamily residential development and for all other nonresidential development shall be interior landscaping. However, in vehicular use areas where the strict application of this article will seriously limit the function of the area, such as off-street loading areas, the required landscaping may be located near the perimeter of the paved area. Such required interior landscaping which is relocated as provided in this subsection shall be in addition to the perimeter landscaping requirements. 
(d)  The front of a vehicle may encroach upon any interior landscaped area or walkway when the area is at least 31/2 feet in depth per abutting parking space and protected by motor vehicle stops or curbing. Two feet of such landscaped area or walkway may be part of the required depth of each abutting parking space. 
(e)  Trees shall have a minimum spread of five feet at planting. 
(f)  Plant materials used in conformance with the provisions of this landscape code shall conform to the most recent standards outlined by the Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants, Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, February 1998 (on file at the planning and community development department). Grass sod shall be clean and reasonably free of weeds and noxious pests or diseases. 
(g)  The owner shall not plant closer than 12 feet thereto tree species identified by the community development director as likely to cause damage to public roadways, public facilities or building foundations. The owner may only plant them if the tree root system is completely contained within a container or barrier five feet square and five feet deep. The construction requirements shall be four inch thick concrete reinforced with No. 6 road mesh (six by six by six) or equivalent. 
(h)  Trees of species whose canopy could be damaged by, or could cause damage to, overhead power lines shall not be planted closer than a horizontal distance of 12 feet from such overhead power lines. 
(i)  Vines shall be a minimum of 30 inches in height at planting. The owner may use them in conjunction with fences, screens, or walls to meet physical barrier requirements. 
(j)  If the owner uses ground cover instead of grass, he shall plant it to present a finished appearance and reasonably complete coverage within three months of installation. All landscaped areas shall be sodded or otherwise covered with ground cover. 
(k)  The owner shall plant grass areas in species locally grown as permanent lawns. The owner may sod, plug, sprig, or seed grass areas, provided he or she uses solid sod in swales or other areas subject to erosion. In areas where solid sod or grass seed is not used, nurse grass seed shall be sown for immediate effect and protection until coverage is otherwise achieved. 
TABLE 102-1 
Required Number 
of Trees Minimum Number 
of Species 1-10 1 11-30 2 31-60 3 61-100 4 101-over 5  
(Code 1999, § 102-128; Ord. No. 2005-13, pt. 2, 12-19-2005) 
Sec. 102-118. - Landscape maintenance. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  The owner or lawful occupant of real property landscaped as new development, renovation development, or vacant development pursuant to this landscape code are responsible for the maintenance of required landscaping in a healthy, growing condition. Failure to maintain plantings and other features of a required landscaped area in an attractive and healthy state shall be considered a violation of this article. 
(2)  The owner or the lawful occupant of real property landscaped prior to the effective date of this landscape code are each responsible for the maintenance of all installed landscaping in a healthy, growing condition. Within three months of a determination that a plant or tree is dead, severely damaged or diseased, the plant shall be replaced by the owner or developer in accordance with the standards required in this article. 
(3)  The owner or lawful occupant shall maintain in a neat and orderly appearance, and keep free from refuse and debris all landscaped areas. All walls and fences shall be maintained in good condition so as to present a neat and orderly appearance and shall be kept free from graffiti. 
(4)  The owner or lawful occupant shall prune trees only as necessary to promote healthy growth or to avoid power lines. The owner shall not severely prune or hatrack trees to permanently maintain growth at a reduced height. Pruning shall be accomplished in accordance with current applicable National Arborists' Society Standards. 
(b)  Maintenance of sidewalk areas as public right-of-way. 
(1)  It shall be the responsibility of all property owners to maintain grass and landscaping which exists in street right-of-way swales and easements adjoining their properties. Grass in such areas shall not be allowed to exceed eight inches in height. 
(2)  Grass and landscaping which exist near or around sidewalk areas shall be maintained by adjoining property owners. Sidewalks shall be kept free of grass and weeds and shall be cleaned of sand, dirt and trash. 
(Code 1999, § 102-129; Ord. No. 2005-13, pt. 2, 12-19-2005) 
Sec. 102-119. - Buffers for multifamily, commercial, and industrial development. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  In order to reduce visual, light, and noise impacts, a required buffer shall be located along the length of adjacent private property. 
(2)  The owner shall provide buffers for all developments seeking site plan approval as required by this landscape code. 
(3)  Buffer width requirements. Except where the side or rear yards are smaller than the outlined buffer width requirements, the buffer width requirements for one-story developments are: 
TABLE 102-2 
ABUTTING SINGLE-FAMILY OR TWO-FAMILY ZONING DISTRICT 
Type of Use Side Yard (Ft.) Rear Yard (Ft.) Multifamily, 0.5 acre or less 15 20 Multifamily > 0.5 acres 25 25 Commercial 25 25 Industrial 30 30  
(b)  Where the side or rear yards are smaller than the outlined buffer width requirements: 
(1)  Multifamily residential uses shall have buffers consisting of 40 percent of each of the side and rear yard widths; 
(2)  Commercial and other nonresidential uses (other than industrial) shall have buffers consisting of 75 percent of each of the side and rear yard widths; and 
(3)  Industrial uses shall have buffers consisting of 90 percent of each of the side and rear yard widths. 
(c)  Multi-story developments. For multi-story developments, the buffer width is an additional ten feet for each additional or upper story, where applicable. 
(d)  Buffer landscaping. 
(1)  A buffer shall consist of landscaping to include a buffer screen. 
(2)  The width of a buffer screen shall be 25 percent of the width of the required buffer. 
(3)  A fence or wall included in a buffer shall be constructed to present a finished appearance to neighboring uses looking onto the site. 
(4)  The owner may provide an opening through a buffer area to facilitate pedestrian or vehicular traffic between developments subject to the approval of the community development director. 
(5)  Excluding the buffer screen area, a dry retention area may be located in a buffer. Existing plant material within a dry retention area shall not be credited toward meeting the landscape requirements of this landscape code. 
(Code 1999, § 102-130; Ord. No. 2005-13, pt. 2, 12-19-2005) 
Sec. 102-120. - Permit application procedures. 
    Before the development of any open space or vehicular use area, multifamily and nonresidential development, a permit from the community development department shall be required. The landscape plan shall be submitted and approved as part of the site plan approval process, before the issuance of a building permit. Such a landscape plan shall be prepared in accordance with professional standards meeting the requirements set forth in this landscape code and shall accompany all applications for site plan approval. 
(Code 1999, § 102-131; Ord. No. 2005-13, pt. 2, 12-19-2005) 
Sec. 102-121. - Appeals. 
(a)  A person aggrieved by an administrative order, determination or decision of the community development director regarding the provisions of this article may appeal the order, determination or decision to the city manager. The aggrieved person must notify the city manager, in writing, within five days of the order, decision, or determination. 
(b)  In addition to other remedies and notwithstanding the existence of an adequate remedy at law, the city may seek injunctive relief in the circuit court to enforce the provisions of this article. The city shall be entitled to reasonable attorney's fees and costs, including applicable fees and costs in action where the city is successful in obtaining affirmative relief. 
(c)  A stop work order shall be issued for all sites in violation, upon which construction has been authorized. The city shall issue no further city permits for the subject property or project, or attendant inspections completed, until the owner corrects such violations, or the community development director has accepted a restoration plan. This shall include the certificate of occupancy for the attendant structure. 
(Code 1999, § 102-132; Ord. No. 2005-13, pt. 2, 12-19-2005) 
Secs. 102-122-102-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 102-141. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to ensure that land development activities are undertaken in a manner which considers the capacity of existing stormwater management facilities and management standards of the city, Clewiston Drainage District and South Florida Water Management District, by incorporating, as part of every development project, those facilities and improvements which are designed so as to prevent flooding conditions, erosion and other adverse impacts. 
(Code 1999, § 102-161; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-67), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 102-142. - Applicability. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall be applicable to land development activities other than the construction of one single-family or two-family residences and the placement of one mobile home on a recorded lot within the RM-2 zoning district. 
(b)  If redevelopment of a site occurs, such that existing improvements are removed or demolished so as to reduce the value of the remaining improvements to less than 50 percent of their assessed valuation prior to such removal or demolition, then the site shall be developed in a manner which meets the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1999, § 102-162; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-68), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 102-143. - Stormwater management design standards. 
    To comply with the performance standards in this chapter, the proposed stormwater management system shall conform to the following design standards: 
(1)  All new development activities shall be undertaken in a manner which conforms with the stormwater management level of service standards set forth in chapter 90 with respect to impacts on primary and secondary drainage facilities as well as first floor building elevations. 
(2)  Improvements to existing or construction of proposed roadways within the state system shall meet the state department of transportation standards as set forth in state department of transportation Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design, Construction and Maintenance for Streets and Highways. 
(3)  Detention and retention systems shall be designed in conformance with the CDD and SFWMD Permit Information Manual, volume IV, part B, section 3.2.2. 
(4)  To the maximum extent practicable, natural systems shall be used to accommodate stormwater. 
(5)  The proposed stormwater management system shall be designed to accommodate the stormwater that originates within the development and stormwater that flows onto or across the development from adjacent lands. 
(6)  The proposed stormwater management system shall be designed to function properly for a minimum 20-year life. 
(7)  The design and construction of the proposed stormwater management system shall be certified as meeting the requirement of this article by a professional engineer registered in the state. 
(8)  No surface water may be channeled or directed into a sanitary sewer. 
(9)  The proposed stormwater management system shall be compatible with the drainage systems or drainageways on surrounding properties or streets, taking into account the possibility that substandard systems may be improved in the future. 
(10)  The banks of detention and dry retention areas shall be sloped and planted to prevent erosion. Bank slopes should not exceed a 3:1 ratio. 
(11)  Dredging, clearing of vegetation, deepening, widening, straightening, stabilizing or otherwise altering natural surface waters shall be minimized. 
(12)  Natural surface waters shall not be used as sediment traps during or after development. 
(13)  Water reuse and conservation shall, to the maximum extent practicable, be achieved by incorporating the stormwater management system into irrigation systems serving the development. 
(14)  Vegetated buffers of sufficient width to prevent erosion shall be retained or created along the shore, banks or edges of all natural or manmade surface waters. 
(15)  In phased developments, the stormwater management system for each integrated stage of completion shall be capable of functioning independently as required by this article. 
(16)  All detention and retention basis shall be accessible for maintenance from streets or public rights-of-way. 
(17)  The storm drainage system shall be installed prior to installation of street pavement. 
(18)  Good management practices shall be used when applying fertilizer to reduce the amount of runoff into the stormwater system. 
(19)  The method of pesticide storage and application and disposal of unused chemicals and empty containers shall be such that there shall be minimal runoff of pesticides into the stormwater system. 
(20)  Regular sweeping, vacuuming, flushing and other good cleaning practices shall be utilized in parking lots and other paved vehicular use areas. These practices shall be performed to remove dry weather accumulations or pollutants and fine particulate matter to reduce the impacts upon the stormwater system. 
(21)  Existing development shall comply to the greatest extent feasible with the best management practices not included in this section. 
(Code 1999, § 102-163; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-69), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 102-144. - Dedication. 
    If a stormwater management system approved under this article is located within a public right-of-way and will function as an integral part of the city-maintained system, as determined by the city engineer, the facilities shall be dedicated to the city. 
(Code 1999, § 102-164; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-70(a)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 102-145. - Maintenance by an acceptable entity. 
(a)  All stormwater management systems that are not dedicated to the city shall be operated and maintained by one of the following entities: 
(1)  A local government unit including a county, municipality, or municipal service taxing unit, special district or other governmental unit. 
(2)  An active water control district created pursuant to F.S. ch. 298, or drainage district created by special act, or community development district created pursuant to F.S. ch. 190, or special assessment district created pursuant to F.S. ch. 170. 
(3)  A state or federal agency. 
(4)  An officially franchised, licensed or approved communication, water, sewer, electrical or other public utility. 
(5)  The property owner or developer if: 
a.  Written proof is submitted in the appropriate form by either letter or resolution, that a governmental entity or such other acceptable entity as set forth in subsections (a)(1) through (4) of this section, will accept the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management and discharge facility at a time certain in the future. 
b.  A bond or other assurance of continued financial capacity to operate and maintain the system is submitted to the city and is accepted as being adequate to protect the city from maintenance responsibility and for public liability associated therewith. 
(6)  For-profit or nonprofit corporations, including homeowners' associations, property owners' associations, condominium owners' associations or master associations, if: 
a.  The owner or developer submits documents constituting legal capacity and a binding legal obligation between the entity and the city affirmatively taking responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility. 
b.  The association has sufficient powers reflected in its organizational or operational documents to: 
1.  Operate and maintain the stormwater management system as permitted by the city. 
2.  Establish rules and regulations. 
3.  Assess members. 
4.  Contract for services. 
5.  Exist perpetually with the articles of incorporation, provided that if the association is dissolved, the stormwater management system will be maintained by an acceptable entity as described above. 
(b)  If a project is to be constructed in phases, and subsequent phases will use the same stormwater management facilities as the initial phase or phases, the operation/maintenance entity shall have the ability to accept responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management systems of future phases of the project. 
(c)  In phased developments that have an integrated stormwater management system, but employ independent operation/maintenance entities for different phases, the operation/maintenance entities, either separately or collectively, shall have the responsibility and authority to operate and maintain the stormwater management system for the entire project. That authority shall include cross easements for stormwater management and the authority and ability of each entity to enter and maintain all facilities, should any entity fail to maintain a portion of the stormwater management system within the project. 
(d)  The applicant shall be an acceptable entity and shall be responsible for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management system from the time construction begins until the stormwater management system is dedicated to and accepted by another acceptable entity. 
(Code 1999, § 102-165; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-70(b)), 12-19-1994) 
Secs. 102-146-102-173. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - REQUIREMENTS FOR LOCAL PARK AND RECREATION LAND 

Sec. 102-174. - Applicability. 
    The requirement for local park and recreation land as provided in this article shall be applicable to all new residential developments for which no development order or permit has been issued prior to February 1, 1992, or as may be exempt in accordance with section 102-175. 
(Code 1999, § 102-191; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-74), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 102-175. - Exemptions. 
    The lands exempt from the local park and recreation requirement as set forth in this article shall include any residential development for which platting is not required containing less than five dwelling units provided that no phasing of development is proposed and the five dwelling units comprise the entire development program. 
(Code 1999, § 102-192; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(25-75), 12-19-1994) 
Chapter 106 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Platting generally, F.S. § 177.011 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 106-1. - Declaration of purpose. 
    This chapter is intended to serve the following purposes, among others: 
(1)  Protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city. 
(2)  Encourage economically sound and stable land development. 
(3)  Ensure the provision of required streets, utilities and other facilities and services to new land developments in conformance with public improvement plans of the city. 
(4)  Ensure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in new land developments. 
(5)  Ensure equitable handling of all subdivision plans by providing uniform procedures and standards for observation both by the subdivider and the city. 
(Code 1960, § 27-2; Code 1982, § 17-2; Code 1999, § 106-1) 
Sec. 106-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Block includes the terms "tier" and "group" and means a group of lots existing within well-defined and fixed boundaries, usually being an area surrounded by streets or other physical barriers and having an assigned number, letter, or other name through which it may be identified. 
    Building setback line means a line parallel to a street right-of-way line, shore of a lake, edge of a stream, river bank or canal established on a parcel of land or on a lot for the purpose of prohibiting construction of a building between such line and a right-of-way, other public area or the shore of a lake, or the edge of a stream, river bank or canal. 
    Comprehensive plan means a plan, which may consist of several maps, data and other descriptive matter, for the physical development of the city or any portion thereof, including any amendments, extensions or additions thereto, indicating the general location for major streets, parks or other public open spaces, public building sites, routes for public utilities, zoning districts or other similar information. The comprehensive plan, of which the major thoroughfare plan is a part, shall be based on and include appropriate studies of the location and extent of present and anticipated population, social and economic resources and problems, and other useful data. 
    Crosswalk means a paved right-of-way within a block dedicated to public use, ten feet or more in width, intended primarily for pedestrians and from which motor propelled vehicles are excluded and which is designed to improve or provide access to adjacent roads or lots. 
    Cul-de-sac means a street terminated at the end of a vehicular turn. 
    Easement means a grant by the property owner for the use by the public, a utility company, a corporation or persons of a strip of land for special purposes. 
    Final plat means a finished drawing of a subdivision showing completely and accurately all legal and engineering information and certification necessary for recording. 
    Health department and health officer mean the county health department and its designated agent. 
    Lot means a portion of a subdivision, or any other parcel of land, intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for development or both. In determining the area and dimensions of a lot, no part of the right-of-way of a road or crosswalk may be included but includes tract or parcel, and means the least fractional part of subdivided lands having limited fixed boundaries, and an assigned number, letter, or other name through which it may be identified. 
(1)  Lot depth means the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured along the median between the side lot lines. 
(2)  Lot width means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at the setback line and at right angles to the lot depth. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
    Lot, double frontage, means a lot other than a corner lot abutting upon two or more streets. 
    Planning board means the city planning board. 
    Plat or replat means a map indicating the subdivision or resubdivision of land, intended to be filed for record. 
    Preliminary plat means a drawing which shows the proposed layout of a subdivision in sufficient detail to indicate unquestionably its workability in all aspects, but is not in final form for recording and the details are not completely computed. 
    Street means a dedicated and accepted right-of-way for vehicular traffic which affords the principal means of access to abutting property, whether designated as highway, parkway, thoroughfare, lane, road, boulevard, avenue, place or otherwise. The following are definitions intended to distinguish between different categories of streets: 
(1)  Arterial streets and highways are those which are used primarily for fast or heavy traffic. 
(2)  Collector streets are those which carry traffic from minor streets to the major system of arterial streets and highways, including the principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within such a development. 
(3)  Minor streets, including loop streets and cul-de-sacs, are used primarily for access to the abutting properties. 
(4)  Marginal access streets are minor streets which are parallel to and adjacent to arterial and collector streets which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic (referred to as frontage road). 
(5)  Alleys or service drives are minor, permanent, public service ways which are used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting the street. 
    Subdivider means any person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate or trust, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as herein defined, including any agent of a subdivider. 
    Subdivision means any division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land, regardless of how it is to be used, either by platting or by metes and bounds into three or more lots, building sites or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, leasing or building development, including all division of land involving the dedication, change or abandonment of a street, site, easement or other right-of-way for any public use or facility. When appropriate to the context, the term "subdivision" shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided. 
(Code 1960, § 27-3; Code 1982, § 17-3; Code 1999, § 106-2) 
Sec. 106-3. - Violations. 
    Any person violating or failing to comply with the terms and provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1960, § 27-25; Code 1982, § 17-4; Code 1999, § 106-3) 
Sec. 106-4. - Variances for hardship. 
    Where the city commission finds that hardships may result from strict compliance with this chapter, it may vary the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that such variation will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the comprehensive plan, chapter 110 or this chapter. 
(Code 1960, § 27-22; Code 1982, § 17-5; Code 1999, § 106-4) 
Sec. 106-5. - Variances for large scale development. 
    The standards and requirements of this chapter may be modified in the case of a plan and program for a complete community or a neighborhood unit, which in the judgment of the city commission provide adequate public spaces and improvements for the circulation, recreation, light, air and service needs of the tract when fully developed and populated and which also provide such covenants or other legal provisions as will ensure conformity to and achievement of the plan. 
(Code 1960, § 27-23; Code 1982, § 17-6; Code 1999, § 106-5) 
Sec. 106-6. - Conditions of variances. 
    In granting variances and modifications, the city commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied or modified. 
(Code 1960, § 27-24; Code 1982, § 17-7; Code 1999, § 106-6) 
Sec. 106-7. - Furnishing utilities prohibited before approval. 
    No public utility services shall be provided for any lot or building in a subdivision until final plat approval is granted by the city commission. 
(Code 1960, § 27-25; Code 1982, § 17-8; Code 1999, § 106-7) 
Sec. 106-8. - Permits, licenses prohibited before approval. 
    No electrical permits, building permits or such other permits, or licenses as may be required by the city, for any construction, shall be issued for any buildings on any lot in a new subdivision until final plat approval is granted by the city commission. 
(Code 1960, § 27-25; Code 1982, § 17-9; Code 1999, § 106-8) 
_____
Sec. 106-9. - Typical certificates. 
    The following typical certificate forms may be used in the administration of this chapter, but the forms set out in this section shall not be mandatory and may be varied to the extent appropriate to the circumstances: 
(1)  Professional surveyor's and mapper's certificate. 
I, the undersigned Professional Surveyor and Mapper, hereby certify that this plat is a true representation of the lands described and shown, to the best of my knowledge and belief, and that Permanent Reference Monuments have been placed as required by the Subdivision Regulations and the Statutes of the State of Florida thereunto appertaining. 
Signature: _____ Name: _____ Name: _____
Professional Surveyor and Mapper Florida Certificate No. _____ Date of Survey: _____  
(2)  Certification of approval of county commission. 
STATE OF FLORIDA ) ) SS COUNTY OF HENDRY )  
It is hereby certified that this plat has been officially approved for record by the Board of County Commissioners of the County of Hendry, Florida, this _____ day of ___________, A.D. 20___. 
APPROVED: 
_____
County Engineer _____
Chairman, Board 
of County Commissioners  
(3)  Certificate of approval of county clerk. 
STATE OF FLORIDA ) COUNTY OF HENDRY ) ) SS  
I, ___________, County Clerk of Hendry County, Florida, hereby certify that this plat has been examined and that it complies in form with all the requirements of the Statutes of Florida pertaining to maps and plats, and that this plat has been filed for record in Plat Book _____, Page _____, Public Records of Hendry County, Florida, this _____ day of ___________, A.D. 20___. 
_____
Clerk, Hendry County, Florida By: _____
Deputy Clerk  
(4)  Plat certification. 
This certifies that this plat was presented to the city commission of the City of Clewiston, Hendry County, Florida, and approved by the said City Commission for record, and the dedication of the streets and public places accepted for municipal purposes of said City on the _____ day of ___________, 20___; provided that this plat is recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Hendry County, Florida, within 90 days from the date of approval by the said Commission. 
(Code 1960, § 27-25; Code 1982, § 17-10; Code 1999, § 106-9) 
Secs. 106-10-106-36. - Reserved. 
_____
ARTICLE II. - PLANS AND PLATS 

Sec. 106-37. - Sketch plan review. 
(a)  Recommended. In order to facilitate efficient review of subdivision plans by the city, it is recommended, although not required, that a sketch plan be prepared prior to preparation of a preliminary plat in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  Prepare a sketch plan and confer with the city manager or designated representative before preparing a preliminary subdivision plan in order to become thoroughly familiar with the subdivision requirements and with the proposals of the city plan affecting the territory in which the proposed subdivision lies. 
(2)  Obtain a concurrency reservation to reserve the appropriate amount of public facilities and services in accordance with the provisions of chapter 90. 
(b)  Contents. The sketch plan may contain the following information: 
(1)  Title, scale, north arrow and date. 
(2)  Outline of general land use areas with approximate density and acreage allocations within the proposed plat. 
(3)  Proposed location of streets within the subdivision and the intended connections to major roads adjacent and nearby the proposed subdivision. 
(4)  Identification of areas surrounding the proposed subdivision. 
(5)  Boundaries of the subdivision indicated by a heavy line. 
(Code 1960, § 27-4; Code 1982, § 17-61; Code 1999, § 106-36; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(17-21), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 106-38. - Plats to be submitted to city manager for review by the planning board and the city commission. 
    Any subdivider of land within the city shall submit to the city manager plats of the subdivision which shall conform to requirements set forth in this chapter. The city manager shall forward the preliminary plat to the planning board for review, with recommendation for its disposition. The planning board shall make a recommendation on the proposed plat and forward such recommendation to the city commission. 
(Code 1960, § 27-5; Code 1982, § 17-22; Code 1999, § 106-37; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(17-22), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 106-39. - Preliminary plat approval and issuance of a concurrency reservation required before commencing construction. 
    No subdivider shall proceed with any construction work on the proposed subdivision, including grading, before obtaining a concurrency reservation in accordance with the provisions of chapter 90, a preliminary plat approval from the city manager, and approval of plans and profiles by the city manager or city commission. 
(Code 1960, § 27-6; Code 1982, § 17-23; Code 1999, § 106-38; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(17-23), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 106-40. - Concurrency reservation required prior to final plat approval. 
    Prior to final plat approval for a proposed subdivision, a finding shall be made by the city manager or his designee that public facilities for traffic, sanitary sewer, solid waste, stormwater drainage, potable water and recreation and open space have sufficient capacity at or above their adopted level-of-service to accommodate the impacts of the proposed development, or that improvements necessary to bring facilities up to their adopted level of service will be in place concurrent with the impacts of the proposed development as provided in chapter 90. 
(Code 1999, § 106-39; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(17-24), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 106-41. - Final plat approval required. 
    No land dedicated as a public street or for any other public purpose shall be opened, extended or accepted as a public street or other purpose, and no subdivision of land shall be made, nor subdivision plat, nor part thereof, recorded before obtaining final approval from the city commission and such approval entered in writing on the final plat by the city clerk. 
(Code 1960, § 27-7; Code 1982, § 17-24; Code 1999, § 106-40; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(17-25), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 106-42. - Approved street condition precedent to building permit. 
    No building permit shall be issued for and no building or other structure shall be erected on any lot within the incorporated city unless the street giving access to a lot upon which such building is proposed to be placed shall be accepted or opened as, or shall have otherwise received the legal status of, a public street prior to that time, or unless such street corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown on a subdivision plat approved by the city commission and the city manager. 
(Code 1960, § 27-8; Code 1982, § 17-25; Code 1999, § 106-41; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(17-26), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 106-43. - Procedure for approval of preliminary plat. 
(a)  City manager or designated representative to forward copies. An application for preliminary plat approval shall include six copies to be submitted to the city manager. He shall forward copies as required to get comments from city departments. 
(b)  City departments to examine forwarded copies. The city manager or designated city engineer shall examine and check the preliminary plat for general engineering and conformance with the provisions of sections 106-47 through 106-50. The community development director shall check the preliminary plat of street numbering and naming. The departments shall, within ten days of receipt of the preliminary plat, forward to the city manager their approval or recommended changes. 
(c)  Review by planning board. The recommendation of the city manager shall be sent with the preliminary plat to the planning board. The planning board shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial to the city commission. 
(d)  Approval by city commission. The recommendation of the preliminary plat by the city manager shall be sent to the city commission. If the city commission approves the preliminary plat without modifications or changes the developer shall be so notified. 
(e)  Modifications. If the city commission approves the plat with modifications, correction or changes acceptable to the developer, the plat shall be altered by the developer to conform with the modifications or changes. 
(f)  Qualifications as to approval. Approval of a preliminary plat is only tentative pending submission of the final plat, which shall be submitted within 12 months. 
(g)  Effect of approval. Receipt by the subdivider of preliminary plat approval is authorization for the subdivider to proceed toward preparation of plans and specifications for minimum improvements and preparation of the final plat. 
(Code 1960, § 27-9; Code 1982, § 17-26; Code 1999, § 106-42; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(17-27), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 106-44. - Application for final plat approval. 
    While the preliminary plat approval is in effect, the subdivider may submit to the city manager 30 days prior to the commission meeting at which it is to be considered an application for review and approval of the final plat which shall consist of: 
(1)  A letter of application requesting review and final approval of the plat by the city commission. 
(2)  Six copies of final plat and other documents as specified in sections 106-47 through 106-50. 
(Code 1960, § 27-10; Code 1982, § 17-27; Code 1999, § 106-43; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(17-28), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 106-45. - Tentative final plat approval. 
(a)  Conformity to preliminary plan. The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved and if desired by the subdivider it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which he proposes to record and develop at the time. 
(b)  Conditions of tentative approval. After acceptance of the final plat by the city manager, as being in conformance with an approved preliminary plan and standards of the city, the plat shall be presented to the planning board for recommendation of approval, approval with conditions, or denial by the city commission. Following receipt of such recommendations, the city commission may tentatively approve the final plat. Final approval may be delayed until all the required improvements are installed or agreements executed to ensure that improvements will be in place concurrent with impacts of the proposed development to the satisfaction and final approval of the city commission. In lieu of the immediate installation of the required improvements, the subdivider shall either: 
(1)  File with the city commission a surety bond conditioned to secure the construction of the improvements listed in article IV of this chapter or improvements necessary to construct the facility or provide the service to ensure that the impacts of the proposed developments falls within the adopted level of service standards in a satisfactory manner and within a time period specified by the city commission, such period not to exceed one year. Such bond shall be executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the state. No such bond shall be accepted unless it is enforceable by or payable to the city in a sum at least 125 percent of the cost of constructing the improvements as estimated by the developer's engineer and approved by the city manager and in conformity with the surety and conditions approved by the city attorney; or 
(2)  Deposit with the city or place in escrow, cash, cashier's check or a certified check in an amount equal to 125 percent of the cost of constructing the improvements as estimated by the developer's engineer. The city manager may release portions of this security deposit as the work progresses to his satisfaction. 
(c)  Approval to be marked on plat. The approval of the city commission shall be indicated on the final plat. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider, only one copy to the city manager and one copy to be retained in the files of the commission. 
(Code 1960, § 27-11; Code 1982, § 17-28; Code 1999, § 106-44; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(17-29), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 106-46. - Final approval of final plat. 
(a)  Duty of subdivider. Upon the findings by the city commission that the subdivider has complied with the applicable state, county and city laws and the provisions of these regulations, and the city commission has given tentative approval to the final plat, the subdivider either shall install all required improvements immediately or deposit any of the surety alternatives specified in section 106-45. 
(b)  Execution of final plat. Following receipt of the surety deposit or notification by the city manager that all required improvements have been installed, whichever occurs first, the city commission may give final approval to the final plat and cause such plat to be properly executed. 
(c)  Copy to be filed. After final approval by the city commission, the subdivider shall file a true copy of the plat as approved within 30 days from the date of such approval with the clerk of the county circuit court. 
(d)  Additional copies required. When the plat has been recorded, four copies thereof shall be filed with the city clerk, who shall distribute one each to the city manager and the community development director, and/or city engineer, and shall retain one for the city commission. 
(e)  Issuance of building permits, certificates of occupancy. No building permit shall be issued until the final plat has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the county circuit court. No temporary or final certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all physical improvements serving the property have been installed in accordance with article IV of this chapter. 
(Code 1960, § 27-12; Code 1982, § 17-29; Code 1999, § 106-45; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(17-30), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 106-47. - Data required for approval of preliminary plat. 
    Every plat or replat of a subdivision submitted to the approving agency of the city must be accompanied by: 
(1)  A boundary survey of the platted lands. However, a new boundary survey for a replat is required only when the replat affects any boundary of the previously platted property or when improvements which may affect the boundary of the previously platted property have been made on the lands to be replatted. The boundary survey must be performed and prepared under the responsible direction and supervision of a professional surveyor and mapper preceding the initial submittal of the plat to the local governing body. This subsection does not restrict a legal entity from employing one professional surveyor and mapper to perform and prepare the boundary survey and another professional surveyor and mapper to prepare the plat. 
(2)  A title opinion of an attorney at law licensed in the state or a certification by an abstractor or a title company showing that record title to the land as described and shown on the plat is in the name of the person, persons, corporation, or entity executing the dedication. The title opinion or certification shall also show all mortgages not satisfied or released of record nor otherwise terminated by law. 
(3)  Topographic data required as a basis for the preliminary plat shall include existing conditions as follows except when otherwise specified by the city manager: 
a.  Boundary lines. Bearings and distance. 
b.  Easements. Location, width and purpose. 
c.  Streets on and adjacent to the tract. Name and right-of-way width and location; type, width and elevation of surfacing; any legally established centerline elevations; walks, curbs, gutters, culverts, etc. 
d.  Utilities on and adjacent to the tract. Location, size and invert elevation of sanitary, storm and combined sewers; locations and size of water mains; location of gas lines, fire hydrants, electric and telephone poles, and street lights; if water mains and sewers are not on or adjacent to the tract, indicate the direction and distance to, and size of nearest ones, showing invert elevation of sewers. 
e.  Ground elevations on the tract. Based on a U.S.C. and G.S. datum plane; show spot elevations at all breaks in grade, along all drainage channels or swales, and at selected points not more than 100 feet apart in all directions. 
f.  Subsurface conditions on the tract, if required. Location and results of tests made to ascertain subsurface soil, rock and ground water conditions; depth to ground water unless test pits are dry at a depth of five feet; location and results of soil percolation tests if individual sewage disposal systems are proposed. 
g.  Other conditions on the tract. Watercourses, marshes, rock outcrops, wooded preserve areas, isolated preservable trees six inches or more in diameter, houses, barns and other significant features. 
h.  Other conditions on adjacent land. Approximate direction and gradient of ground slope, including any embankment or retaining walls; character and location of buildings, railroads, power lines, towers and other nearby nonresidential land uses or adverse influences; owners of adjacent unplatted land; for adjacent platted land refer to subdivision plat by name, plat book and page number, and show typical lot size and dwelling type. 
i.  Zoning. Existing zoning on and adjacent to the tract and proposed zoning, if any. 
j.  Proposed public improvements. Highways and ultimate rights-of-way of abutting roadways and roadways traversing the project shall be provided in accordance with the future traffic circulation map and applicable city, county and state right-of-way standards or other major improvements planned by public authorities for future construction on or near the tract. 
k.  Key map. Showing location of the tract. 
l.  Title and certificates. Present tract designation according to official records in office of appropriate recorder; proposed title under which proposed subdivision is to be recorded, with names and addresses of owners, notation stating acreage, scale, north arrow, datum, bench marks and date of survey. 
(Code 1960, § 27-13; Code 1982, § 17-30; Code 1999, § 106-46; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(17-31), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 106-48. - Scale, contents of preliminary plat. 
    Preliminary plat (preliminary subdivision plan, general subdivision plan) may be at a scale of 200 feet to one inch or larger. It shall show all existing conditions required in section 106-47, topographic data, and shall show the following: 
(1)  Streets. Proposed names, right-of-way and roadway widths; approximate grades and gradients; similar data for alleys, if any. 
(2)  Other rights-of-way or easements. Location, width and purpose. 
(3)  Location of utilities, if not shown on other exhibits. 
(4)  Lot lines, lot numbers and block numbers. 
(5)  Sites, if any, for multifamily dwellings, shopping centers, churches, industry or other nonpublic uses exclusive of single-family dwellings. 
(6)  Site, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for parks , playgrounds or other public uses. 
(7)  Minimum building setback lines. 
(8)  Site data, including number of residential lots, typical lot size, and acres in parks, etc. 
(9)  Title, scale, north arrow and date. 
(Code 1960, § 27-14; Code 1982, § 17-31; Code 1999, § 106-47; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(17-32), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 106-49. - Other preliminary plans may be required. 
    When required by the city manager, the preliminary plat shall be accompanied by profiles showing existing ground surface and proposed street grades, including extensions for a reasonable distance beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision; typical cross sections of the proposed grading, roadway and sidewalk; and preliminary plan of proposed sanitary and storm sewers with grades and sizes indicated. All elevations shall be based on a U.S.C. and G.S. datum plane. 
(Code 1960, § 27-15; Code 1982, § 17-32; Code 1999, § 106-48; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(17-33), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 106-50. - Form, contents of final plat. 
    The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn in ink on a reproducible medium acceptable for recording within the county and at a scale of not smaller than 100 feet to one inch. Individual sheets shall conform to the size as approved by the county for the purpose of recording. Where the final plat of a proposed subdivision requires more than one sheet, each sheet shall be keyed to a master map with appropriate marks of identification. The final plat shall show the following information. 
(1)  Location sketch. Location sketch showing location of subdivision with respect to section or government lot lines. 
(2)  Boundary lines. Boundary lines of the trace with accurate distances measured to hundredths of a foot and angles to 20 seconds. The boundaries shall be determined by accurate survey in the field, which shall be balanced and closed with error closures not to exceed one foot to 7,500 feet. Surveys shall be coordinated and tied into the nearest established section corner by angle and distance. 
(3)  Streets adjoining tract. The exact names, locations and widths along the property lines of all existing or recorded streets intersecting or paralleling the boundaries of the tract. 
(4)  Reference monuments. The accurate location and material of all permanent reference monuments. 
(5)  Street layout. The exact layouts, including street and alley lines, street names, bearings, angles of intersection and widths (including widths along the lines of any obliquely intersection streets), lengths of arcs and radii, points of curvature and tangent bearings; all easements of rights-of-way where provided for or owned by public services; all lot lines with dimensions in feet and hundredths and with bearings or angles of other than right angles to the street or alley lines. 
(6)  Lot numbers. Lots numbered in numerical order beginning with number one in each block and blocks numbered in numerical order or lettered in alphabetical order. 
(7)  Property reserved. The accurate outline of all property which is to be dedicated or reserved for public use including open drainage courses and suitable easements and all property that may be reserved by covenants in deeds for the common use of the property owners in the subdivision, with the purpose indicated thereon. 
(8)  Adjoining subdivisions. Names and locations of adjoining subdivisions, if any, the adjacent portions of which shall be shown in outline form. 
(9)  Acknowledgements. Acknowledgements of the owner or owners and all lienholders to the plat and restrictions, including dedication to public use of all streets, alleys, parks or other open spaces thereon and the granting of the required easements. 
(10)  Private restrictions. Private restrictions and/or trusteeships and their period of existence. Should these restrictions be of such length as to make their lettering on the plat impracticable and thus necessitate the preparation of a separate instrument, reference to such instrument shall be made on the plat. 
(11)  Certificate of professional surveyor or mapper. The certificate of the registered land surveyor attesting to the accuracy of the survey and that the permanent reference monuments have been established according to law. 
(12)  Execution. Space and forms for the following necessary signatures indicating approval: mayor (attested by city clerk) of city commission and clerk of the circuit court. 
(Code 1960, § 27-16; Code 1982, § 17-33; Code 1999, § 106-49; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(17-34), 12-19-1994) 
State Law reference- Requirements for plats made for recording, F.S. § 177.091. 
Secs. 106-51-106-73. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 106-74. - To be observed in all plats. 
    The design standards set forth in this article shall be observed in all plats which are required to be approved by the city. 
(Code 1960, § 27-17; Code 1982, § 17-44; Code 1999, § 106-76) 
Sec. 106-75. - General suitability of land. 
    Land deemed by the city or other public agencies to be unsuitable for residential use shall not be platted for residential occupancy nor shall such land be platted for any other uses as may continue such conditions or increase danger to health, safety, life or property unless adequate methods of correction are formulated by the subdivider and approved by the city manager. 
(Code 1960, § 27-17; Code 1982, § 17-45; Code 1999, § 106-77) 
Sec. 106-76. - Streets. 
(a)  Conformity to plan. The arrangements, character, extent, width and location of all streets shall conform to the master plan and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to public convenience and safety and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. 
(b)  Arrangement. Where such is not shown in any streets or highway plan, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing streets in surrounding areas. 
(c)  Minor streets. Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 
(d)  Separation of through and local traffic. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major street, the city manager may require marginal access streets, double frontage lots with screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property lines, deep lots with rear service drives, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
(e)  Separation of rights-of-way. Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way, or limited access highway right-of-way, the city may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a distance suitable for appropriate use of the intervening land. 
(f)  Intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible, and no intersection shall be at an angle less than 60 degrees. Detailed designs of intersections may be required. 
(g)  Curbline radius. Back of curb radius at street intersections shall be 25 feet or greater if so deemed necessary by the city manager or his designated representative. 
(h)  Street jogs. Street jogs with centerline off-set of less than 125 feet shall not be permitted. 
(i)  Alleys, service drives. Alleys or service drives may be required at the rear of all lots to be used for multifamily, commercial or industrial developments, but shall not be provided in residential blocks except where the subdivision produces evidence satisfactory to the city manager of the need of alleys. 
(j)  Half-streets. Half-streets shall not be permitted. 
(k)  Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets are prohibited except those designed to be so permanently. Permanent dead-end streets shall be no longer than 500 feet and shall be provided at the closed end (cul-de-sac) with a turn-around having a street property line diameter of at least 100 feet. 
(l)  Right-of-way widths. Street right-of-way widths shall be no less than 60 feet with swales or 50 feet with curb and gutter; provided, however, where Avenida del Rio, Caribbean Avenue, Alverdez Avenue and Arroyo Avenue are adjacent to drainage canals, their widths shall be no less than 40 feet. Alleys and service drives shall be no more than 20 feet. 
(m)  Tangents. Between reverse curves there shall be not less than 100 feet. 
(n)  Cul-de-sacs. The minimum widths of lots or cul-de-sacs and inside curves shall not be less than 35 feet. 
(Code 1960, § 27-18; Code 1982, § 17-46; Code 1999, § 106-78) 
Sec. 106-77. - Blocks. 
(a)  Size, shape. The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
(1)  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated. 
(2)  Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions. 
(3)  Needs for convenient access, circulation control and safety of street traffic. 
(4)  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
(b)  Maximum, minimum length. Residential blocks shall not exceed 1,800 feet in length or be less than 500 feet in length. 
(c)  Width. Residential blocks shall be wide enough to provide two tiers of lots of minimum depth, except where frontage on major streets or prevented by topographical conditions or size of property, in which case the city manager may require and/or approve a single tier of lots. 
(Code 1960, § 27-19; Code 1982, § 17-47; Code 1999, § 106-79) 
Sec. 106-78. - Lots. 
(a)  Compliance with zoning requirements. Every residential lot shall conform to the minimum dimensions and area requirements of chapter 110, zoning, provided that every lot not served by a public sewer or community sanitary sewage system and/or public water shall meet the dimension and area requirements of the health officer. 
(b)  Appropriate for use. The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation and the minimum building setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated. 
(c)  Side lot lines; lot to abut street. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be perpendicular or radial to street lines. Each lot line shall abut upon a public street. 
(Code 1960, § 27-20; Code 1982, § 17-48; Code 1999, § 106-80) 
Secs. 106-79-106-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 106-100. - Required. 
    The following improvements, in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the city manager, are required. Every subdivider at his own expense shall be required to install the improvements set out in this article. 
(Code 1960, § 27-21; Code 1982, § 17-59; Code 1999, § 106-106) 
Sec. 106-101. - Availability of standards. 
    All standards referred to in this article shall be found in the office of the city manager. 
(Code 1960, § 27-21; Code 1982, § 17-60; Code 1999, § 106-107) 
Sec. 106-102. - Street grading. 
    All street rights-of-way shall be cleared and graded to standards of the city. Finished grades shall be at levels approved by the city manager. 
(Code 1960, § 27-21; Code 1982, § 17-61; Code 1999, § 106-108) 
Sec. 106-103. - Street paving. 
(a)  Street paving shall be installed according to the following standards. 
(b)  Typical cross sections are available to guide the designer in the minimum type of design acceptable to the city. It is noted here that the surface drainage design is a matter of final engineering design, and is subject to many changes by the actual designer. However, all minimum requirements shall meet the current edition of state department of transportation specifications. The following cross sections are shown: 
(1)  Widths. 20-foot minimum pavement width. 
(2)  Base and surface requirements. 
a.  Residential use streets (collector or minor streets) shall have limerock; the subgrade shall be compacted to a density of 100 percent as determined by Proctor Control method at optimum moisture then six inches of compacted limerock as per current edition state department of transportation specifications, prime and one inch hot mix asphaltic pavement, Type #2. Paving radius shall be 35 feet. 
b.  Any modifications, additions or changes on any paving shall be approved by the city manager. 
c.  Muck removal. In no case shall a paved street to be accepted for city maintenance be constructed over muck. Muck shall be removed to full depth and replaced with new embankment. The removal line at the top of the muck shall be the back of the curblines or edge of shoulder, if ditch section is used. This removal shall continue downward and outward on a 11/2:1 slope to the bottom of the muck and then upward and outward on a 11/2:1 slope. 
(3)  Control by samples and test. 
a.  The city manager may require any or all materials to be submitted to tests, expense to be borne by the developer. The city manager may also require certificates of quality or specifications of materials being utilized in the work, such as bituminous materials, concrete, limerock, etc. These certificates shall be supplied by the contractor. 
b.  The contractor shall fully cooperate with the city manager in the taking of any or all samples required and in the making of any tests required or desired. 
c.  In the case of pavements, whether base course or resurface, the contractor shall, when required by the city representative, furnish samples taken from completed work at any point indicated by the city's representative and shall replace the areas with materials and construction to conform to these specifications and to the line and grade required at no cost to the city. 
d.  Curb and gutter must be installed at the cost of the subdivider if the street right-of-way is 50 feet or less. Curb and gutter may be required on streets with a right-of-way of more than 50 feet if deemed necessary by the city manager; provided, however, Avenida del Rio, Caribbean Avenue, Alverdez Avenue and Arroyo Avenue shall not have curbs and gutters unless deemed necessary by the city manager, but these streets shall have a swale on the side farthest from the canal with positive drainage to the canal provided by structures under the paving. 
e.  Swales can be used when streets have a minimum right-of-way of 60 feet. 
(Code 1960, § 27-21; Code 1982, § 17-62; Code 1999, § 106-109) 
Sec. 106-104. - Sidewalks. 
    Sidewalks may be required by the city on one side of any street in a subdivision where it is deemed essential to pedestrian movement and safety. 
(1)  Sidewalks shall be constructed on both sides of collector streets, and on major streets and on the property line side of all frontage roads on major streets as deemed necessary by the city. 
(2)  The city may require additional sidewalks and wider sidewalks leading to and going through commercial areas, school sites, places of public assembly and other congested areas. 
(3)  Minimum requirements for sidewalks shall be four inches thick and five feet wide at 2,500 psi concrete on well-compacted base. Dummy joints at every four feet (straight and three-eighths-inch deep) with expansion joints one-half inch premolded bituminous material, 32 feet center to center along transverse length. All edges rounded with one-fourth-inch radius edger. 
(4)  Driveway aprons over sidewalks shall be concrete 3,000 psi five inches thick (six inches thick in commercial areas) with six-inch by six-inch no. 10/10 welded wire mesh and expansion joint material at property line. 
(5)  Minimum requirements for driveways shall be 12 feet wide in residential areas and 14 feet wide in commercial areas, with three-foot radius turnouts. Trailers and special cases of driveways may be wider with approval of city community development director and city manager. 
(Code 1960, § 27-21; Code 1982, § 17-63; Code 1999, § 106-110) 
Sec. 106-105. - Water supply. 
    Water mains properly connected with the city water supply systems shall be provided so as to adequately serve all lots shown on the subdivision plat for both domestic use and fire protection. 
(Code 1960, § 27-21; Code 1982, § 17-64; Code 1999, § 106-111) 
Sec. 106-106. - Sanitary sewage disposal. 
(a)  When, in the written opinion of the city manager, public sanitary sewers are available and within reasonable access of the subdivision, the subdivider shall provide sanitary sewer services to each lot therein. 
(b)  Such sanitary sewage system shall be installed prior to the installation of the street pavement. 
(c)  When, in the written opinion of the city manager, a public sanitary sewer is not accessible, an alternate method of sewage disposal for each lot, or a community sewage disposal system, may be used when in compliance with the standards of the health department. 
(Code 1960, § 27-21; Code 1982, § 17-65; Code 1999, § 106-112) 
Sec. 106-107. - Installation of utilities. 
(a)  Utility services should be installed underground when feasible, including electric power, telephone and community antenna television service. 
(b)  When feasible, underground utility mains and service connections shall be completely installed, inspected and approved by the city manager, or his duly authorized inspector, after grading is completed and before the road base is applied. 
(Code 1960, § 27-21; Code 1982, § 17-66; Code 1999, § 106-113) 
Sec. 106-108. - Storm drainage. 
(a)  Every subdivision shall be served by adequate storm drainage facilities including drains, sewers, catchbasins, culverts and other facilities in accordance with design standards as set forth in article V of chapter 102. 
(b)  All surface water drainage shall be transported to existing storm sewers or to drainage facilities approved by the city manager and Clewiston Drainage District. 
(c)  Such storm drainage system shall be installed prior to the installation of the street pavement. 
(Code 1960, § 27-21; Code 1982, § 17-67; Code 1999, § 106-114; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(17-67), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 106-109. - Monuments. 
(a)  The owner shall install within the subdivision or on the exterior boundaries thereof, or both, a sufficient number of permanent reference monuments, in no case less than four and in no case more than 800 feet apart. All points of curvature, points of reverse curvature and points of tangency shall be permanently marked with PRM's. 
(b)  Permanent reference monuments shall be as required by the state plat law. 
(Code 1960, § 27-21; Code 1982, § 17-68; Code 1999, § 106-115) 
State Law reference- Permanent reference monuments, F.S. § 177.091(7). 
Sec. 106-110. - Street name signs. 
    Street name signs shall be installed at the intersection of all streets carrying the street names approved on the subdivision plat. Location and design of street name signs shall be subject to the approval of the city manager. 
(Code 1960, § 27-21; Code 1982, § 17-69; Code 1999, § 106-116) 
Sec. 106-111. - Traffic control signs. 
    The subdivider, at his expense, shall install control signs at locations determined by the city manager. Such signs shall meet the requirements of the Uniform Sign Manual of the state department of transportation. 
(Code 1960, § 27-21; Code 1982, § 17-70; Code 1999, § 106-117) 
Sec. 106-112. - Requirements for local park and recreation land. 
(a)  In any proposed residential development, adequate provisions shall be made to accommodate neighborhood and community park and recreational needs of the residents of the development. The recreation areas shall permit development of recreational facilities of a type consistent with the needs of the residents with convenient access provided. 
(b)  Compliance with this provision may be accomplished by one of the following means: 
(1)  Dedication to the city of an on-site recreation area; 
(2)  Dedication to the city of an off-site neighborhood park which is reasonably accessible to the residents of the development and which is approved by the city; or 
(3)  Contribution to the city of funds equivalent to the value of land which would otherwise be dedicated. Such funds shall be utilized by the city for the acquisition of park and recreation lands or facilities. 
The city will determine which option shall be required based upon the availability of local parks and recreational lands within the area of the proposed residential development. 
(Code 1999, § 106-118; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(17-71), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 106-113. - Exemptions. 
    The following lands shall be exempt from the local park and recreation requirement as set forth in this article: 
(1)  Any previously platted subdivision recorded prior to February 1, 1992. 
(2)  Any platted residential development intended to include the construction of less than five dwelling units provided that no phasing of development is proposed and the five dwelling units comprise the entire development program. 
(Code 1999, § 106-119; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(17-72), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 106-114. - Recreation requirements. 
    Recreation requirements shall be met in one of the following forms: 
(1)  The recreation area shall be the equivalent of three acres of land per 1,000 person population, based on 2.5 persons per dwelling unit. 
(2)  If funds are contributed in lieu of dedication of land, the amount of such contribution shall equal the per-acre value of land as reflected in the records of the county property appraiser's office as adjusted at time of final subdivision plan submission. This amount shall be presumed to be the value in the absence of better evidence of value. 
(3)  The city may require the developer of a phased project involving submittal of multiple plats, to meet the requirements of this section at the time of approval of the first plat. 
(4)  All funds contributed to the city in lieu of land dedication shall be held in a nonlapsing park and recreation trust fund for the acquisition and improvement of community or neighborhood parks according to the following provision: Monies deposited by a developer pursuant to this section shall be expended within a reasonable period of time for the purpose of acquiring and developing land necessary to meet the need for neighborhood or community parks created by the development in order to provide a system of parks of sufficient size and at appropriate locations to enable efficient and effective operation and maintenance. 
(Code 1999, § 106-120; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(17-73), 12-19-1994) 
Chapter 110 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Planning and land development regulations, F.S. § 163.3161 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 110-1. - Regulatory authority and purpose. 
(a)  By the provisions of F.S. ch. 166, authority has been granted to the city for the purpose of planning and zoning. 
(b)  Such authority has been granted to the city in the interests of promoting and maintaining the health, safety and general welfare of the city and its inhabitants. In doing so, the city shall set forth the districting or zoning of the city for the purpose of regulating the location of residences, trades, industries and other uses of property; and for the purpose of regulating the height of buildings and other structures and the dimensions of lots, yards and other open spaces in connection with buildings and other structures; and for the purpose of regulating the density of population and the location and use of buildings, structures, land and water for residences, trade or industry in conformity with any other restrictions or regulations established by building codes, subdivision requirements and the like. 
(c)  These regulations shall be made in accordance with a comprehensive plan and designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from catastrophe; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid the undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks and other public requirements. 
(d)  Such regulations shall be made with reasonable consideration, among other things, to the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the community. 
(Code 1982, § 24-2; Code 1999, § 110-1) 
Sec. 110-2. - Definitions and construction. 
(a)  Construction. Specific terminology shall control general terminology. 
    And/or. Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, where a regulation includes two or more items, conditions or provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or," or "either ... or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  And indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)  Or indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  Either ... or indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination. 
    Building or structure. A building or structure includes any part thereof. 
    Includes shall not limit a term to the specified examples, but is intended to extend its meeting to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
    Lot includes the terms "plot" and "parcel." 
    Meaning. In case of any differences of meaning or implication between the text of this chapter and any caption, illustration, summary table or illustration table, the text shall control. 
    Used or occupied includes the terms "intended," "designed" and "arranged to be used or occupied." 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory use, building or structure means a use, building or structure on the same lot with and a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building or structure. Accessory structures, or private recreational facilities shall include, but not be limited to unattached carports, unattached sheds, garages, tennis courts, and swimming pools. 
    Apartment means a room or suite of rooms intended or designed for use as a residence by a single family, including bath and culinary accommodations. 
    Archaeological site means any subsurface remains of historical, cultural, archaeological or architectural importance, or any unusual ground formations of archaeological significance. 
    Automated teller machine means an electronic banking facility that is open to the general public and allows customers to perform financial transactions without the assistance of any bank employees. 
    Bank means a financial institution that is open to the general public and engaged in deposit banking, and that performs closely related functions such as making loans, investments, and fiduciary activities. 
    Building means any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof, and used or built for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, vehicles, goods, merchandise, equipment, materials or property of any kind. 
    Building, accessory, means a subordinate building or structure, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the main or principal building. 
    Building height means the vertical distance from the mean grade of a lot at the frontage of the building to the highest point on top of the structure or a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the mid-height level between eaves and ridge for gable, or hip roofs. 
    Building line means the line shown on a plat or site plan indicating the proposed setback distance from a street or property line. 
    Building, principal, means a building or, where the context so indicates, a grouping of buildings in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which such building or such grouping is located. 
    Business services means establishments primarily engaged in rendering services to business establishments on a fee or contract basis, such as advertising and mailing, building and maintenance, employment service, management and consulting services, protective services, equipment rental and leasing commercial research, development and testing, photo finishing, and personal supply services. 
    Carport means a roofed structure open on two or more sides, intended or used for the parking and storage of automobiles. 
    Child day care facility means a facility licensed and operated in accordance with standards of the state department of health and rehabilitative services where general supervisory care is provided for six or more children at any one time, including children of the supervisor. 
    Child day care facility, family, accessory, means a facility licensed and operated in accordance with standards of the state department of health and rehabilitative services where general supervisory care is provided for five or fewer children at any one time, including children of the supervisor. 
    Clinic means a facility providing medical, dental, surgical, therapeutic, and related services on an outpatient basis and not providing overnight accommodations. A clinic may also include a veterinary facility providing care and boarding of domestic animals. 
    Club or lodge means an establishment operated by a corporation or association of persons for social, literary, political, educational, fraternal, or charitable purposes, registered as a not-for-profit organization pursuant to section 501(C) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954. 
    Commercial recreation facilities means those facilities which offer recreational activity and receive economic return for their utilization such as, and not all inclusive, marinas, miniature golf, bowling alleys, go-cart tracks and other similar related facilities. 
    Comprehensive plan means a plan meeting the requirements of F.S. §§ 163.3177 and 163.3178 (Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act). 
    Density means a measure of the intensity of land use and development per unit area of land, usually expressed as the number of persons, families, or dwelling units per acre or as a floor area ratio. 
    Development/development activity means the construction of improvements or alteration of an existing structure or site which requires the issuance of a permit or granting approval by the city to ensure conformance with the provisions of this Code. 
    Development order means any order granting, denying or granting with conditions, an application for a development permit. 
    Drive-through or drive-window means a window or other opening in the wall of a principal or accessory building through which goods or services are provided directly to customers in motor vehicles. 
    Duplex. See Dwelling, two-family. 
    Dwelling means any building or portion thereof designed for or used for residential purposes. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family, means a building designed for three or more families, with separate housekeeping, sanitary, and cooking facilities for each family. 
    Dwelling, single-family, means a detached dwelling designed for only one family. 
    Dwelling, two-family, means a building designed for only two families with separate housekeeping, sanitary, and cooking facilities for each family. 
    Dwelling unit means a room or group of rooms within a dwelling that forms a single independent habitable unit used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, sanitation, cooking, and eating purposes by only one family. A dwelling unit may be used for owner occupancy, rental, lease, or other occupancy on a weekly or longer basis. 
    Easement means a grant of one or more rights by a property owner to another individual, group, or governmental unit to make limited use of a portion of real property for a specified purpose. 
    Extended stay hotel or motel means a hotel or motel in which all rooms contain accommodations for sleeping and a kitchen equipped with a full-sized refrigerator, built-in cooking facilities, microwave, sink, cooking utensils, dishes and cutlery. 
    Family means one or more persons who occupy a single dwelling unit, all of whom are related by blood, marriage or adoption, including foster children, or a group of persons all of whom are not somehow related which does not exceed three persons in number. The term "family" shall not include the occupants of a roominghouse, a group home/congregate living facility, a fraternity or sorority house or other similar use with shared cooking or sanitary facilities. 
    Floor area ratio (FAR) means the total square foot amount of building floor area on a lot in relation to each square foot of land area. Floor area ratio is determined by dividing the floor area existing or proposed on a lot by the land area of the lot. 
    Frontage means all or a portion of a lot line which directly abuts an officially recorded street or separates property from a street, excluding alleys and private driveways. 
    Garage, public, means a building or a portion thereof, other than a private or storage garage or service station, designed or used for equipping, servicing, repairing, hiring, selling, or storing of motor vehicles. 
    Garage, residential, means an accessory detached building or an attached portion of a main building, including a carport or porte cochere, designed and used for the parking or storage of vehicles owned or used by the occupants of the residence. 
    Gross floor area means the sum of the total areas taken on a horizontal plane of a floor or several floors of a building measured between the outside face of exterior walls. 
    Ground coverage means the portion of the area of a lot, expressed as a percentage, occupied by all buildings or structures which are roofed or otherwise covered. 
    Group home, congregate living facility, means a residential use consisting of any building or section thereof, residence, private home, boarding home, home for the aged, or any other residential structure, whether or not operated for profit, which undertakes, for a period exceeding 24 hours, housing, food service and one or more personal services for persons not related to the owner or administrator by blood or marriage when such residential structure is licensed by the state department of housing and rehabilitative services. In addition, the term "group home" shall include rehabilitative home care, adult congregate living facilities and personal care homes for the physically impaired, mentally retarded, developmentally disabled persons or elderly persons 60 years of age or older. The term "group home" shall not mean nursing home, intermediate care facility, or similar facility which provides medical care and support services to persons not capable of independent living. There are three types of group homes as follows: 
(1)  Group home, type I, means a congregate living facility that is single-family in character and provides a residence for not more than six persons. 
(2)  Group home, type II, means a congregate living facility that is single-family in character and provides a residence for more than six but less than 15 persons. 
(3)  Group home, type III, means a congregate living facility that is multifamily in character and provides a residence for 15 or more persons. 
    Home occupation means an occupation or activity carried on as an accessory use by a member of the immediate family residing within a dwelling unit. 
    Hospital means an institution licensed by the state department of health which has facilities for one or more overnight patients, which provide services for inpatient medical or surgical care of sick or injured humans, and which may include related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient departments, training facilities, state offices, utilities, and support facilities. 
    Hotel means a public lodging establishment licensed by the state which offers transient lodging accommodations to the general public and may provide additional services such as restaurants, meetings rooms, and recreation facilities provided: 
(1)  The length of stay for any person may not exceed 29 days in a consecutive 60-day period; 
(2)  The establishment is not licensed as under F.S. § 381.008 et seq. as a migrant labor camp or residential migrant housing or temporary guest worker program housing. 
    Hotel unit means a room or suite of rooms in which lodging or boarding is provided. 
    Impervious surface means any surface incapable of being penetrated by water under normal circumstances, including such surfaces as roofs, areas paved or covered with concrete, asphalt or similar materials, etc. 
    Junkyard means a commercial establishment where waste or discarded or salvaged materials are stored or handled, including, but not limited to, auto wrecking yards, house wrecking yards, used lumber yards, and places or yards for salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment or salvaged machinery, used furniture and household equipment, and the processing of used, discarded, or salvaged materials as part of manufacturing operations. 
    Land clearing means the removal from land of any type of vegetation or structure by mechanical, manual, or other means. 
    Loading, off-street, means space located outside of any street right-of-way and designed to accommodate the temporary parking of vehicles used for pickups and deliveries. 
    Lot, for zoning purposes as covered by this chapter, means a parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are herein required, such lot may consist of: 
(1)  A single lot of record; 
(2)  A portion of a lot of record; 
(3)  A combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots of records and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of record; and 
(4)  A parcel of land described by metes and bounds, provided that in no case of division or combination shall any residential lot or parcel be created which does not meet the requirements of this chapter. 
    Lot area means the total area contained within the lot lines. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more intersecting streets. 
    Lot depth means the horizontal length of a straight line drawn from the midpoints of the front and rear lot lines. 
    Lot, interior, means a lot abutting only one street or right-of-way. 
    Lot, irregular, means a lot containing curved, uneven, reversed, or other asymmetrical lot lines. 
    Lot line means the boundary of a lot. 
(1)  Lot line, front, means the shortest property line adjacent to a public street; is also the front property line. 
(2)  Lot line, rear, means the line separating a lot from abutting property, an alley or other secondary means of access, an easement, or similar items. 
(3)  Lot line, side corner, means any lot line which is adjacent to a public street and is not considered the front lot line. 
(4)  Lot line, side interior, means any lot line which is not a front or rear lot line. 
    Lot, nonconforming, means a legally subdivided lot shown on a legally recorded plat, existing at the time regulations were adopted, requiring greater minimum width or area than provided on such lot or establishing other limitations which such lot does not meet. 
    Lot of record means a lot which is part of a platted subdivision or a parcel of land described by a deed, for which the subdivision plat or deed has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the county circuit court. 
    Lot width means the horizontal length of a straight line drawn from the midpoints of the side lot lines. 
    Motel means a building or group of buildings which contains overnight accommodations for transient occupancy, and has individual entrances from outside the building to serve each such sleeping unit and is not licensed under F.S. § 381.008 as a migrant labor camp or residential migrant housing, or temporary guest worker program housing. No provision shall be made for cooking in any individual room or suite of rooms. Motels may have one or more dining rooms, restaurants or cafes as accessory uses. The length of stay for any person may not exceed 29 days in a consecutive 60-day period. 
    Nursing home means a facility for unrelated individuals providing lodging, meals, intermediate care level one and intermediate care level two medical services, as defined by the state department of health and rehabilitative services, and related support services. 
    Offices, professional (medical) means offices and clinics of individuals engaged in the provision of health care to the general public, including, but not limited to, chiropodists, chiropractors, Christian Science practitioners, dentists, dieticians, medical record services, midwives, naturopaths, nurses (registered and practical), nutritionists, occupational therapists, optometrists, osteopathic physicians and surgeons, physiotherapists, psychiatrists, psychoanalysts, psychologists, psychotherapists, podiatrists, public health agencies, and visiting nurse associations. 
    Offices, professional (nonmedical) means offices of individuals engaged in the conduct of business in the following professions: architecture, art, clerical services, court recorders, engineering, finance services (excluding banks, savings and loan associations and related institutions), insurance services (excluding automobile insurance claims centers), interior design, landscape architecture, law, music and planning. 
    Open space means unenclosed area open to the sky on the same lot with a building consisting of setbacks, landscaping, buffers, natural environmental features, pedestrian circulation features and recreational facilities including, but not limited to, swimming pools and tennis courts. 
    Outdoor storage means the keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods, material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than 24 hours. 
    Parking, off-street, means space located outside of any street right-of-way or easement and designed to accommodate the parking of motor vehicles. 
    Personal service, commercial, means an establishment that primarily provides services, involving the care of an individual or his apparel, including, but not limited to, the following: barber shops, beauty salons, seamstress shops, shoe repair shops, dry cleaning and laundry pickup facilities, coin-operated laundry and dry cleaning facilities, health spas, and similar establishments providing related services. 
    Planning board means an advisory body whose members are appointed by the city commission to advise it on planning, zoning and related matters in accordance with the provisions of section 94-21 et seq. 
    Professional services means the conduct of business in any of the following related categories: law, architecture, landscape architecture, medicine, dentistry, engineering, planning, music, art, finance, and insurance. 
    Right-of-way means a strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, prescription, or condemnation and intended to be occupied or occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer, and other similar uses. 
    Setback means the horizontal distance between the front, side line or rear line of a building site to the front, side or rear of the building or structure, respectively. 
    Setback, front, means the required open space extending across the full width of the front of a lot between the front property line and the required building setback line. 
    Setback, rear, means the required open space extending across the full width of the rear of a lot between the rear lot line and the required building setback line. 
    Setback, side (corner), means the required open space extending across the full width of the side of a lot between the side property line extending along a street and the required building setback line. 
    Setback, side (interior), means the required open space extending across the full width of the side of a lot between the side property line, which does not extend along the street, and the required building setback line. 
    Shopping center means three or more commercial establishments planned, developed, owned and managed as a unit and related by location, size and types of establishments to the trade area which such unit serves. 
    Shrubs means self-supporting, woody, evergreen plants smaller than a tree and usually branching from or near the ground. When planted in accordance with requirements of this Code, a shrub shall have a minimum height of the plant of two feet unless otherwise specified. 
    Story means the portion of a building, other than a cellar, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and ceiling next above it. 
    Street means a public right-of-way which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
    Street right-of-way line means the line which bounds the right-of-way set aside for use as a thoroughfare. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, mobile homes, manufactured homes, towers, walls, fences, billboards, poster panels, recreational facilities, swimming pools, and above-ground gas or liquid storage tanks. 
    Structure, temporary, means a structure without any foundation or footings and which is removed when the designated time period, activity, or use for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased. 
    Swimming pool means a portable pool or permanent structure that contains a body of water 18 inches or more in depth of 250 square feet or more of water surface area and intended for recreational purposes, including a wading pool. The term "swimming pool" excludes an ornamental reflecting pool, fish pond, or other type of pool, regardless of size, unless located and designed so as to create a hazard or be used for swimming or wading. 
    Townhouse means a single-family residential building attached to a series of other single-family residential buildings by not more than two party walls. 
    Transitional site means a lot, tract, parcel or portion thereof located in a C or I district and situated within 50 feet of, and abutting the same street as property in an R-1, R-2, R-3, RM-1 and RM-2 district. 
    Tree means a self-supporting woody plant of a species normally growing to a mature height of at least 15 feet in the city. 
    Variance means a relaxation of the terms of the zoning ordinance where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the chapter would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
    Yard means an area between the front property line and the front setback line of any main or accessory building, exclusive of steps and open terraces. 
    Yard, front, means an area between the front property line and the front setback line of any main or accessory building, exclusive of steps and open terraces. 
    Yard, rear, means an unoccupied area extending across the full width of the lot between the rear line of any main or accessory building and the rear line of the lot commencing at such rear line, and measured at its least dimension. 
(Code 1982, § 24-5; Code 1999, § 110-2; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-5.2), 12-19-1994; Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 2-20-2017; Ord. No. 2017-08, § 1, 5-15-2017) 
Sec. 110-3. - General provisions. 
(a)  Scope of chapter. Provisions set forth in this chapter apply to the entire corporate area of the city, and all zoning districts therein, unless exceptions are specifically provided relating to one or more zoning districts, or except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(b)  Authority to enter upon private property. The community development director, and any inspector under his direction, in the performance of their functions and duties under the provisions of this chapter, may enter upon any land and may make examinations and surveys as deemed necessary in the administration and enforcement of this chapter, upon presentation of proper credentials. 
(c)  Any use not expressly provided for. When an application is made for any use not expressly permitted or prohibited, the community development director shall consider that use which is expressly prohibited or permitted most closely similar or allied to that use requested. Upon doubt as to whether or not a specific use is similar to uses expressly prohibited or permitted, such permit shall be withheld until a request is made to the city commission. 
(d)  Measurement and calculation of minimum lot size and dimensions. Minimum lot size and dimensions required in this chapter shall be measured and calculated to conform with the ultimate right-of-way of all adjacent streets, as shown on the future traffic circulation map of the comprehensive plan or other map maintained by the city. 
(e)  Measurement of setbacks. Front or side corner setbacks, as required in this chapter, shall be measured from the ultimate right-of-way line of all adjacent streets, which shall be determined in the manner described in subsection (d) of this section. 
(f)  Nuisances. No use shall be made of any property that shall in any way be offensive or noxious by reason of the emission of odors, gases, dust, smoke, vibration or noise, nor shall anything be constructed or maintained that would in any way constitute a nuisance to adjacent property owners, residents or to the community. 
(Code 1982, § 24-6; Code 1999, § 110-3; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-6), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-4. - Applicability. 
    No building or structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed or altered, and no existing use, new use, or change of use of any building, structure, or land, or part thereof, shall be made or continued except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 24-26(b); Code 1999, § 110-4; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-26(b)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-5. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine and imprisonment as provided by section 1-15. 
(Code 1982, §§ 24-26(h), 24-27(d); Code 1999, § 110-5; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-26(i)), 12-19-1994) 
Secs. 110-6-110-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 110-29. - Community development director. 
(a)  Designation. The city manager shall designate a person to enforce and administer the provisions of this zoning chapter. Such designated person shall be known as the community development director. 
(b)  Notice, abatement of violation. Upon receipt of information and upon verification by the community development director that any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated, the community development director shall notify in writing the persons responsible for such violation indicating the provisions or regulations being violated, and shall order the necessary steps to abate such violation. The community development director shall have the power to order the discontinuance of the use of any land, water, or building, the removal of any building. 
(c)  Remedies. In addition to other remedies, the community development director, through the city attorney, may institute any appropriate action or procedure to bring about compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 24-26(a), (c), (d); Code 1999, § 110-31; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-26(a), (c), (d)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-30. - Concurrency reservation. 
    A concurrency reservation shall be obtained in accordance with chapter 90, concurrency management, prior to the approval of a development order, a rezoning, site plan approval, plat approval, subdivision approval or issuance of a building permit. 
(Code 1999, § 110-32; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-26(e)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-31. - Building permits required. 
    No building shall be constructed, reconstructed, altered or extended, until a building permit has been issued indicating that such use is in compliance with the provisions and regulations of this Code. 
(Code 1982, § 24-26(e); Code 1999, § 110-33; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-26(f)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-32. - Special permits required. 
    There shall be no excavation, cut, or fill of earth or debris which will alter, hinder or negatively affect the physical character of the area. No curb shall be cut or access opened into a public street, no signs shall be erected, and no building shall be moved until a permit has been obtained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 24-26(f); Code 1999, § 110-34; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-26(g)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-33. - Certificate of occupancy required. 
    No land, water, building or any part thereof, shall be used and no existing use of land, water or building shall be changed until a certificate of occupancy is issued stating that such use of land, water or building, or any part thereof, is found to be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. A certificate of occupancy shall also be required for any change of use, or for any alteration or modification of any building or structure. Any change of occupancy of business uses, professional uses, personal services and retail sales and services shall require a certificate of occupancy. 
(Code 1982, § 24-26(g); Code 1999, § 110-35; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-26(h)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-34. - Errors and violations. 
(a)  The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for, or any approval of, any violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The issuance of a permit upon plans and specifications shall not prevent the community development director from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in such plans and specifications, or preventing building operations being carried on thereunder when in violation of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 24-25; Code 1999, § 110-36) 
Secs. 110-35-110-56. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 110-57. - Authority; general procedure. 
    Upon its own initiative, or upon the petition of an owner of property or the owners of a majority of frontage in any area, the city commission may, after having held a public hearing, following at least seven days' notice of a time, place an object of such public hearing published in a paper of general circulation in the city, amend, supplement, change, modify, vary or repeal the regulations, restrictions and boundaries herein established; or appeal the decision of the community development director or other administrative official regarding a zoning matter; provided, however, the enactment of an ordinance which rezones private real property shall be enacted pursuant to the procedures set forth in F.S. § 166.041. Every such proposed variance, change, appeal or amendment shall be submitted to the planning board for review and report thereon to the city commission prior to public hearing; however, nothing in this section shall preclude the owner of a lot platted prior to November 8, 1976, from petitioning the city commission for a waiver of certain zoning requirements in accordance with conditions set forth in article IV of this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 24-24(a); Code 1999, § 110-56; Ord. No. 251, § 1, 7-21-1975; Ord. No. 76-9, § 2, 1-10-1977; Ord. No. 86-4, §§ 1, 2, 7-29-1986; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-24(a)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-58. - Service of notice-Proposed variance, special exception. 
    In the case of a proposed variance or special exception, notice by mail shall be sent to all persons owning lands which shall be subject or affected by the proposed variance or special exception or within 200 feet, such notice to be mailed at least seven days prior to the pertinent public hearing, to the last known address of such owners as the same shall appear on the current ad valorem tax roll. 
(Code 1982, § 24-24(b); Code 1999, § 110-57; Ord. No. 251, § 1, 7-21-1975; Ord. No. 76-9, § 2, 1-10-1977; Ord. No. 86-4, §§ 1, 2, 7-29-1986; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-24(b)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-59. - Same-Rezoning. 
    In the case of proposed rezoning, in addition to notice being sent to each real property owner whose land will be rezoned as required by F.S. § 166.041, notice by mail shall also be sent to all persons within 200 feet of the land proposed for rezoning, such notice to be mailed at least 30 days prior to the date set for the public hearing, to the last known address of such owners as the same shall appear on the current ad valorem tax roll. 
(Code 1982, § 24-24(c); Code 1999, § 110-58; Ord. No. 251, § 1, 7-21-1975; Ord. No. 76-9, § 2, 1-10-1977; Ord. No. 86-4, §§ 1, 2, 7-29-1986; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-24(c)), 12-19-1994) 
State Law reference- Rezoning, notice required, F.S. § 166.041(3)(c). 
Sec. 110-60. - Administrative charge. 
    There is hereby affixed a charge, established by resolution and located in appendix A to this Code, to particularly cover the cost of sending out notices and other incidental expenses connected with the investigation of the facts involved in any petition to vary, change or amend the regulations, restrictions or boundaries herein established, which amount shall be paid to the city. 
(Code 1982, § 24-24(d); Code 1999, § 110-59; Ord. No. 251, § 1, 7-21-1975; Ord. No. 76-9, § 2, 1-10-1977; Ord. No. 86-4, §§ 1, 2, 7-29-1986; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-24(d)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-61. - Required findings; variance. 
    The city commission may grant such variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest, when owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. In order to authorize any variance from the terms of this chapter, the commission must find: 
(1)  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures or buildings in the same zoning district; 
(2)  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the owner of the affected property; 
(3)  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the owner of the affected property any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other lands, buildings, or structures in the same zoning district; 
(4)  That literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the owner of the effected property of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same zoning district under the terms of this chapter and would work unnecessary and undue hardship on the applicant; 
(5)  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the use of the land, building or structure; and 
(6)  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of this chapter and that such variance will not be injurious to the area involved or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
(Code 1982, § 24-24(e); Code 1999, § 110-60; Ord. No. 251, § 1, 7-21-1975; Ord. No. 76-9, § 2, 1-10-1977; Ord. No. 86-4, §§ 1, 2, 7-29-1986) 
Sec. 110-62. - Special exception. 
    The city commission may, as a special exception, authorize the use of lands, buildings or structures in a manner that is not otherwise permitted or appropriate generally within a zoning district, so long as that specially excepted use is controlled as to number, area, location and relation to the neighborhood such that it will not adversely affect the public health, safety, comfort, good order, appearance, convenience, morals and the general welfare of the community. In granting any such special exception, the city commission must find that such grant will not adversely affect the public interest. In addition, the city commission may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards and may also prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the special exception is requested shall be begun or completed, or both, as it may deem necessary to protect the public interests. Violation of such conditions, safeguards and time limitations, when made a part of the terms under which the special exception is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Code and may result in authorization for a specially excepted use to be withdrawn. 
(Code 1982, § 24-24(f); Code 1999, § 110-61; Ord. No. 251, § 1, 7-21-1975; Ord. No. 76-9, § 2, 1-10-1977; Ord. No. 86-4, §§ 1, 2, 7-29-1986) 
Sec. 110-63. - Applications and regulations for reasonable accommodation for residents of recovery residences. 
(a)  Definitions. 
    Certified recovery residence means a recovery residence that holds a valid certificate of compliance and is actively managed by a certified recovery residence administrator. 
    Certified recovery residence administrator means a recovery resident administrator who holds a valid certificate of compliance. 
    Counseling means the process, conducted in a facility licensed under F.S. ch. 397 of engaging a client in a discussion of issues associated with the client's substance abuse and associated problems in an effort to work toward a constructive resolution of those problems and ultimately toward recovery. 
    Disabled individual or disabled person means an individual meeting the definition of "disability" set forth in 42 U.S.C.S. § 12102 of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) [and] means someone: 
(1)  Having a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more major life activities; 
(2)  Having a record of having such impairment; and 
(3)  Who is regarded as having such an impairment. 
    Housing provider means a person or entity which has been certified as a recovery residence, or which is in the process of obtaining certification as a recovery residence. 
    Licensed service provider means a public agency under F.S. ch. 397, a private for-profit or non-for-profit agency under F.S. ch. 397, a physician or any other private practitioner licensed under this chapter, or a hospital that offers substance abuse services through one or more licensed service components. 
    Qualifying entity means a licensed service provider in the state as defined by F.S. § 397.311(18), or an entity who is in the business of providing recovery residences for individuals disabled due to substance abuse. 
    Recovery means a process of personal change through which individuals achieve abstinence from alcohol or drug abuse and improve health, wellness, and quality of life. 
    Recovery residence means a residential dwelling unit, or other form of group housing that is offered or advertised through any means including oral, written, electronic, or printed means, by any person or entity as a residence that provides a peer-supported, alcohol-free, and drug free living environment. 
    Recovery residence administrator means the person responsible for the overall management of the recovery residence, including, but not limited to, the supervision of residents and staff employed by or volunteering for, the residence. 
    Service component or component means a discrete operational entity within a service provider which is subject to licensing as defined by the rules adopted to implement F.S. ch. 397. 
    Substance abuse means the misuse of or dependence on alcohol, illicit drugs, or prescription medications. 
    Treatment means specific clinical and services such as individual and group counseling. 
(b)  Application. This section implements the policy of the city for processing reasonable accommodation applications for persons with disabilities and who are in recovery from substance abuse. Any applicant, whether a disabled individual or a qualifying entity, may apply for a reasonable accommodation with respect to the city's land use or applicable zoning laws, codes, rules, practices and/or procedures by submitting an application for a reasonable accommodation pursuant this section. 
(1)  All qualifying entities shall submit, as part of an application for a reasonable accommodation, proof of the licensable service component the qualifying entity holds pursuant to F.S. ch. 397. 
(2)  Housing providers for disabled individuals shall submit such information as the city may deem sufficient to demonstrate that the entity is a certified recovery residence or is in the process of becoming certified to operate a recovery residence for disabled individuals. 
(3)  Applicants making applications to operate a recovery residence shall identify the recovery residence administrator who is responsible for the overall management and the supervision of residents and any staff. Applicant shall submit such information as is necessary to document that the recovery residence administrator is certified or has applied for certification as a recovery residence administrator. 
(4)  An applicant for a reasonable accommodation under this section shall submit an application using a form which is available in the city's community development department ("department"). The information on the form must be complete as the information solicited is necessary for the city to process the reasonable accommodation application. 
(5)  The city shall display a notice in the city's public notice bulletin board (and shall maintain copies available for review in the department, the building/permitting division, and the city clerk's office), advising the public that an application for a reasonable accommodation as provided in this section has been submitted to the department. 
(6)  A disabled individual or qualifying entity or housing provider who has applied for a reasonable accommodation may be represented at all stages of the reasonable accommodation proceedings by a person designated by the disabled individual as their authorized agent. Any authorized agent representing an individual, or, if applicable, a qualifying entity or housing provider, shall submit a written authorization designating the individual as the agent authorized to legally bind the applicant to the representations in the application, or any conditions agreed to or imposed as part of the order of the special magistrate. 
(7)  No application fee shall be imposed by the department in connection with an application for a reasonable accommodation. 
(c)  An individual, qualifying entity, or housing provider who is the tenant of a property owner shall submit the leases or lease between the property owner and the tenant or tenants requesting a reasonable accommodation. It shall be the joint and several responsibility of the property owner or tenant to submit any leases or subleases pertaining to the residence which is the subject of a reasonable accommodation application for a recovery residence. 
(d)  Applicants for a reasonable accommodation shall have the burden of establishing that the individuals on whose behalf the application has been submitted are protected under the provisions of the FHA and/or ADA. The applicant shall also demonstrate that the accommodation being sought for all of the individuals who will occupy the recovery residence are reasonable and necessary. 
(e)  All applications for a reasonable accommodation shall be considered by the city's special magistrate. The city shall be responsible for mailing via certified mail a notice containing the date and time of the special magistrate's hearing to consider the application. The special magistrate may: 
(1)  Grant the reasonable accommodation application as requested in the application; 
(2)  Grant a portion of the application determined by the special magistrate to be a reasonable accommodation given the circumstances and the nature of the request; 
(3)  Grant the application with conditions to effectuate a reasonable accommodation; or 
(4)  Deny the reasonable accommodation requested. 
    All decisions of the special magistrate shall be in writing. The written decision of the special magistrate shall constitute a final order and shall be sent to the applicant by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the address specified by the applicant on the application form. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 2, 3-20-2017) 
Secs. 110-64-110-82. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING AND SITE PLANS 

Sec. 110-83. - Purpose. 
    The requirements and procedures of this article shall apply to all developments of one acre or more in one parcel or to any development of a size or complexity such that the community development department, in its opinion, deems it necessary to review the entire development plan of the given project. No structures within such development shall be erected, modified or refurbished, and no building permit shall be issued until building and site plan approval has been secured according to the provisions and requirements of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 24-17(a); Code 1999, § 110-91; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-17(a)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-84. - Procedure. 
(a)  Site and building plans, in the form required by this article, shall be submitted to the community development department for review and then to the technical review committee. 
(b)  Upon the review of the technical review committee, the site and building plans shall be transmitted to the city community development department, which may then require such additional plans as may be necessary as a basis for determination that the applicant meets the requirements of the resource protection standards, site design standards, and city building, plumbing and electrical codes. 
(c)  In reaching a decision of approval or denial of site and building plans, or in approving site and building plans with changes and alterations, the city may hold public hearings. 
(d)  The city commission may attach to its approval of the site and building plan any reasonable conditions, limitations or requirements which are found necessary in their judgment to effectuate the purposes of this article and carry out the spirit and purpose of this chapter. 
(e)  Prior to the issuance of the permit for development of properties or structures under this section, the plans shall be reviewed by the community development director for his endorsement of approval, and the endorsement of approval by the community development director shall constitute full compliance with this chapter. 
(f)  Modification in plans or any change in use of buildings, structures, or the institution of new uses, or alteration of or addition to buildings or structures, or erection of new buildings or structures during construction or at any time thereafter shall be in accordance with a new or modified development plan conforming with and approved pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1982, § 24-17(b); Code 1999, § 110-92; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-17), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-85. - Site plan requirements. 
    The site plan shall be drawn to a scale of not more than 50 feet to the inch. A sufficient number of copies of the site plan shall be submitted by the applicant for the use of the appropriate city departments. The plan, for the purpose of this section, shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following plans, designs, specifications and information: 
(1)  The exact property lines of the property for which site plan approval is requested, including existing street and right-of-way lines, ultimate street and right-of-way lines in accordance with the future traffic circulation map and city, county and state standards, and survey and legal description of the site prepared by a registered land surveyor. 
(2)  Adjacent properties on the same frontage, indicating the locations of buildings and structures on such adjacent properties, means of ingress and egress to such properties, off-street parking, loading and service areas, if any, for or on such properties, and any screening or buffers on such properties and the nature and type thereof. 
(3)  Location of present and proposed structures on the site. 
(4)  Location and dimensions of all required yards. 
(5)  Location of facilities for ingress and egress to the site, including existing and proposed curb cuts, if any, and proposed directions of traffic flow on the site and into and from public rights-of-way. 
(6)  Location and dimensions of off-street parking, queuing, loading, service areas and such additional information as specifically required by article II of chapter 102. 
(7)  A preliminary drainage plan for the entire site. 
(8)  Location and dimension of areas for service to the property and for refuse disposal and collection. 
(9)  Location of all utilities and easements. 
(10)  Landscape planting plan depicting type, size, location and number of plants to demonstrate conformance with the requirements set forth in article IV of chapter 102. 
(11)  Location and dimensions of all signs and exterior lighting facilities to be placed on the site. 
(12)  Program to eradicate prohibited tree species, as required by article II of chapter 98. 
(13)  Habitat and endangered species assessment and management plan as required by article III of chapter 98. 
(14)  Location of existing or proposed wellfield zones and corresponding zones of influence, if applicable, in accordance with article VI of chapter 98. 
(15)  Identification of a historic site, building or other resources as applicable, in accordance with article IV of chapter 98. 
(Code 1982, § 24-17(c); Code 1999, § 110-93; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-17), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-86. - Building plan requirements. 
    For the purpose of this article, the building plan requirements shall consist of, but not be limited to, requirements of section 110-85, including the listed items and three copies shall be submitted. The various portions of the building plan shall be of such scale as to meet clearly the following requirements or to give the following information: 
(1)  The name of the architect or engineer who prepared the plans. 
(2)  Floor plans and elevations. 
(3)  Perspective sketch or rendering of the exterior of all structures on the site showing form, mass and exterior materials; optional only. 
(4)  Outline specifications, including size, type and location of all on-site signs and location and outline specifications of all proposed exterior lighting. 
(Code 1982, § 24-17(d); Code 1999, § 110-94; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-17), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-87. - Lot, yard requirements. 
    Lot and yard requirements shall be regulated by the zoning district in which the development takes place. 
(Code 1982, § 24-17(e); Code 1999, § 110-95; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-17), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-88. - Standards, factors and findings. 
    The technical review committee shall be guided by the following standards and shall consider the following factors, and shall show in its records that each factor was considered. Before final site and building plan approval is granted, the city manager shall find in the case of these factors and any other significant factors that the purposes and requirements of this chapter have been met by the applicant: 
(1)  Ingress and egress to property and proposed structures thereon, with particular reference to automotive and pedestrian safety, traffic flow and control and access in case of fire or catastrophe. 
(2)  Off-street parking, queuing and loading areas, with particular attention to the items in subsection (1) of this section and the effect of noise, glare, or odors of the location of such areas on adjoining properties. 
(3)  Refuse and service areas, with particular reference to the items listed in subsections (1) and (2) of this section. 
(4)  Utilities, with reference to location, availability and capability for the proposed use. 
(5)  Manner of drainage of the property, with particular reference to the effect of provisions for drainage on adjacent properties and the consequences of such drainage on the overall city drainage capacities. 
(6)  Signs and proposed exterior lighting with reference to glare, traffic safety, economic effects of the same on properties in the district and compatibility and harmony with nearby properties. 
(7)  General amenities and convenience, with reference to ensuring that the appearance of the proposed development will be as compatible and harmonious with properties in the general area as may be and will not be so at variance with other structures or developments in the general area as to cause a substantial depreciation of property values. 
(8)  Effect of the proposed use on natural and manmade resources such as: 
a.  Existing and proposed wellfields and their zones of influence; 
b.  Existing habitats and endangered species; and 
c.  Historic sites or buildings. 
(Code 1982, § 24-17(f); Code 1999, § 110-96; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-17), 12-19-1994) 
Secs. 110-89-110-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NONCONFORMING USES AND RELATED MATTERS 

Sec. 110-120. - Intent. 
(a)  Within the districts established by this chapter, or amendments that may later be adopted, there exist: 
(1)  Lots; 
(2)  Structures; 
(3)  Uses of land; and 
(4)  Characteristics of use; 
which were lawful before this chapter was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this chapter or future amendment. It is the intent of this chapter to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this chapter that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, or be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
(b)  Nonconforming uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. A nonconforming use of structure and land in combination shall not be extended or enlarged after the effective date of this chapter, or by the addition of other uses of a nature which would be prohibited generally in the district involved. 
(Code 1999, § 110-121; Ord. No. 2006-01, pt. 2, 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 110-121. - Uses of land. 
    Where, prior to enactment of this article, permitted uses of land exist which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this chapter, the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise permitted, provided: 
(1)  No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the time of enactment of this article. 
(2)  No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use at the time of enactment this article. 
(3)  If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than six months, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such land is located. 
(4)  No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this chapter shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land. 
(Code 1999, § 110-122; Ord. No. 2006-01, pt. 2, 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 110-122. - Uses of structures and land in combination. 
    If a permitted use involving an individual structure, or structure and land in combination, exists at the time of enactment of the ordinance from which this article is derived that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this chapter, the permitted use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise permitted, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No nonconforming use of individual structure or use of structure and land in combination may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity, but any nonconforming use of individual structure, or of structure and land in combination, may be altered to decrease its nonconformity. 
(2)  Should a nonconforming use of an individual structure or any nonconforming portion of such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50 percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(3)  Should such structure be moved for any reason to any district whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
(Code 1999, § 110-123; Ord. No. 2006-01, pt. 2, 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 110-123. - Exceptions. 
(a)  No conforming structure shall be erected on the same lot with an existing nonconforming structure until the nonconforming use of the structure has been discontinued and replaced with a conforming use or until the nonconforming structure has been removed from the lot. 
(b)  If for any reason a nonconforming use of land or structure within the RM-1 and RM-2 zoning district is discontinued, it shall not thereafter be replaced except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(c)  If for any reason a nonconforming use of an accessory structure within any zoning district ceases or is discontinued, or if there is more than 50 percent destruction of such nonconforming accessory structure as defined in section 110-122(2), it shall not thereafter be replaced except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(Code 1999, § 110-124; Ord. No. 2006-01, pt. 2, 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 110-124. - Repairs and maintenance. 
(a)  On a nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding 25 percent of the current replacement cost of the nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of the structure as the case may be, provided that the cubic content existing when it became nonconforming shall not be increased. 
(b)  If a nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs and maintenance, and is declared by any duly authorized official to be unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be restored, repaired or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(Code 1999, § 110-125; Ord. No. 2006-01, pt. 2, 3-20-2006) 
Secs. 110-125-110-146. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 110-147. - Establishment of zoning districts; official zoning map. 
(a)  In order to accomplish the purpose of this chapter, the city is hereby divided into districts as provided herein and as shown on the official zoning map, consisting of a map of all lands lying within the city, entitled Zoning District Map 1992, and which, together with all explanatory matter contained thereon, is hereby declared to be a part of this chapter. Such map shall be endorsed by the city clerk with appropriate language and shall be filed with the community development director. 
(b)  The community development director shall preserve the official zoning map and maintain it in current form. The community development director shall see that each amendment to such map is recorded as soon as practicable after the effective date of the ordinance adopting such amendment and that records accompany such map or notations are made thereon to identify the official action by which such amendment was made, the date of such action and the area involved. It shall be unlawful for any person to make any change in the official zoning map except by authorization of the community development director in accordance with the procedures and requirements set forth in this chapter. 
(c)  If the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the commission may adopt a new zoning map which shall supersede the prior official zoning map. 
(d)  The new official zoning map may correct drafting and clerical errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no such corrections shall have the effect of amending the original zoning ordinance or subsequent amendment thereto without a duly noticed public hearing. Unless the prior official zoning map has been lost or destroyed, the prior map, or any significant parts thereof remaining, shall be preserved together with all available records pertaining to its adoption and amendment. 
(Code 1982, § 24-3; Code 1999, § 110-161; Ord. No. 248, § 1, 5-12-1975; Ord. No. 76-5, §§ 2, 3, 6-21-1976; Ord. No. 78-1, §§ 1-3, 4-10-1978; Ord. No. 82-16, §§ 1, 2, 11-15-1982; Ord. No. 83-5, § 1, 4-18-1983; Ord. No. 83-10, §§ 1, 2, 1-9-1984; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-3), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-148. - Rules for interpretation of district boundaries. 
    Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as described herein or shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  When reference is made that a zoning district includes an entire block, the zone boundaries shall extend to the centerline of abutting streets or if a canal bisects two parallel streets, the boundary shall be the canal centerline. 
(2)  If a zoning district divides a block, the lot lines shall be construed as the district boundary. 
(3)  If a canal or lake adjoins two or more districts, then the boundary of each adjoining zoning district shall extend to the center point of such canal or lake. 
(4)  Where a zoning district boundary is adjacent to the city limits, then the corporate limit line shall be the district boundary. 
(5)  Where a zoning district is bordered by railroad right-of-way, then the district boundary shall be construed as the point midway between the main tracks within the right-of-way. 
(6)  For any public street or alley which is hereafter officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to each parcel of abutting property shall apply to the centerline of the property which is abandoned. 
(7)  Where physical or cultural features existing on ground are at variance with those shown in the official zoning map, or in case any other uncertainty exists, the city commission shall interpret the intent of the official zoning maps as to location of district boundaries. 
(Code 1982, § 24-4; Code 1999, § 110-162; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-4), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-149. - Zoning districts classified. 
    For the purpose of classifying, regulating and restricting the location of residences, apartments, businesses, industry and other uses, the city is hereby divided into the following zoning districts: 
P Public District R-1A Single-Family Residential District R-1B Single-Family Residential District R-1C Single-Family Residential District R-2 Two-Family (Duplex) Residential District R-3 Multiple-Family Residential District RM-1 Mobile Home and Recreational Vehicle Park District RM-2 Mobile Home Subdivision District C General Commercial District I Industrial District PUD Planned Unit Development CPID Commerce Park Industrial District  
(Code 1982, § 24-7; Code 1999, § 110-163; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-7), 12-19-1994) 
Secs. 110-150-110-166. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - P PUBLIC DISTRICT 

Sec. 110-167. - Purpose. 
    The P Public District is established for the purpose of regulating the use of publicly owned land. The district is provided primarily for the strict protection of public areas within the city. 
(Code 1982, § 24-8(a); Code 1999, § 110-181; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-8(a)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-168. - Permitted uses, floor area ratio. 
    The permitted uses and maximum floor area ratio (FAR) in the P, Public District are as follows: 
(1)  Public recreational areas such as parks, playgrounds, ball fields, golf courses and similar uses: 0.25 FAR. 
(2)  Governmental facilities which includes, but not limited to, city hall, fire and police facilities, public works facilities, public utility substations, airports, cemeteries and other municipally owned facilities: 1.0 FAR. 
(3)  Educational uses such as schools, public and private, colleges, vocational schools and training centers and seminaries: 0.5 FAR. 
(4)  Civic and cultural uses such as auditoriums, stadiums, museums: 0.5 FAR. 
(5)  Heliports and airports, public and private: 0.10 FAR. 
(6)  Hospitals and similar uses: 1.0 FAR. 
(Code 1982, § 24-8(b); Code 1999, § 110-182; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-8(b)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-169. - Area and height requirements. 
    The lot area and height requirements in the P Public District are as follows: 
(1)  Lot area requirements. There shall be no minimum lot area requirement. 
(2)  Maximum height of building. The maximum height of buildings in the public zone shall not exceed two stories, except for hospitals and other institutions, which shall not exceed three stories or 35 feet. 
(Code 1982, § 24-8(c), (e); Code 1999, § 110-183; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-8(c), (d)), 12-19-1994) 
Secs. 110-170-110-191. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - R-1A SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 110-192. - Purpose. 
    It is the intent of the R-1A Single-Family Residential District to permanently provide lands within the city for very low density, estate lot, single-family residential development consisting of not more than one dwelling unit per any platted lot. 
(Code 1982, § 24-9(a); Code 1999, § 110-201; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-9(a)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-193. - Permitted uses. 
    The permitted uses in the R-1A Single-Family Residential District are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings and customary accessory structures incidental thereto. 
(2)  Public parks. 
(Code 1982, § 24-9(b); Code 1999, § 110-202; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-9(b)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-194. - Lot and building requirements. 
    The lot and building requirements in the R-1A Single-Family Residential District are as provided in this section. The principal building, accessory structures and other land uses shall be located so as to comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width at building line: 120 feet. 
(3)  Minimum lot depth: 125 feet. 
(4)  Minimum front yard: 40 feet. 
(5)  Minimum rear yard: 40 feet. 
(6)  Minimum side yard (interior): 20 feet. 
(7)  Minimum side yard (corner): 20 feet. 
(8)  Minimum setback from lot line for accessory structures: 
a.  Front: 80 feet. 
b.  Rear: 15 feet. 
c.  Side (interior): 10 feet. 
d.  Side (corner): 20 feet. 
(9)  Minimum living area of residences: 1,700 square feet. 
(Code 1982, § 24-9(c); Code 1999, § 110-203; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-9(c)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-195. - Ground coverage. 
    The total ground coverage in the R-1A Single-Family Residential District shall not exceed 25 percent of the total area of the lot or building site. 
(Code 1982, § 24-9(d); Code 1999, § 110-204; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-9(d)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-196. - Maximum height of buildings. 
    No building in the R-1A Single-Family Residential District shall be more than 25 feet in height with a maximum of two stories. 
(Code 1982, § 24-9(e); Code 1999, § 110-205; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-9(e)), 12-19-1994) 
Secs. 110-197-110-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - R-1B SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 110-216. - Purpose. 
    It is the intent of the R-1B Single-Family Residential District to permanently provide lands within the city for low density, single-family residential development consisting of not more than one dwelling unit per any platted lot. 
(Code 1982, § 24-10(a); Code 1999, § 110-226; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-10(a)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-217. - Permitted uses. 
    The permitted uses in the R-1B Single-Family Residential District are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings and customary accessory structures incidental thereto. 
(2)  Churches, provided that the minimum side yard requirement equals twice the minimum side yard requirements of said district and minimum parking and landscaping requirements can be satisfied. 
(3)  Kindergartens and day care centers, provided that a minimum outdoor play area of 100 square feet for each child enrolled shall be provided for on the premises, but not within the required front or side yard, and provided that such play area shall be shaded by canopies and/or shade trees and shall be enclosed with a continuous fence or wall having a minimum height of four feet. 
(4)  Public parks. 
(Code 1982, § 24-10(b); Code 1999, § 110-227; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-10(b)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-218. - Lot and building requirements. 
    The principal building, accessory buildings and other land uses in the R-1B Single-Family Residential District shall be located so as to comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 14,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width at building line: 90 feet, 50 feet*. 
(3)  Minimum lot depth: 125 feet. 
(4)  Minimum front yard: 30 feet. 
(5)  Minimum rear yard: 20 feet. 
(6)  Minimum side yard (interior): ten feet. 
(7)  Minimum side yard (corner): 15 feet. 
(8)  Minimum setback from lot line for accessory structures: 
a.  Front: 60 feet. 
b.  Rear: ten feet. 
c.  Side (interior): 7.5 feet. 
d.  Side (corner): 15 feet. 
(9)  Minimum living area of residences: 1,300 square feet. 
* If an occupied single-family residence existed on the lot in the previous five years. 
(Code 1982, § 24-10(c); Code 1999, § 110-228; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-10(c)), 12-19-1994; Ord. No. 2017-07, § 2, 4-17-2017) 
Sec. 110-219. - Ground coverage. 
    The total ground coverage in the R-1B Single-Family Residential District shall not exceed 35 percent of the total area of the lot or building site. 
(Code 1982, § 24-10(d); Code 1999, § 110-229; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-10(d)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-220. - Maximum height of buildings. 
    No building in the R-1B Single-Family Residential District shall be more than 25 feet in height with a maximum of two stories. 
(Code 1982, § 24-10(e); Code 1999, § 110-230; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-10(e)), 12-19-1994) 
Secs. 110-221-110-248. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - R-1C SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 110-249. - Purpose. 
    It is the intent of the R-1C Single-Family Residential District to permanently provide lands within the city for single-family residential development at a moderate density, consisting of not more than one dwelling unit per any platted lot. 
(Code 1982, § 24-11(a); Code 1999, § 110-246; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-11(a)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-250. - Permitted uses. 
    The permitted uses in the R-1C Single-Family Residential District are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings and customary accessory structures incidental thereto. 
(2)  Group homes, type I. 
(3)  Churches, provided that the minimum side yard requirement equals twice the minimum side yard requirements of such district and minimum parking and landscaping requirements can be satisfied. 
(4)  Kindergartens and day care centers, provided that a minimum outdoor play area of 100 square feet for each child enrolled shall be provided for on the premises, but not within the required front or side yard, and provided that such play area shall be shaded by canopies and/or shade trees and shall be enclosed with a continuous fence or wall having a minimum height of four feet. 
(5)  Home occupations. 
(6)  Public parks. 
(Code 1982, § 24-11(b); Code 1999, § 110-247; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-11(b)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-251. - Lot and building requirements. 
    The principal building, accessory buildings and other land uses in the R-1C Single-Family Residential District shall be located so as to comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width at building line: 80 feet. 
(3)  Minimum lot depth: 125 feet. 
(4)  Minimum front yard: 25 feet. 
(5)  Minimum rear yard: 20 feet. 
(6)  Minimum side yard (interior): ten feet. 
(7)  Minimum side yard (corner): 15 feet. 
(8)  Minimum setback from lot line for accessory structures: 
a.  Front: 60 feet. 
b.  Rear: ten feet. 
c.  Side (interior): 7.5 feet. 
d.  Side (corner): 15 feet. 
(9)  Minimum living area for residences: 1,000 square feet. 
(Code 1982, § 24-11(c); Code 1999, § 110-248; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-11(c)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-252. - Ground coverage. 
    The total ground coverage in the R-1C Single-Family Residential District shall not exceed 35 percent of the total area of the lot or building site. 
(Code 1982, § 24-11(d); Code 1999, § 110-249; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-11(d)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-253. - Maximum height of buildings. 
    No building in the R-1C Single-Family Residential District shall be more than 25 feet in height with a maximum of two stories. 
(Code 1982, § 24-11(e); Code 1999, § 110-250; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-11(e)), 12-19-1994) 
Secs. 110-254-110-284. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - R-2 TWO-FAMILY (DUPLEX) RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 110-285. - Purpose. 
    The R-2 Two-Family Residential District is a residential district of medium population density providing for a maximum of two dwelling units per lot. The principal uses of land may include a mix of housing types, including single-family duplex apartments and townhouse development. The provisions of this district are intended to provide for the development of sites where a desirable density transition can be achieved between areas of contrasting character of development intensity. It is intended that this district accommodate a compatible development of residential uses at a higher density than single-family, but at no lower standards of quality. 
(Code 1982, § 24-12(a); Code 1999, § 110-266; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-12(a)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-286. - Permitted uses. 
    The permitted uses in the R-2 Two-Family Residential District are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings incidental thereto. 
(2)  Townhouses and customary accessory structures incidental thereto. 
(3)  Two-family (duplex) dwelling units and customary accessory structures incidental thereto. 
(4)  Group homes, types I and II. 
(5)  Churches, provided that the minimum side yard requirements equals twice the minimum side yard requirements of said district and minimum parking and landscaping requirements can be satisfied. 
(6)  Kindergartens and day care centers, provided that a minimum outdoor play area of 100 square feet for each child enrolled shall be provided for on the premises, but not within the required front or side yard, and provided that such play area shall be shaded by canopies and/or shade trees and shall be enclosed with a continuous fence or wall having a minimum height of four feet. 
(7)  Home occupations. 
(8)  Public operated neighborhood parks and recreation areas. 
(Code 1982, § 24-12(b); Code 1999, § 110-267; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-12(b)), 12-19-1994) 
_____
Sec. 110-287. - Lot and building requirements-Generally. 
    The principal building, accessory structures and other land uses in the R-2 Two-Family Residential District shall be located so as to comply with the following requirements: 
Duplex Single-Family Minimum lot area 9,500 sq. ft. 7,500 sq. ft. Minimum lot width at building line: Interior 90 ft. 75 ft. 
50 ft.* Corner 100 ft. 85 ft. Minimum front yard 25 ft. 25 ft. Minimum side yard (interior) 10 ft. 10 ft. Minimum side yard (corner) 20 ft. 20 ft. Minimum rear yard 20 ft. 20 ft. Minimum living area for residences 750 sq. ft. 900 sq. ft. Minimum setback from lot line for accessory structures: Front 60 ft. 60 ft. Rear 10 ft. 10 ft. Side (interior) 7.5 ft. 7.5 ft. Side (corner) 20 ft. 20 ft.  
* If an occupied single-family residence existed on the lot in the previous five years. 
(Code 1982, § 24-12(c); Code 1999, § 110-268; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-12(c)), 12-19-1994; Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 3-20-2017) 
_____
Sec. 110-288. - Same-Ground coverage. 
    The total ground coverage in the R-2 Two-Family Residential District shall not exceed 35 percent of the total area of any lot or building site. 
(Code 1982, § 24-12(d); Code 1999, § 110-269; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-12(d)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-289. - Same-Townhouses. 
    A single townhouse unit, groups of townhouse units, and accessory structures in the R-2 Two-Family Residential District shall be so located and arranged so as to comply with the following requirements as applicable: 
(1)  Minimum site area density. The minimum combined site area required for two townhouse units shall be 7,500 square feet; for each additional unit thereafter: 3,500 square feet shall be provided. 
(2)  Minimum lot size. No townhouse lot shall be less than 2,000 square feet. No townhouse unit lot width shall be less than 20 feet. Where less than 100 percent of the townhouse lot is conveyed in fee simple then that portion not conveyed shall be conveyed to a property owners' association as stated below. If any portion of such lot or lots is not conveyed in fee simple title, it shall be held by either: 
a.  The lot owners, provided each lot owner has an undivided interest in the common area. The individual interest in the common areas shall not be conveyed separately from the ownership of such lot. 
b.  A property owners' association. 
c.  A combination of subsection (1) or (2) of this section, the minimum area to be conveyed to an individual owner shall be not less than 100 percent of the total ground floor building area of the unit. Where 100 percent of the townhouse lot is conveyed in fee simple, then a homeowners' maintenance association shall be formed among the unit owners to ensure compliance with exterior area maintenance regulations as may be adopted by the association. 
(3)  Setbacks. 
a.  Any townhouse group having not more than two units shall meet the following minimum yard setback requirements: 
Minimum front yard 25 ft. Minimum side yard (interior) 7.5 ft. Minimum side yard (corner) 15 ft. Minimum rear yard 15 ft.  
b.  Any townhouse group having more than two units shall meet the following minimum yard requirements: 
Minimum front yard 25 ft. Minimum side yard (interior) A townhouse having two party walls shall have no side interior yard requirements. End units shall have a ten-foot side yard minimum. Minimum side yard (corner) 15 ft. Minimum rear yard 20 ft.  
(4)  Number of townhouse dwellings in a group. Townhouses developed in a lateral configuration shall have no more than ten single-family units and shall be attached laterally in a series, provided that setback and/or architectural variation shall be provided among units within a series of more than five units. 
(Code 1999, § 110-270; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-12(d)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-290. - Same-Maximum height of buildings. 
    No building in the R-2 two-family residential district shall be more than 25 feet in height with a maximum of two stories. 
(Code 1982, § 24-12(e); Code 1999, § 110-271; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-12(e)), 12-19-1994) 
Secs. 110-291-110-313. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - R-3 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 110-314. - Purpose. 
(a)  The intent of the R-3 Multiple-Family Residential District is to provide for residential development of medium population density. The provisions of this district are intended to recognize that a certain amount of flexibility in multifamily living is desirable and that the district is designed to complement the requirements of low and high density multiple-family districts. 
(b)  The provisions of this R-3 district are intended to provide for sites in logical locations after consideration of such factors as the following: 
(1)  The capacity and character of adjoining streets; 
(2)  The nature of surrounding uses; the proximity to large concentrations of employment or shopping; or 
(3)  Where a substantial amount of primarily vacant land exists or where smaller individual parcels of land can be feasibly assembled to form a single, larger parcel suitable for multiple-family developments. 
(Code 1982, § 24-13(a); Code 1999, § 110-311; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-13(a)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-315. - Permitted uses. 
    The permitted uses in the R-3 Multiple-Family Residential District are as follows: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-1 and R-2 districts. 
(2)  Apartments, condominiums, townhouses developed in accordance with requirements set forth in division 6 of this article, and other similar multifamily uses. 
(3)  Group homes, types I, II and III. 
(4)  Nursing and convalescent facilities when located on a collector or arterial street as designated on the future traffic circulation map of the comprehensive plan. 
(5)  Churches. 
(6)  Kindergartens and day care centers. 
(7)  Home occupations. 
(8)  Public parks. 
(Code 1982, § 24-13(b); Code 1999, § 110-312; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-13(b)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-316. - Lot and building requirements. 
    The principal building, accessory buildings and other land uses in the R-3 Multiple-Family Residential District shall be located so as to comply with the following requirements: 
Minimum lot area 8,500 
sq. ft. Minimum lot width at building line 80 ft. Minimum front yard 25 ft. Minimum rear yard 20 ft. Minimum side yard (interior) 20 ft. Minimum setback from lot lines for accessory structures: Front 50 ft. Side (interior) 10 ft. Side (corner) 15 ft. Rear 10 ft.  
Single-family dwellings and accessory structures shall conform to minimum yard requirements of the R-2 Two-Family Residential District, section 110-287. 
Townhouses and accessory structures shall conform to the minimum yard requirements of the R-2 Two-Family Residential District, section 110-289. 
(Code 1982, § 24-13(c); Code 1999, § 110-313; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-13(c)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-317. - Ground coverage. 
    The total ground coverage in the R-3 Multiple-Family Residential District shall not exceed 40 percent of the total area of the lot or building site. 
(Code 1982, § 24-13(d); Code 1999, § 110-314; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-13(d)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-318. - Maximum height of buildings. 
    No building shall in the R-3 Multiple-Family Residential District be more than 35 feet in height with a maximum of three stories. Accessory structures shall not exceed the maximum structure height permitted in the zoning district or the height of the principal structures, whichever is less. 
(Code 1982, § 24-13(e); Code 1999, § 110-315; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-13(e)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-319. - Density regulations. 
    Density requirements in the R-3 Multiple-Family Residential District shall be calculated as follows: 
(1)  One dwelling unit: 8,500 square feet of land area. 
(2)  Two dwelling units: 9,500 square feet of land area. 
(3)  Three or more dwelling units: 9,500 square feet of land area for first three dwelling units, plus an additional 2,500 square feet of land area for each additional dwelling unit. 
(Code 1982, § 24-13(g); Code 1999, § 110-316; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-13(f)), 12-19-1994) 
Secs. 110-320-110-341. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - RM-1 MOBILE HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK DISTRICT 

Sec. 110-342. - Purpose. 
    The RM-1 Mobile Home and Recreational Vehicle Park District is a managed recreational vehicle and mobile home park district in which lots may not be sold to individuals and on-site management is provided. These regulations are designed to promote high quality mobile home living, therefore, the regulations and minimum standards in this division shall apply. 
(Code 1982, § 24-14(a); Code 1999, § 110-336; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-14(a)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-343. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this division, the terms "mobile home" and "recreational vehicles" shall be defined in accordance with section 50-2. 
(Code 1999, § 110-337; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-14(b)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-344. - Permitted uses. 
    No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be erected, altered or used, or land or water used, in whole or in part, in the RM-1 Mobile Home and Recreational Vehicle Park District for other than the following: 
(1)  Mobile homes and recreational vehicles (one per lot or site). 
(2)  Accessory uses and structures customarily associated with mobile home and recreational vehicle parks, including patios, recreation facilities, administration buildings, service buildings and utilities. 
(3)  A single-family residence other than a mobile home or recreational vehicle for park proprietor only. 
(Code 1982, § 24-14(b); Code 1999, § 110-338; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-14(c)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-345. - Plan approval requirements. 
    Plans for a mobile home and recreational vehicle park shall be submitted to the city commission and construction shall be in accordance with approved plans and specifications. 
(Code 1982, § 24-14(c); Code 1999, § 110-339; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-14(d)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-346. - Required utilities. 
    The utilities required in the RM-1 Mobile Home and Recreational Vehicle Park District shall be as governed by the state, the county health department, and the city building code. 
(Code 1982, § 24-14(d); Code 1999, § 110-340; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-14(e)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-347. - Area and lot requirements. 
    The area and lot requirements in the RM-1 Mobile Home and Recreational Vehicle Park District are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum site or lot area and width for mobile homes and recreational vehicles. Minimum lot size or site shall be 5,000 square feet. Each lot or site shall have a minimum width of 50 feet. 
(2)  Minimum setbacks from park perimeter and within park. Minimum setbacks from park perimeter shall be in accordance with section 50-39 and minimum setbacks within the park shall be in accordance with section 50-40. 
(3)  Minimum spacing of units. Minimum spacing of units with relation to other units or buildings shall be in accordance with section 50-42. 
(4)  Minimum park size. 20 units. 
(5)  Required recreation area, exclusive of administrative and utility areas. There shall be a minimum of 200 square feet of open area provided per lot or site for the first 100 lots or sites and 50 square feet for each additional lot or site in excess of 100. One-half of the water surface within a park shall be credited toward required recreation area except that at least 50 percent of the required area shall be land area. 
(Code 1982, § 24-14(e)-(h); Code 1999, § 110-341; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-14(f)-(j)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-348. - Required buffer strip. 
    In addition to screening requirements for mobile home parks as set forth in section 50-39, the buffer strip requirements in this section shall be applicable to all mobile home parks. No buildings or mobile homes shall be permitted in a required buffer strip and no fence, wall or identification sign may be erected to a height in excess of four feet. 
(1)  Adjacent to public streets, a buffer strip shall be provided having a minimum width of ten feet developed with pervious ground cover or lawn grass; and containing for each 50 linear feet thereof, measured at the street right-of-way, at least eight shrubs having a height of 18 inches at time of installation and two trees having a minimum height of 12 feet at time of installation. When a mobile home park or recreational vehicle park is located adjacent to a residential zoning district and fronts on the same street as residential lots in such district, the buffer adjacent to such street shall have a depth, as measured perpendicular to the street, equal to the minimum front yard setback required in the residential zoning district. This provision may result in a setback greater than the minimum setback distances set forth in section 50-39. 
(2)  Mobile home and recreational vehicle parks fronting on a highway shall provide and maintain a clear area not less than 20 feet in width alongside and parallel to the public thoroughfare to facilitate safe and rapid exit from the public thoroughfare by arriving vehicles. 
(Code 1982, § 24-14(j); Code 1999, § 110-342; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-14(k)), 12-19-1994) 
Secs. 110-349-110-369. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - RM-2 MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION DISTRICT 

Sec. 110-370. - Purpose. 
    The RM-2 Mobile Home Subdivision District is a mobile home subdivision district wherein lots may be sold to individuals. The district standards are designed to promote high quality mobile home development. The regulations and minimum standards in this division shall apply. 
(Code 1982, § 24-14.1; Code 1999, § 110-361; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-14.1), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-371. - Definitions. 
    The term "mobile home" shall be as defined in accordance with the definition included in section 50-2. 
(Code 1999, § 110-362; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-14.1(b)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-372. - Permitted uses. 
    No building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered or used, or land or water used, in whole or in part, in the RM-2 Mobile Home Subdivision District for other than the following: 
(1)  Mobile homes (one per lot). 
(2)  Accessory uses and structures customarily associated with mobile home development, such as recreation facilities, administration buildings, utilities and additions which complement the mobile homes. 
(Code 1982, § 24-14.1(b); Code 1999, § 110-363; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-14.1), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-373. - Plan approval requirements. 
    Plans for a mobile home subdivision to be developed in accordance with the requirements of the RM-2 district shall be processed in the same manner as subdivision plats, and shall be recorded in the county plat book. 
(Code 1982, § 24-14.1(c); Code 1999, § 110-364; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-14.1(d)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-374. - Area and lot requirements. 
    The area and lot requirements in the RM-2 Mobile Home Subdivision District are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 6,600 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width (interior): 60 feet. 
(3)  Minimum lot width (corner): 70 feet. 
(4)  Minimum setbacks from lot boundary. 
a.  Mobile home sites or lots served by central water and sewer system: 
1.  Front: 25 feet. 
2.  Side (interior): 7.5 feet. 
3.  Side (corner): ten feet. 
4.  Rear: 15 feet. 
b.  Minimum setback from lot line for accessory structures: 
1.  Front: 40 feet. 
2.  Side (interior): five feet. 
3.  Side (corner): ten feet. 
4.  Rear: five feet. 
(Code 1982, § 24-14.1(d)-(f); Code 1999, § 110-365; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-14.1(e)-(h)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-375. - Minimum areas. 
    The minimum size and floor areas in a RM-2 Mobile Home Subdivision District are as follows: 
(1)  Mobile home floor area: 320 square feet. 
(2)  Floor area of structures added to mobile homes for living space shall not exceed 100 percent of original floor area. 
(3)  Mobile home subdivision size: ten acres. 
(Code 1982, § 24-14.1(g), (h); Code 1999, § 110-366; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-14.1(i), (j)), 12-19-1994) 
Secs. 110-376-110-393. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - C GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 110-394. - Purpose. 
    The intent of the C General Commercial District is to provide commercial areas in the city that cater to an area-wide consumer population. It shall also be the purpose of this district to provide for business uses normally found in the central business district and those catering to highway-oriented uses. 
(Code 1982, § 24-15(a); Code 1999, § 110-386; Ord. No. 76-8, § 1, 11-8-1976; Ord. No. 81-8, § 1, 9-21-1981; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-15(a)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-395. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Uses permitted in the C General Commercial District are as follows: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-2 district and the R-3 district although any residential use must be in harmony with overall development and not as a primary or principal use, but no single-family residences are permitted. 
(2)  Appliance and furniture stores. 
(3)  Bakeries, confectionery providing on-premises retail sales. 
(4)  Clinics, medical and dental out-patient only. 
(5)  Commercial or municipal parking lots or garages. 
(6)  Commercial recreation facilities, including marinas. 
(7)  Convenience food and beverage store. 
(8)  Department stores. 
(9)  Financial institutions with or without drive-thru teller units. 
(10)  Gasoline service stations. 
(11)  General retail establishments. 
(12)  Hardware, paint and garden supplies. 
(13)  Hotels, motels or tourist courts. 
(14)  Indoor and outdoor vehicular sales such as automobile, motorcycle and all terrain vehicles and boat and boat trailer and utility trailer sales. 
(15)  Kennels; provided that they shall be allowed only if they are located on the same property with and are ancillary to either a veterinary clinic or a pet grooming facility; provided that no more than two animals at any such facility are allowed to be in outside runs at any one time and that such animals not be allowed in such outside runs before 6:30 a.m. or after 6:30 p.m. of any day; provided that all other animals are kept in cages, pens or runs located inside a fully enclosed air conditioned structure; provided that no more than 35 pets are kept in any such facility at any one time; provided the facilities are used to house only dogs, cats and birds; and also provided that the facilities are operated in a manner so that they do not create any noise or smell that is unreasonably objectionable to the occupants of other property. 
(16)  Kindergarten and day care facilities. 
(17)  Laundries and dry cleaning plants, which do not use flammable solvents. 
(18)  Mortuary and funeral homes. 
(19)  Newsstand. 
(20)  Reserved. 
(21)  Personal services (including, but not limited to, barbershops, beauty salons, spa). 
(22)  Pharmacy. 
(23)  Pool halls and theaters. 
(24)  Professional services, business services. 
(25)  Public assembly buildings. 
(26)  Repair and services of automobiles, trucks, boats, recreational vehicles and other automotive equipment provided repair and service work is not performed on any premises within 50 feet of a residential zoning district. Storage areas shall have a wall or fence that screens any repairing or storage areas that are visible from the street or adjacent property owner. 
(27)  Repair and service of personal, household and office items and equipment such as, but not limited to, shoe repair, typewriter repair and small appliance repair. 
(28)  Restaurants. 
(29)  Shopping centers. 
(30)  Supermarkets. 
(31)  Veterinarian clinics. 
(32)  Vocational schools, limited to office-oriented vocations, such as, but not limited to secretarial, business, real estate and computer programming. 
(b)  Special exception uses. A use which may be allowed in the C General Commercial District by special exception are as follows: 
(1)  Extended stay hotel or motel, occupancy limits for each unit shall be established and imposed by condition of approval. 
(Code 1982, § 24-15(b); Code 1999, § 110-386; Ord. No. 76-8, § 1, 11-8-1976; Ord. No. 81-8, § 1, 9-21-1981; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-15(b)), 12-19-1994; Ord. No. 2000-01, pt. 1, 3-20-2000; Ord. No. 2000-02, pt. 1, 3-20-2000; Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1, 6-15-2009; Ord. No. 2017-03, § 2, 2-20-2017) 
Sec. 110-396. - Transitional site. 
    The following uses, features, and activities shall not be permitted on a transitional site in the C General Commercial District so as to avoid incompatible off-site impacts for properties located in a residential district: 
(1)  Restaurant, bar or night club operating after the hour of 10:00 p.m. 
(2)  Public and private clubs operating primarily as entertainment facilities offering food and beverage after the hour of 10:00 p.m. 
(3)  Parking and loading spaces, exclusive of access drives, located within 25 feet of a residential district boundary. 
(4)  Drive-through facilities where business transactions occur. 
(5)  Outdoor paging devices or loud speakers. 
(6)  Freestanding signs having a sign face area greater than six square feet. 
(7)  A window in an exterior wall of a building having a total area in excess of 24 square feet used primarily for advertising, or displaying merchandise or services offered on the premises. 
(8)  Repair service businesses involving gasoline motors, mechanical equipment tools, or chemicals which create perceptible outdoor noise or odors in normal operations. 
(9)  Service stations. 
(10)  Car wash. 
(11)  Veterinary clinics. 
(12)  Kennels. 
(Code 1999, § 110-388; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-15(c)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-397. - Lot and building requirements. 
    The principal building, accessory buildings and other land uses in the C General Commercial District shall be located so as to comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Minimum land area: 2,500 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width at building line: 25 feet. 
(3)  Minimum front yard: none required. 
(4)  Minimum rear yard: none required, except when abutting an R or RM District: 20 feet. 
(5)  Minimum side yard: none required, except when abutting an R or RM District: ten feet. 
(Code 1982, § 24-15(c); Code 1999, § 110-389; Ord. No. 76-8, § 1, 11-8-1976; Ord. No. 81-8, § 1, 9-21-1981; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-15(d)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-398. - Ground coverage. 
    The total ground coverage in the C General Commercial District may be 100 percent. 
(Code 1982, § 24-15(d); Code 1999, § 110-390; Ord. No. 76-8, § 1, 11-8-1976; Ord. No. 81-8, § 1, 9-21-1981; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-15(e)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-399. - Maximum height of buildings. 
    No building in the C General Commercial District shall be more than 35 feet and three stories in height. 
(Code 1982, § 24-15(e); Code 1999, § 110-391; Ord. No. 76-8, § 1, 11-8-1976; Ord. No. 81-8, § 1, 9-21-1981; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-15(f)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-400. - Parking requirements. 
    The off-street parking requirements in the C General Commercial District shall be as stated in article II of chapter 102. 
(Code 1982, § 24-15(g); Code 1999, § 110-392; Ord. No. 76-8, § 1, 11-8-1976; Ord. No. 81-8, § 1, 9-21-1981; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-15(g)), 12-19-1994) 
Secs. 110-401-110-428. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - I INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 110-429. - Purpose. 
    The intent of the I Industrial District is to provide for industry beyond simple assembly. The further intent is to encourage and facilitate the development of industrial enterprises in a setting conclusive to public health; economic stability and growth; protection from blight and deterioration; nonindustrial encroachment; and efficient traffic movement including employee and truck traffic. The area, height, bulk and placement regulations, as well as use regulations, reflect the intent of the district. This district is primarily designed for limited range of industry and related uses. New residential development is excluded from this district, both to protect residences from an undesirable environment and to ensure the reservation of adequate areas for industrial development. In this district, consideration is given to including certain industries which, because of their character and methods of operation, are clean, quiet and can be properly buffered from a residential area by screening or as otherwise regulated on a transitional site. 
(Code 1982, § 24-16(a); Code 1999, § 110-411; Ord. No. 81-8, § 2, 9-21-1981; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-16(a)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-430. - Permitted uses. 
    The uses permitted in the I Industrial District are as follows: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the C district except, however, residential uses shall be allowed only as living quarters for an owner, manager or caretaker of a permitted use. 
(2)  Asphalt and concrete mixing and product manufacture. 
(3)  Automotive, boat and other vehicular paint and body shops. 
(4)  Cold storage. 
(5)  Contractor storage yard. 
(6)  Outdoor sales establishments such as automobile and motorcycle sales, boat sales, display and sale of mobile homes and factory-manufactured housing units and/or travel trailers, recreational vehicles; and camper sales. 
(7)  Commercial AM/FM radio, television microwave transmission and relay towers and accessory equipment and buildings. 
(8)  Exterminator. 
(9)  Incinerators. 
(10)  Laundry and dry cleaning plants, bottling plants, and printing shops. 
(11)  Light manufacturing such as dairy products, appliances, leather goods, electronic equipment, furniture and other similar activities. 
(12)  Lumber and building supplies, heating and air conditioning, sheet metal works, welding, contractors and subcontractors shops and offices. 
(13)  Metal fabrication. 
(14)  Outdoor storage of equipment, raw materials, manufactured products and manufactured housing units. 
(15)  Salvage yards and junkyards, in accordance with section 22-42 et seq. 
(16)  Storage of gas and oil. 
(17)  Transportation and multimode terminals. 
(18)  Wholesale, warehousing, trucking, moving, storage and storage depots. 
(19)  Woodworking. 
(Code 1982, § 22-16(b); Code 1999, § 110-412; Ord. No. 81-8, § 2, 9-21-1981; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-16(b)), 12-19-1994; Ord. No. 2000-03, pt. 1, 3-20-2000) 
Sec. 110-431. - Open storage. 
    Where the city commission deems it necessary, any area within the I Industrial District used as open storage shall be completely enclosed by a fence or wall so as to protect surrounding property from debris damage caused by wind or storm. 
(Code 1982, § 24-16(c); Code 1999, § 110-413; Ord. No. 81-8, § 2, 9-21-1981; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-16(c)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-432. - Transitional site. 
    The following uses, features, and activities shall not be permitted on a transitional site in the I Industrial District, so as to avoid incompatible off-site impacts for properties located in a residential district: 
(1)  Uses and activities prohibited on transitional sites in the commercial district as set forth in section 110-396. 
(2)  Uses and activities prohibited on a transitional site in the industrial district as follows: 
a.  Buildings or portions thereof housing machinery used for industrial operations which exudes perceptible processing odors or excessive noise. Noise levels shall not exceed 55 decibels measured three feet above grade at a common property line which is also a residential district boundary. 
b.  Parking and loading spaces, exclusive of access drives located within 25 feet of a residential district boundary. 
c.  Wall openings for windows and doors which comprise more than ten percent of the total exterior wall surface on any one face of a building including wall offsets, oriented toward an abutting residential district. 
d.  Outdoor storage. 
e.  Commercial radio, television, microwave transmission and relay stations and towers. 
(Code 1999, § 110-414; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-16(d)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-433. - Prohibited uses. 
    Residential dwellings, except living quarters for an owner, manager, or caretaker, in conjunction with and incidental to a permitted use are prohibited in the I Industrial District. 
(Code 1982, § 24-16(c); Code 1999, § 110-415; Ord. No. 81-8, § 2, 9-21-1981; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-16(e)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-434. - Lot and building requirements. 
    The principal building, accessory buildings and other land uses in the I Industrial District shall be located so as to comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Minimum land area: 5,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width at building line: 50 feet. 
(Code 1982, § 24-16(d); Code 1999, § 110-416; Ord. No. 81-8, § 2, 9-21-1981; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-16(f)), 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 110-435. - Maximum height of building. 
    No building shall be more than 55 feet or three stories in height in the I Industrial District. Smokestacks, radio antennas, chimneys and similar structures are excluded from this restriction. 
(Code 1982, § 24-16(e); Code 1999, § 110-417; Ord. No. 81-8, § 2, 9-21-1981; Ord. No. 94-01, pt. 1(24-16(g)), 12-19-1994; Ord. No. 2017-09, § 1, 5-15-2017) 
Secs. 110-436-110-453. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 

Sec. 110-454. - Purpose. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this section to permit a Planned Unit Development (PUD) District which: 
(1)  Allows the development of land as planned communities and encourages developers to exercise greater creativity in the planning and development or redevelopment of tracts of land under unified control than is generally possible through the strict application of the minimum requirements of these zoning district regulations; 
(2)  Encourages flexible and creative concepts of site planning; permits a diversification of uses, structures and open space areas in a manner compatible with both the surrounding existing and approved development; 
(3)  Encourages the land to be used more efficiently and the creation of communities through the use of smaller networks of infrastructure; 
(4)  Provides for the retention of natural amenities by encouraging the incorporation of scenic, natural and functional open space areas within the PUD; and 
(5)  Provides for the approval of a plan upon which both the city and the applicant can rely, where there are conflicts between the general provisions of the code and the approved PUD plan and development order, the PUD plan and development order will control. 
(b)  The PUD process shall not be used merely to avoid compliance with other zoning regulations imposed by this Code. 
(Code 1999, § 110-418; Ord. No. 2006-02, pt. 1, 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 110-455. - Permitted uses. 
    The uses permitted within the PUD district shall include and comply with the following: 
(1)  Residential units, including single-family attached and detached dwelling, two-family dwellings, and multiple-family dwellings. 
(2)  Churches, schools, community or club buildings and similar public and semi-public facilities. 
(3)  Nonresidential uses, including commercial or retail uses, offices, clinics and professional uses, light industrial (fully enclosed) and recreation uses. 
(4)  Any combination of the above uses. 
(Code 1999, § 110-419; Ord. No. 2006-02, pt. 1, 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 110-456. - Pre-application conference. 
    The applicant shall file for a pre-application conference. The city will invite all of the necessary city representatives to provide review and input. The applicant will provide the city with a synopsis of the proposed PUD one week prior to the pre-application conference to permit the city staff to review and consider the proposal. 
(Code 1999, § 110-420; Ord. No. 2006-02, pt. 1, 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 110-457. - Application requirements. 
    An application for PUD zoning shall be submitted in accordance with the general requirements for a rezoning as set forth in article II, division 2 of this chapter. All applications for PUD zoning must include the following additional information: 
(1)  Evidence of unified control. The applicant must submit a notarized written consent from the owners of all property comprising the subject parcel. 
(2)  Surrounding property owners list. The applicant must submit a property owner's list with mailing addresses and mailing labels for all property within 200 feet of the subject parcel, or the portion thereof that is the subject of the PUD zoning request. For the purpose of this subsection, names and addresses of property owners will be deemed to be those appearing on the latest tax rolls of Hendry County at the time of application. 
(3)  Master concept plan (MCP). The MCP must identify: 
a.  The boundary of each development area within which buildings, parking, or other uses will be located; 
b.  The maximum height in feet and the number of habitable floors, and whether or not parking will be under the building; 
c.  Identify the maximum amount of uses, such as; if residential the maximum number of units by type (single family, multifamily, townhome, zero-lot line, etc.), hotel, the maximum number of rooms, if commercial, identify the breakdown of commercial uses, such as retail, office, restaurant, and the maximum square footage of each type of commercial, if industrial, the maximum square footage; 
d.  The general location of wetlands and lakes, and the percentage of the PUD that will be in open space and recreation areas. Open space includes wetlands, lakes, recreation areas, common landscaped areas, and other areas of green space. A PUD must include 25 percent overall open space. Indicate whether or not there are private recreational uses such as clubhouses or recreational facilities, and the maximum square footage of the clubhouse or recreational center; 
e.  The property development regulations for each use shall be shown on the MCP and shall be set forth on an exhibit included with the application, which is in a form that can be attached to the final development order. 
(4)  Traffic impact statement. A traffic impact statement (prepared by a professional engineer or duly qualified transportation planner) that identifies the number of net new external trips, identifies pass-by calculations, internal capture calculations, identifies the a.m. and p.m. peak hour trips on all adjacent roadway links, and which identifies the level of service (LOS) on all adjacent roadway links with and without the project. 
(5)  Comprehensive plan consistency. A narrative explanation as to how the proposed development complies with the city's comprehensive plan. Specific reference to compliance with each future land use category must be noted. 
(6)  Additional information. Information that identifies the general elevations of the property, information regarding whether or not there are any floodplains on the property and the general location of the floodplains, a statement as to whether or not there are any historical or archeologically significant features on the site, and a Florida Land Use, Cover and Classification System (FLUCCS) map at the same scale as the MCP that clearly identifies any existing federal or state jurisdictional wetlands. The FLUCCS map shall identify the acreage of any wetlands and water bodies on the site at the time of submittal. The master concept should identify only those wetlands that will be incorporated into the plan. 
(7)  Deviations. A list of all deviations (from zoning district lot and building requirements) with a written justification for each deviation. The location of each requested deviation must be identified on the MCP. 
(8)  Schedule of uses. The type of uses, and the maximum amount of each use, and the general location of each use. 
(Code 1999, § 110-421; Ord. No. 2006-02, pt. 1, 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 110-458. - Staff technical review. 
(a)  The application shall be reviewed by the city planning staff for compliance with the submittal requirements. Upon a determination that sufficient information has been submitted to initiate the substantive review, a sufficiency letter shall be sent to the applicant by the city manager. If the determination is that the application does not include sufficient information, a letter shall be sent to the applicant identifying the deficiencies that need to be addressed. The staff shall conduct a sufficiency review of all additional information submitted in response to a sufficiency letter and either identify additional deficiencies, or provide the letter finding the application to be complete. 
(b)  Once the application is determined to be complete, the staff technical review committee shall conduct their substantive review. The application shall be reviewed for consistency with the comprehensive plan and the code; written recommendations to shall be provided to the applicant and the local planning agency not less than one week prior to the scheduled public hearing. 
(Code 1999, § 110-422; Ord. No. 2006-02, pt. 1, 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 110-459. - Local planning agency review. 
    The local planning agency shall review the application in accordance with the requirements of article II, division 2 of this chapter and shall make findings and recommendations as to compliance of the application with the adopted comprehensive plan and the applicable standards of this Code. The finding shall be reduced to writing and provided to the applicant and submitted for consideration by the city commission. 
(Code 1999, § 110-423; Ord. No. 2006-02, pt. 1, 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 110-460. - City commission action. 
    The city commission shall review the application in accordance with the requirements of articles II and III of this chapter and shall make findings, or adopt the findings of the local planning agency, of consistency with the comprehensive plan and this Code. The city commission may include appropriate conditions within the PUD to address compatibility and to ensure compliance with the PUD purpose and intent. If the action of the city commission results in changes to the master concept plan, the applicant must submit a master concept plan that conforms to the action of the city commission for attachment to, and incorporation into the PUD approval. 
(Code 1999, § 110-424; Ord. No. 2006-02, pt. 1, 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 110-461. - PUD district development standards. 
(a)  Generally. All PUD developments shall conform to the provisions of the adopted comprehensive plan of the city and the land development regulations (LDR). Where standards exist in the plan and comparable standards do not exist in this Code, the standards and procedures set out in the plan shall apply in addition to the standards herein. Use of the PUD process described in section herein can result in the applicant establishing specific height, area, bulk, yard, size and mix provisions which may be different from the requirements contained in the several zoning districts within this chapter, in any or all respects. Minimum requirements of the zoning districts in which the subject property is located shall no longer apply upon final approval of a PUD. Further, a PUD may be placed in any zoning district provided that the public hearing and notice procedures described in this chapter are observed during the preliminary plan review stage and, if necessary, during the final plan review stage. 
(b)  Minimum dimension and density requirements. 
(1)  The PUD development shall identify the width and type of any perimeter buffers, and internal buffers, when buffers are necessary to ensure compatibility. Buffers shall be of such a size and type to mutually protect incompatible adjacent land uses. Buffers can be walls, walls on berms, landscaping, native vegetation, distance separation, or other creative means of ensuring compatibility, or a combination of the aforementioned factors. 
(2)  The lot requirements shall be consistent with the adopted property development regulations. 
(3)  The maximum permitted density and square footage within the PUD must be consistent with the density permitted by the future land use element of the city's comprehensive plan. 
(4)  The maximum height of all structure types, office, single family, multifamily, townhomes, etc., must be identified on the master concept plan and in the written PUD approval. 
(c)  Off-street parking and loading area. Off-street parking and loading shall be as set forth in article II of chapter 102 unless a deviation from the LDR is granted by the city commission. 
(d)  Landscaping standards. Landscaping shall be as set forth in article IV of chapter 102 unless a deviation from the LDR is granted by the city commission. 
(e)  Other specific standards. 
(1)  The frontage on dedicated public or private rights-of-way shall observe a front yard setback requirement in accordance with the zoning district. For detached structures, there shall be a minimum of a five-foot side yard and rear yards shall be a minimum of ten feet. Corner lots and through lots shall provide the full front setback along the street frontage to which the structure is oriented and a minimum of ten-foot setback along the other street frontage. 
(2)  Two or more freestanding structures located on the same lot shall be a minimum of ten feet apart. 
(3)  Every dwelling unit or other use permitted in PUD developments shall have access to a public road or street, either directly or via an approved road, pedestrian way, court, or other area dedicated to public use or reserved for private use, or common element guaranteeing access. 
(4)  Reserved. 
(5)  All streets shall be constructed to meet or exceed all city standards, except as provided for in subsection (6) of this section. 
(6)  Private streets, as principal means of access to individually owned lots in the PUD that are required to comply with the provisions of this chapter, shall be prohibited unless the developer establishes a homeowners' association complying with state statutes. In such cases, the homeowner's association shall be responsible for construction, maintenance and control of such roadways. Private streets are required to be constructed to meet or exceed all applicable city standards. The right-of-way for private streets and cul-de-sac within the PUD may be reduced to 40 feet in width and 90 feet in diameter, respectively, provided the developer can show that all sidewalks, utilities and stormwater are provided for within the right-of-way. Alternatively, utilities and stormwater may be provided for through easements. 
(Code 1999, § 110-425; Ord. No. 2006-02, pt. 1, 3-20-2006) 
Sec. 110-462. - Effect of approval. 
    Approval of the proposed PUD development shall be interpreted as including approval of all maps, diagrams, tables and reports attached to the PUD approval, and made a part thereof. 
(Code 1999, § 110-426; Ord. No. 2006-02, pt. 1, 3-20-2006) 
Secs. 110-463-110-492. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - CPID COMMERCE PARK INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 110-493. - Purpose 
(a)  The purpose of the Commerce Park Industrial District (CPID) is to provide lands for business and industry which support the economic base of the city and contributes to its economic growth and self-sufficiency. The CPID uses shall include light industrial activities consisting of manufacturing and assembly processes, research and development, and similar uses which are of a nature not likely to be objectionable to neighboring properties. The CPID development standards provided herein are intended to result in new industry that is attractive in appearance for the benefit of the property, the city, and the owners and/or lessees of all lots within the CPID. 
(b)  The Clewiston Commerce Park (the "park") is hereby zoned CPID Commerce Park Industrial District. The zoning map of the city is hereby amended by changing the zoning district designation from industrial district (I) to Commerce Park Industrial District (CPID) on those parcels, known as the Clewiston Commerce Park, specifically described as: 
Being a parcel of land lying within Section 16, Township 43 South, Range 34 East. Begin at the intersection of the westerly right-of-way line of Olympia Street as described in Official Records book 157, page 161, of the Public Records of Hendry County, Florida, with the northerly right-of-way line of Clewiston Drainage District Canal No. 5 Maintenance Easement as laid out and now in use, as described in Official Records book 221, page 172, of the Public Records of Hendry County, Florida; thence south 89° 26' 55" west along the northerly right-of-way line of said Canal No. 5 Maintenance Easement a distance of 1,244.61 feet to an intersection with the easterly right-of-way line of Lopez Street Canal, as described in Official Records book 108, page 181, of the Public Records of Hendry County, Florida; thence north 00° 32' 34" west along said easterly right-of-way line a distance of 1,180.82 feet to an intersection with the westerly extension of the southerly right-of-way line of Bahama Street, as shown on the General Plan of Clewiston, Florida, as described in plat book 2, pages 71 to 78, inclusive, of the Public Records of Hendry County, Florida; thence north 89° 26' 55" east along said southerly right-of-way line a distance of 1,244.76 feet to the westerly right-of-way line of said Olympia Street; thence south 00° 32' 09" east along the westerly right-of-way line of Olympia Street a distance of 1,180.82 feet to the point-of-beginning. (Containing 33.70 acres, more or less.) Parcel Identification Number: 3-34-43-16-A00-0011.0000 and Parcel Identification Number: 3-34-43-16-A00-0012.0000 (Split-out). 
(c)  The CPID designation and development standards contained herein shall apply to all lands within the park at the date of adoption of this division and to all future expansions of the park. The existing park is located in the southwest quadrant of the city bordered on the east by Olympia Street, on the west by the abandoned Clewiston Airport property, on the north by the South Central Florida Express Railroad, and on the south by vacant industrial lands. Phase I of the park contains 33.7 acres consisting of ten platted lots. At the date of adoption of this division, all lands of the park are vacant. 
(Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 5-21-2012) 
Sec. 110-494. - Land acquisition. 
(a)  Determination. The city commission may adjust sale or lease price for all city-owned parcels within the CPID. Pricing may be reviewed, and adjustments may be made, as market value fluctuates. Economic incentives may be employed to attract desirable businesses. 
(b)  Economic goals. The city will place a measure of control to prevent land speculation within the park and to ensure properties are used for bona fide projects that locate or retain jobs and provide for new capital investment which meets the purpose of the CPID and the economic development goals, objectives, and policies of the city comprehensive plan. Limitations on use, preference for certain uses over other uses, construction and appearance standards, capital investment, number and quality of job created and the development standards contained herein are designed toward these ends. 
(Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 5-21-2012; Ord. No. 2017-10, § 1, 6-19-2017) 
Sec. 110-495. - Permitted uses. 
    Permitted uses within the CPID include and comply with the following: 
(1)  Light industrial and commercial operations, which produce: 
a.  Computer components; 
b.  Robotics; 
c.  Food processing and packaging (no animal process/meat packing); 
d.  Apparel-related products; 
e.  Finished wood products; 
f.  Furniture and fixtures; 
g.  Assembled paper products; 
h.  Formulation and packaging of drugs, cosmetics, soap; 
i.  Fabricated metal products; 
j.  Manufactured machinery; 
k.  Electrical equipment and components; 
l.  Optics; 
m.  Aerospace composites; 
n.  Integrated circuits; 
o.  Ceramics and glass products; 
p.  Consumer electronics; 
q.  Image recognition; 
r.  Medical devices, dental equipment and supplies; and 
s.  Restaurant, hotel and store supplies, fixtures and equipment. 
(2)  The following services and trade establishments, provided that they only provide limited retail services on the same premises, unless specifically allowed by special exception of the city commission. 
a.  Bookbinding; 
b.  Bakery; 
c.  Blending of liquor; 
d.  Cheese making; 
e.  Carpet and rug cleaning; 
f.  Diaper service; 
g.  Drapery and window blind fabrication and service; 
h.  Glass and mirror shop; 
i.  Linen supply; 
j.  Magazine wholesale agency; 
k.  Pattern making; 
l.  Printing, publishing, lithography, and engraving; 
m.  Communication-information/data processing; 
n.  Telecommunication; 
o.  Exterminating; 
p.  Janitorial; 
q.  Plumbing, mechanical, or electrical shop; 
r.  Shipping and parcel services; 
s.  Manufacture of powder blends; and 
t.  Call service centers. 
(Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 5-21-2012; Ord. No. 2017-10, § 1, 6-19-2017) 
Secs. 110-496, 110-497. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-10, § 1, adopted June 19, 2017, repealed §§ 110-496 and 110-497, which pertained to prohibited uses and nuisances, respectively, and derived from Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, adopted May 21, 2012. 
Sec. 110-498. - Development standards. 
(a)  Lot size. No lot shall be less than 75 feet in width and not less than 20,000 square feet in area. 
(b)  Height. No building shall exceed 70 feet in height without alternative fire safety provisions made by the company and specifically allowed by special exception of the city commission. Smoke stacks, radio antennas, chimneys, and similar structures are excluded from this restriction. 
(c)  Setbacks. 
(1)  Street side. All parcels shall have a minimum front yard setback of 20 feet. Front yard setbacks shall be measured from the property line. 
(2)  Interior side yard. The minimum interior side yard shall be 15 feet, except that the interior side yard setback may be reduced to zero on one side of the lot provided that: 
a.  The wall constructed at the zero setback shall be of maintenance-free masonry material. 
b.  The opposite side yard is increased to 30 feet. In the event that two contiguous property owners desire to construct buildings using zero side yard setbacks, utilizing a common driveway for ingress and egress to the rear of both properties, said opposite side yard may be reduced to 15 feet provided easements are obtained and recorded ensuring a 30-foot minimum separation between the two buildings for ingress and egress to the rear of the property. This 30-foot access way shall be maintained free of obstructions skyward and with no openings that would facilitate any loading or unloading, in any portion of the buildings which fronts on the easement. 
(3)  Rear yard. There shall be a minimum rear yard setback of ten feet. 
(d)  Off-street parking. Two parking spaces for each three employees, but in no event less than two spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. Parking on any public street within the CPID is strictly prohibited. 
(e)  Landscaping. Landscaping shall be as set forth in article IV of chapter 102. 
(f)  Signage. Sign standards shall be as set forth in chapter 100. 
(g)  Fences and walls. All fences and walls shall be constructed of concrete, masonry, or metal. Metal fences shall be of the open-weave, chainlink type. Fences and walls shall not exceed ten feet in height. Fences and walls shall not be located within any setback area on a street with the exception that a double frontage plot shall be permitted to contain fences and walls in the rear or secondary required setback area when provided with a 25-foot planting area adjacent to the street landscaped in conformance with this division. 
(h)  Lighting. Adequate lighting shall be provided for all automobile parking areas, truck loading and unloading areas, and all pedestrian and vehicle access points. Lighting design should conform with IESNA RP-33-99 recommended practices, Lighting for exterior environments. 
(i)  Loading areas. Loading and unloading areas will be designed to permit the pickup and delivery of materials without impeding the public right-of-way. 
(j)  Outdoor storage areas. All industrial and manufacturing activities of a business will be carried on within the confines of the building. The storage of materials and finished product outside of a building is permitting, so long as it does not constitute a nuisance or interfere with adjoining owners' reasonable use of their land. All outdoor storage shall be on a stabilized hard surfaced area, free of vegetation, visually screened from access streets, residential neighborhoods, and adjacent property with a complete opaque fence or wall (that is architecturally compatible to the building's finished materials) or landscaping as approved by the city. This requirement does not prohibit parking of company owned and operated motor vehicles and equipment. No storage shall be permitted between a frontage street and the building line. No waste materials, manufacturing process by-product, rubbish, or discarded matter of any kind shall be permitted to be stored in open areas beyond the time reasonably required to arrange removal. The use of Conex boxes and tractor-trailers that are well-maintained, painted, and show no rust are permitted. Other trucks or vehicles for storage is prohibited. 
(k)  Improvement standards. All developed property shall be landscaped, improved, and maintained in full conformity with all applicable requirements of the city land development code, and other state and federal standards. 
(1)  Buildings. All exterior walls, façades, and claddings fronting on any street shall be aesthetically pleasing, and if concrete block, shall be given a veneer of either stucco, plaster, ceramic, or similar covering approved by the city. Metal buildings with façades or claddings constructed of ceramic, masonry, concrete, stucco, or similar material may be allowed with the approval of the technical review committee, provided the façade or cladding is a minimum of four feet in height from the ground and covers all exterior walls of the building, except the rear wall. All buildings and structures shall be kept properly; and protected from deterioration and shall not be permitted to become dilapidated. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be erected, in whole or in part, that is obnoxious, objectionable, a nuisance, or a hazard to adjoining properties, as they relate to sound, vibrations, odors, glare, radioactive materials, smoke and particulate matters. This determination will be made by the technical review committee. 
(2)  Stormwater. Each site shall be designed to accommodate a minimum of one-half inch of dry pretreatment to be detained on site prior to discharge into the master surface water management system. 
(3)  Access areas. All driveways, walkways, parking areas, storage, and loading areas of developed property shall be well-graded and surfaced with asphalt concrete, concrete, or other materials approved by the city. It is intended that driveways on boundary streets be minimized. Spacing on boundary streets shall be at least 75 feet apart (center spacing), at least 100 feet from any street intersection, and a maximum of 24 feet in width. Joint driveways may be developed to serve abutting parcels and are favorably encouraged. 
(4)  Property maintenance. Building, landscaping, and other improvements shall be continuously maintained yielding a well-kept appearance, especially along the perimeters of the property. The city shall from time to time inspect site and landscape maintenance, and if not satisfied with the level of maintenance on a site, shall notify the owner in writing. If, within 15 days from notification, maintenance has not been brought to acceptable standards in conformance with the following maintenance standards, the city may open a case on the matter before the special magistrate of violations of the city's Code of Ordinances. 
(5)  Waste. All trash and garbage shall be placed in designated containers, or within the tenant's contained service area which shall be screened or properly landscaped. The size and number of containers shall be determined by the city. Yards and landscape areas will be kept free of trash, leaves, and dead landscaping materials. All tenants must use the city's designated disposal service. 
(6)  Parking lots and sidewalks. All parking lots, sidewalks, and other hard surface areas shall be swept and cleaned regularly and cracks and damaged areas of sidewalks shall be repaired or replaced as required. Damaged or eroding areas of the asphalt parking surface shall be replaced as required and an overall resurfacing of the parking area will be done as necessary. Broken wheel stops and/or curbing shall be replaced as required; and drainage inlets, storm sewers, and any surface drainage facilities shall be maintained in good repair and clear of debris so as to ensure their proper function. Each tenant, grantee, or lessee shall provide adequate off-street motor vehicle and trailer storage for the tenant's, grantee's, or lessee's needs, but, in any event, no less than that required by subsection (d) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 5-21-2012; Ord. No. 2017-10, § 1, 6-19-2017) 
Sec. 110-499. - Development review. 
(a)  Pre application and conference. The applicant shall file a pre-application with the city manager. The city will invite all of the necessary city representatives to provide review and input. The applicant shall provide a letter of intent and summary of the proposed CPID development one week prior to the pre-application conference. Upon determination by the city manager and community development director that the application meets the purpose of the CPID and the economic development goals, objectives and policies of the city comprehensive plan, the application will be forwarded to the technical review committee. 
(1)  A city development application for site plan review along with six sets of the site development plan shall be submitted to the planning department. The site development plan must include or reflect the following information: 
a.  Shall be drawn at a scale of not more than one inch equals 100 feet. 
b.  Vicinity sketch of adjacent properties. 
c.  Date site plan was prepared. 
d.  Name, address and professional seal of architect, landscape architect, engineer or professional surveyor who prepared the plan. 
e.  North arrow and legal description. 
f.  Property lines, dimensions, and building setback distances from roof overhang or foundations to edge of public street rights-of-way or property lines and all structures, lot lines within 100 feet of the site. 
g.  Existing and proposed topographic elevations at two-foot intervals on the site and to a distance of 50 feet outside the boundary lines of the site. 
h.  Direction of stormwater drainage and how stormwater runoff will be handled as well as a statement describing where stormwater will be ultimately discharged. 
i.  Location of existing and proposed buildings, their intended use, the length, width and height of each building, the square footage of each building and the specific types of material to be used in construction. 
j.  Location of abutting streets, rights-of-way, service drives, curb cuts, and access easements serving the site, as well as driveways opposite the site and driveways within 100 feet on either side of the site including all driveway widths and curb radius. 
k.  Location and size of all water and sanitary sewer lines and storm drainage lines, catchbasins, and location of storm retention/detention ponds with a maximum depth in excess of two feet are permitted in the rear yard only and must be adequately fenced and screened. 
l.  Location and type of all sidewalks, bike paths, and other walkways. 
m.  Location, type and size of any walls, fences or other screening provisions. 
n.  Location of all proposed landscape materials, including size and type of plantings. 
o.  Location, size and height of all proposed accessory structures, if prior approval is received, transformers, dumpsters or trash removal areas or devices, and method of screening and signs. Rooftop or outdoor equipment should also be indicated including proposed method of screening where appropriate. 
p.  Proposed parking areas and access drives showing number and size of spaces and aisles, loading areas, and handicapped access ramps. Also note method of surfacing such areas. 
q.  Exterior lighting showing area of illumination and type of fixture as well a method of shielding from adjacent properties and roadways. 
r.  Location and specifications for any existing or proposed above or below ground storage facilities for any chemicals, salts, flammable materials, or hazardous materials as well as any containment structures or clear zones required by this division or other state or federal agencies. 
s.  Architectural elevation drawing of the buildings including type and color of outer wall coverings and cross-section drawings of the site. 
(2)  A traffic impact statement on lots larger than two acres, unless this requirement is waived by the technical review committee (prepared by professional engineer or duly qualified transportation planner) that identifies the number of net new external trips, identifies pass-by calculations, internal capture calculations, identifies the a.m. and p.m. peak hour trips on all adjacent roadway links, and which identifies the level of service (LOS) on all adjacent roadway links with and without the project. 
(3)  A narrative explanation as to how the proposed development complies with the city's comprehensive plan and objective of the CPID. 
(4)  Any other information deemed appropriate by the city commission or staff. 
(b)  Staff technical review. 
(1)  The application shall be reviewed by the TRC for compliance with the submittal requirements. Upon a determination that sufficient information has been submitted to initiate the substantive review, a sufficiency letter shall be sent to the applicant by the city manager. If the determination is that the application does not include sufficient information, a letter shall be sent to the applicant identifying the deficiencies that need to be addressed. The staff shall conduct a sufficiency review of all additional information submitted in response to a sufficiency letter and either identify additional deficiencies, or provide the letter finding the application to be complete. 
(2)  Once the application is determined to be complete, the staff technical review committee shall conduct their substantive review. The application shall be reviewed for consistency with the CPID development standards, the comprehensive plan and this Code; written recommendations shall be provided to the applicant. 
(c)  City commission action. The city commission shall review the application in accordance with the requirements of articles II and III of this chapter and shall make findings of consistency with the comprehensive plan and this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 5-21-2012; Ord. No. 2017-10, § 1, 6-19-2017; Ord. No. 2018-06, § 1, 1-7-2019) 
Sec. 110-500. - Required approvals. 
    Approval of the proposed CPID development shall require: 
(1)  Purchase or lease of the CPID property at agreed upon price. The city attorney will provide the sales or lease agreement and associated documents. 
(2)  Site plan approval and development authorization (preliminary and/or final) and the preparation of any associated development agreements. 
(Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 5-21-2012; Ord. No. 2017-10, § 1, 6-19-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-10, § 1, adopted June 19, 2017, retitled the catchline of § 110-500 from "Effect of approval" to read as herein set out. 
Secs. 110-501-110-523. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 110-524. - Fences, walls and hedges. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall erect, move, add to or structurally alter any fence in the city without first obtaining a permit for such purposes issued by the building official. Fence permits will be issued only to the owner of the property, or to a licensed or bonded contractor acting as his agent. A permit fee shall be charged in accordance with city ordinance. 
(b)  Plot plan. The applicant shall submit a sketch or plot plan which shows the location of all property lines, easements, rights-of-way and utility lines, all structures, and existing fences and walls. The plot plan shall also show the location of all proposed fences. When doubt exists as to the exact location of property lines, the building official shall require a survey by a licensed surveyor. 
(c)  General regulations. 
(1)  All fences and walls constructed and maintained within the city shall comply with the state building code and a building permit shall be required for the construction of any such wall or fence. 
(2)  The posts and fence material of any such fence or wall must be resistant to decay, corrosion, and termite infestation. Posts, if wood, shall be pressure-treated for strength and durability. 
(3)  All fences, walls, hedges, and trees must be located completely within the boundary limits of the property on which they are located, and must not encroach into any city road right-of-way, alleyway or public utility easement. 
(4)  No fence, wall or hedge shall be located on any property in such a manner that it obstructs vision of traffic at any intersection. 
(5)  Any fence or wall located adjacent to a public right-of-way or private road shall be constructed with the finished side facing that right-of-way. 
(6)  Any fence or wall separating parcels of privately owned property shall be constructed with the finished side facing the adjacent private property. 
(7)  Fences required for safety and protection from hazards by any governmental agency, may, upon approval given by the city commission, exceed the height limitations provided for in this section. 
(8)  No fence or wall shall be constructed, or hedge grown, in such a manner as to interfere with drainage. 
(9)  No electrical fences or electrical shock security devices shall be allowed, except low-voltage, buried pet fences. 
(10)  There shall be a three-foot-side opening or gate in the rear portion of any fence, wall or hedge, providing reasonable access to the property for meter readers and other utility personnel. 
(11)  Barbed wire may be utilized as part of fences or walls in commercial and industrial sites or may be incorporated in fences or walls on property in a mixed use or adjacent to residential use zoning only when approved by the planning commission and demonstrated to be necessary for security, and not aesthetically detrimental to abutting properties. Barbed wire, when approved for use, shall not exceed three strands; the lowest strand shall be no lower than six feet above ground level; and the top strand shall not exceed eight feet above ground level. The use of barbed wire in fences or walls located on residentially zoned property is specifically prohibited. 
(12)  Attachment to neighboring fences. No fence shall be attached to a neighboring fence, but a fence may abut a neighboring fence if such fence is on the property line. 
(13)  Interference with off-street parking or public services. No fence shall be erected or maintained which blocks required off-street parking or interferes with city or public utility service. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a permit for a fence within a public easement may be issued by the public works director under the following conditions: 
a.  Only those easements which are limited to stormwater uses are eligible for this permit if the fence does not interfere with drainage. General purpose easements and rights-of-way or easements intended or dedicated for purposes other than utility uses are not eligible for this permit. 
b.  The property owner, or the owner's authorized agent, shall submit a sketch or other drawing accurately describing the easement and the proposed location of the fence. 
c.  The property owner shall execute an agreement with the city acknowledging that the use of the easement for a fence is subservient to the use for which the easement has been created, and that the fence is subject to removal by the city or by any utility company having facilities or rights to install facilities in the easement, if necessary, and that the owner does not have any right of reimbursement or other claim if the fence has to be removed. Gate(s) may be required. The agreement shall be in recordable form and recorded in the public records of Hendry County at the owner's expense. 
d.  The city is authorized to charge a reasonable permit fee for the processing and issuance of the permit. 
(14)  Maximum height in residential zoned property including single-family, multi-family and mobile home residential districts. Except as otherwise provided in this section, fences and hedges located within the front yard adjoining front setbacks shall not exceed a height of four feet above the existing ground grade prior to site alteration. Fences and hedges located within the side and rear setbacks shall not exceed a height of six feet above the existing ground grade prior to any site alteration. Pergolas, trellises, and arbors are exempt from the height limits but cannot exceed eight feet in height and eight feet in width and require a building permit and cannot be located within the visibility triangle and are limited to one on each lot or parcel. 
(15)  Maximum height in commercial and public zoned property. Fences and hedges located within a side and rear setbacks shall not exceed a height of eight feet above the existing ground grade, except that such fence or hedge, if located within the front setbacks shall not exceed the height of four feet for a solid fence or hedge or five feet for a clear fence or hedge above the existing ground grade. If no front setback is required the front building line of the principle structure shall become the front setback for purposes of this subsection. If the lot is vacant, any fence shall not exceed six feet within the area as far back as the median setback for lots within the block as determined by the building official. Pergolas, trellises, and arbors are exempt from the above height limits but cannot exceed eight feet in height and eight feet in width, require a building permit and cannot be located within the visibility triangle and are limited to one on each lot or parcel. 
(16)  Fencing around sports courts (i.e., tennis courts, basketball courts, baseball courts, volleyball courts, etc.) shall be exempt from the height limitations of subsections (c)(13) and (14). All chainlink fences (including all poles, rails, gates, supports and the like), except those used by single-family dwellings and industrial uses, shall be green, brown or black plastic or vinyl-coated material only. 
(17)  Temporary fences. Temporary fences are permitted after review and approval of all required applications by the building official. All provisions and regulations governing the erection, maintenance, height, location and relocation of fences shall govern temporary fences. A temporary fence permit shall not exceed the expiration date as stated on the permit application and the permit. For cause, one or more extensions of time may be granted by the building official. The building official is authorized to extend the use of a temporary fence for three months after review of a resubmittal of an application for a temporary fence. A temporary fence shall not be permitted for a period of time longer than two years. 
(18)  Swimming pool enclosures. All swimming pools must be within a screened cage, or shall be enclosed on all open sides by a fence which is a minimum of four feet above the existing ground grade and a maximum of six feet above the existing ground grade. All gates which are part of a pool fence or screening cage must have safety locks. 
(19)  Sport enclosures. Tennis courts and racquetball courts may be enclosed on all open sides by an open chainlink fence, ten feet above the existing ground grade. Batting cages must be enclosed in a screened cage. 
(20)  Nonconforming fences. 
a.  Intent. It is the intent of this subsection to encourage the eventual elimination, as expeditiously as is reasonable, of existing fences that are not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
b.  Continuance. A nonconforming fence may be continued, provided that it has not been determined detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. It shall then be maintained in good condition, but it shall not be: 
1.  Enlarged or changed to any other nonconforming structure. 
2.  Structurally altered so as to prolong the life of the fence. 
3.  Re-erected if removed. 
4.  Re-erected after damage or destruction if the estimated expense of re-erection exceeds 50 percent of the appraised replacement cost. 
c.  Determination by building official. It shall be the duty of the building official to determine whether or not a nonconforming fence is in the interest of public health, safety and welfare. 
(Code 1982, § 24-18; Code 1999, § 110-436; Ord. No. 91-2, § 1, 4-1-1991; Ord. No. 2005-02, pt. 1, 4-18-2005; Ord. No. 2017-11, § 1, 6-19-2017) 
Sec. 110-525. - Home occupations. 
(a)  Intent. The standards for home occupations are intended to ensure compatibility with other permitted residential uses and with the residential character of the neighborhood. No home occupation shall be permitted which might interfere with the general welfare of the surrounding area due to potential noise, increased pedestrian or vehicular traffic, use of occupational vehicles or equipment, or entail any other condition, which would constitute an objectionable use of residential property. 
(b)  Application. Prior to the establishment of any home occupation, an application shall be made to the planning division and filed with the city clerk. If the planning director determines the use does not comply with all requirements for a home occupation, then the home occupation license shall not be issued. If such use has been previously established, the use shall either be brought into full compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or the use shall be abandoned and all operations ceased. Prior to issuance of an occupational license and as continuing operational standards, home occupations: 
(1)  Shall be allowed only in the R-1C, R-2 and R-3 zoning districts. 
(2)  No alteration of the principal residential building shall be made which changes the character thereof as a dwelling. 
(3)  Shall be carried on only by members of a family living as legal and regular inhabitants in such residence, and no more than two employees. 
(4)  Shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and is not to change the residential character thereof. 
(5)  May include such uses as professional offices for telephone sales, mailing services, accountants, engineers, architects, dressmakers, artists, handicrafts, consultants or similar professions. The preceding list is meant to be illustrative only and is not all inclusive. 
(6)  Shall not provide for the sale of materials or stock in trade on the premises, nor shall any such materials or stock be stored other than inside the enclosed structure. There shall be no window display of merchandise. 
(7)  Shall not include any activity that: 
a.  Creates any dangerous vapors or fumes. 
b.  Emits any noise, light, dust or vibration that extends beyond the lot or parcel line of any abutting property. 
c.  Is hazardous to public health, safety, morals or welfare. 
d.  Uses any equipment which creates visual or audible interference in radio or television receiver signals off the premises or causes fluctuation in line voltage off the premises. 
e.  Results in any illegal discharge of materials, fluids or gases into the sewer system or in any other manner of discharging such materials in violation of any applicable regulations. 
(8)  Shall not display any signs or other visible evidence that would indicate the property is being utilized for any use other than a dwelling. 
(9)  Shall not have customers or deliveries or pick up associated with such use on the premises between 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m., and such activity shall not exceed that normally and reasonably occurring at a residence. Only one occupational vehicle, which shall not exceed one-ton capacity, and one trailer which may not exceed 16 feet, may be related to and used in conjunction with the home occupation. 
(10)  Shall not include storage of any flammable or hazardous materials on the premises. 
(11)  Shall not occupy more than the greater of 250 square feet or ten percent of the gross enclosed floor area of the structure suited or intended for occupancy as living quarters. 
(12)  Shall not advertise the street address on the structure as a business in any manner and shall not advertise the street address on any occupational vehicle associated with such use on the premises. 
(c)  Prohibited home occupations. The following uses, regardless of whether they meet the performance standards, are not permitted as a home occupation. These business activities shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Veterinary clinics, animal hospitals or kennels. 
(2)  Equipment rental. 
(3)  Funeral chapels, mortuaries or funeral homes. 
(4)  Wedding chapels. 
(5)  Medical or dental clinics. 
(6)  Repair/servicing or painting of automobiles, motorcycles, trailers, boats and other vehicles. 
(7)  Repair/servicing of large appliances including stoves, refrigerators, washers and dryers. 
(8)  Repair/servicing of power equipment including lawn mowers, chain saws, string trimmers and similar equipment. 
(9)  Restaurants. 
(10)  Dispatching of vehicles to and from residential premises. This prohibition includes, but is not limited to taxi services, towing services, and the like. 
(11)  The sale of firearms and gunsmithing. 
(12)  Taxidermy. 
(13)  Storage of construction equipment to include tree surgeon, landscaping, and lawn maintenance contracting equipment. 
(d)  Affidavit of applicant required. An applicant for a business tax receipt for a home occupation shall at the time of application file an affidavit wherein the applicant: 
(1)  Agrees to comply with the standards set forth in this section. 
(2)  Agrees to comply with the conditions imposed by the city to insure compliance with such standards. 
(3)  Acknowledges that a departure therefrom may result in a suspension or termination of the occupational license. 
(4)  Acknowledges that the city shall have the right to reasonably inspect the premises upon which the home occupation is conducted to insure compliance with the foregoing standards and conditions, and to investigate complaints, if any, from neighbors. 
(e)  Fees. Each new and renewal application for a home occupation license shall be accompanied at the time of filing by a fee as established by resolution of the city commission. Each home occupation license shall be renewed annually. 
(Code 1982, § 24-19; Code 1999, § 110-437; Ord. No. 97-03, pt. 1, 8-18-1997; Ord. No. 2005-02, pt. 1, 4-18-2005) 
Sec. 110-526. - Accessory structures. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this section is to provide regulations governing accessory structures and to help ensure acceptable design, installation and use of accessory structures while maintaining the integrity of the principal use of the property. Furthermore, it is intended to provide assurances that activities that take place are compatible with the designated zoning classifications and such activities will have no adverse affects on the surrounding properties. 
(b)  Definition. 
(1)  Accessory structures are a building, area, part of a building, structure or use which is subordinate to, and the use of which is incidental to, that of the main building, structure, or use on the same lot. An accessory structure is typically a structure that is detached from the main residence and includes but is not limited to a household garage, household storage shed, private playhouse, household greenhouse, unattached patios, an accessory storage building to a commercial business use. Accessory structure includes metal frame with metal or canvass cover portable carports. Plastic or resin "snap-together assembly" type shed kits such as plastic deck boxes or other non-walk in type utility/storage units are not considered accessory structures. 
(2)  Shipping containers include standardized reusable vessels that were: 
a.  Originally designed for or used in the packing, shipping, movement or transportation of freight articles, goods or commodities; and/or 
b.  Originally designed for or capable of being mounted or moved by rail, truck or ship by means of being mounted on a chassis or similar transport device. This definition includes the terms "transport containers" and "portable site storage containers" having a similar appearance to and similar characteristics of cargo containers. 
(c)  Attached structure. If an accessory-type structure is attached to a principal building by any wall or roof construction, it shall be deemed to be part of the principal building and shall comply in all respects with the yard and setback regulations of the applicable zoning district. The square footage of the accessory-type building will be counted as part of the square footage allowed on the property for accessory uses. 
(d)  General provisions. 
(1)  Accessory structures incidental to residential dwelling units including all types of manufactured and mobile homes shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Structures must be constructed simultaneously with, or following, the construction of the principal building, and shall not be used until after the principal building has been erected. 
b.  Maximum gross floor area shall not exceed 600 square feet except as provided in subsection (e)(4). 
c.  Roof peaks shall not exceed 12 feet in height, except garages and carports that meet the requirements of subsection (e)(4). 
d.  Structures shall be painted and designed to blend aesthetically with the principal building. 
e.  Use of accessory structures for living purposes is prohibited. 
(2)  Only one detached accessory structure/building, not including garages, shall be permitted per 8,000 square feet of lot area, or fraction thereof, up to a maximum of two such structures per lot. 
(3)  Minimum setback standards from lot line for accessory structures: 
a.  R-1A Single-Family: 
Front: 80 feet. 
Rear: 15 feet. 
Side (interior): Ten feet. 
Side (corner): 20 feet. 
b.  R-1B Single-Family: 
Front: 60 feet. 
Rear: Ten feet. 
Side (interior): 7.5 feet. 
Side (corner): 15 feet. 
c.  R-1C Single-Family: 
Front: 60 feet. 
Rear: Ten feet. 
Side (interior): 7.5 feet. 
Side (corner): 15 feet. 
d.  R-2 Two-Family: 
Front: 60 feet. 
Rear: Ten feet. 
Side (interior): 7.5 feet. 
Side (corner): 20 feet. 
e.  R-3 Multiple-Family: 
Front: 50 feet. 
Rear: Ten feet. 
Side (interior): Ten feet. 
Side (corner): 15 feet. 
f.  RM-1 Mobile Home Park: 
Front: 25 feet from public ROW. 
Park 7.5 feet from interior ROW. 
Rear: Six feet. 
Side: Six feet. 
g.  RM-2 Mobile Home Subdivision: 
Front: 40 feet. 
Subdivision rear: Five feet. 
Side (interior): Five feet. 
Side (corner): Ten feet. 
h.  General Commercial/Industrial: None, except when abutting an R or RM District, then: 
Rear: 20 feet. 
Side: Ten feet. 
However, accessory structure may not encroach into a city alley or public utility easement. 
(4)  An uncovered patio or deck that is not more than three feet above the surrounding grade may extend to the side, but not street side, and/or rear property lines, provided it does not encroach into any city alley or public utility easement. 
(5)  Accessory structures incidental to commercial use on any one lot shall not exceed the lessor of ten percent of the total lot area or 2,100 square feet. This provision shall not apply to structures in the I-Industrial zoning district. 
(e)  Garages and carports. 
(1)  All garages and carports in residential R-1A, R-1B, and R-1C zoning districts shall have a minimum eight-foot by seven-foot vehicle opening and ten-foot wide paved driveway extending from the vehicular opening of such structure to the public right-of-way improvements, or to the right-of-way line if public improvements do not exist. RM-1 and RM-2 shall have such driveways when access fronts on a public right-of-way. The driveway shall be constructed of asphalt, concrete or similar impervious surface. 
(2)  The front plane of an attached front-facing garage shall be no more than five feet closer to the front property line than the front facade of the principal structure, unless the garage is located no less than 30 feet from the front property line, and the house includes a front porch. In no event shall the front plane of a front-facing garage be more than ten feet closer to the front property line than the front facade of the principal structure and in no event shall a front-facing garage encroach into a required front yard setback. 
(3)  Detached garages and carports shall be no closer to the front property line than ten feet behind the front facade of the principal residential structure. 
(4)  The peak of detached garages and carports shall be limited to 20 feet in height. The total gross floor area of detached garages and carports shall not exceed 50 percent of the first floor interior area of the principal structure or 1,000 square feet in area. 
(f)  Temporary buildings or structures. 
(1)  Temporary buildings or structures or mobile offices required for a construction project of any kind shall be permitted in every land use district, provided that such buildings or structures shall be removed from the site immediately upon completion of the project. 
(2)  Accessory structures such as mobile homes or offices shall be permitted in conjunction with temporary outdoor activities for the duration of the temporary outdoor activity for office purposes. Use of accessory structures for living purposes is prohibited. Any such office use shall require toilet facilities with a signed maintenance contract. 
(g)  Prohibited accessory buildings and structures. The following are prohibited in all zoning districts for use as accessory structures: 
(1)  Tents (when used longer than a two-week period) and frame-type structures covered with tarps or canopies. 
(2)  No trucks of any type, truck trailer, or mobile homes. 
(3)  Railroad cars, truck vans, converted mobile homes, trailers, recreational vehicles, bus bodies, vehicles and similar prefabricated items and structures originally built for purposes other than the storage of goods and materials. 
(4)  Use of accessory storage buildings, structures or cargo containers for living purposes. 
(5)  Shipping containers (except on a temporary basis on an active construction site). 
(6)  A shipping container may be approved by the planning board for use in the Industrial District and Public District that otherwise meet all requirements of the district regulations, and: 
a.  Building permit required if over 200 square feet; 
b.  Cannot be stacked; 
c.  Cannot contain advertising on exterior; 
d.  Must be maintained in good repair, painted a solid neutral color that blends with surrounding buildings; 
e.  The planning board may require screening from abutting properties and impose such other conditions that protect the character and aesthetics of the surrounding area; 
f.  The fire marshal shall have access to all containers to review contents for hazardous conditions. 
(7)  Violations-Time to comply. All owners of property within the city shall have 120 days from the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived to bring the properties which currently contain accessory storage buildings that are in violation of the terms of section 110-526(g) into full compliance with section 110-526(g). 
(Code 1999, § 110-438; Ord. No. 2005-02, pt. 1, 4-18-2005; Ord. No. 2017-18, § 1, 11-20-2017) 
Sec. 110-527. - Nudity in commercial establishments. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial establishment means any business, commercial or other establishment (whether for profit or not for profit and whether open to the public at large or where entrance is limited by cover charge or membership requirement) such as, but not limited to, bars, bottle clubs; hotels, motels; restaurants; night clubs; country clubs; cabarets; meeting facilities utilized by any religious, social, fraternal or similar organization, businesses in which the consumption of alcoholic beverages is permitted; and businesses which do not permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages. A private residence is not a commercial establishment. 
    Entity means any proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, business trust, joint venture, joint-stock company or other for profit or not-for-profit organization. 
    Nude means any person insufficiently clothed so that any of the following body parts are not completely covered with a fully opaque covering: 
(1)  The male or female genitals; 
(2)  The male or female pubic area; 
(3)  Any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola; or 
(4)  The buttocks. Attire which is insufficient to completely cover the buttocks includes, but is not limited to, G-Strings, T-backs and thongs. 
Body paint, body dyes, tattoos and similar substances shall not be considered an opaque covering. 
    Person means any human being aged ten years of age or older. 
(b)  Places provided or set apart for nudity. Public restrooms, functional shower and locker room facilities, and similar places in which nudity or exposure is necessarily and customarily expected outside of the home and the sphere of privacy protected therein, but excluding any places where nudity is used for the promotion of business or is otherwise commercially exploited. 
(c)  Nudity, sexual conduct prohibited in commercial establishments. The following prohibitions and criteria shall apply within existing and/or newly created commercial establishments: 
(1)  No person shall knowingly, intentionally or recklessly appear or cause another person to appear nude or expose to public view his or her genitals, pubic area, vulva or buttocks, or any simulation thereof. 
(2)  No female person shall knowingly, intentionally or recklessly expose or cause another female person to expose her breast or any simulation thereof to public view. 
(3)  No person or entity maintaining, owning or operating an establishment shall encourage, allow or permit any person to appear nude or to expose to public view his or her genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus or any portion of the buttocks or simulation thereof. This section shall be violated if any portion of the buttocks is visible from any vantage point. 
(4)  No person or entity maintaining, owning or operating a commercial establishment shall encourage, allow or permit any female person to expose her breasts or any simulation thereof to public view. 
(5)  No person shall engage in and no person or entity maintaining, owning or operating an a commercial establishment shall encourage, allow or permit any sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, lap dancing, straddle dancing, any sexual act which is prohibited by law, touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals, or the simulation thereof. 
(d)  Exemptions. The prohibitions of subsection (c) of this section shall not apply when a customer is clothed in swimwear or other attire, and such swimwear or other attire when worn in public is not in violation of any state law or city ordinance. This exemption shall not apply to any owner, manager, operator or employee of a commercial establishment. 
(e)  Intent. 
(1)  The definition of "person" contained in this section shall not be construed to permit or authorize the commercial exploitation of the nudity of any minor child. 
(2)  The third-listed exemption contained in subsection (c) of this section shall not be construed to limit the right of the owner, manager, operator or employee of a commercial establishment to exclude from the premises any person who is not clothed in accordance with any dress code or other requirements imposed by such owner, manager, operator or employee. 
(f)  Territory embraced. All territory within the legal boundaries of the city shall be embraced by the provisions of this section. 
(g)  Penalties. Any person or entity violating any of the provisions of this section shall be prosecuted in the same manner as misdemeanors are prosecuted. Such violations shall be prosecuted in the name of the state in a court having jurisdiction of misdemeanors by the prosecuting attorney thereof and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed 60 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each incident or separate occurrence of an act that violates this section shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 110-439, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 110-528. - Automatic amusement centers/game rooms restrictions: land use commercial or industrial. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Automatic amusement centers/game rooms means where the principal business operated on the premises is the operation of games of skill which upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, or disc, may be operated by the public generally for the use as a game, entertainment, or amusement, whether or not registering a score, including, but not limited to, such devices as marble machines, pin ball machines, skill ball, mechanical grab-machines, and all games, operations or transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may be indicated. The term "automatic amusement centers/game rooms" includes video type games or machines, or similar devices that can use a display screen for points, lines and dots of light, that can be manipulated to simulate games or other types of entertainment; it shall not include nor apply to music playing devices or non-competitive devices. 
(b)  Use regulations. 
(1)  When the business operated on the premises is the operation of any automatic amusement devices, said premises must be located more than 1,000 feet from any school, house of worship, public park or youth activity building. No two amusement centers shall be located closer than 1,000 feet from one another. The distance shall be measured by following the shortest route of ordinary pedestrian travel along the public thoroughfare from the main entrance of the premises wherein the automatic amusement devices are located to the main entrance of the said school, house of worship or youth activity building. 
(2)  Each automatic amusement device shall be located at least ten feet from the entranceway to the premises in which located and placed so that it does not obstruct or interfere with the free and unfettered passage of patrons or users of the premises. 
(3)  The maximum number of automatic amusement devices shall be limited to one amusement device per 50 square feet of premises used for the operation of such devices. The computation shall exclude any portion of the premises used for the storage or sale of automatic amusement devices or the conduct of any business other than the operation of automatic amusement devices. 
(4)  Specific hours of operation may be established if the use may impact adjacent or nearby residential uses. 
(5)  The amusement center/game room shall be screened per section 102-119 as to minimize noise and glare impacts to neighboring residential uses. 
(6)  No person shall in any automatic amusement center permit gambling in connection with the playing of any automatic amusement device. 
(7)  Automatic amusement centers shall provide a current inventory of all games kept on the premises, including the name of the game which appears on the screen when the automatic amusement device is in attract mode, the manufacturer, serial number, the actual owner of the machine with owner's address and phone number, and attachment of license to each machine. 
(8)  The inventory required in subsection (b)(7) of this section shall be kept on file with the planning department as part of the approved development order. Any change whatsoever in games or machines on the premises must be so indicated on an updated inventory which shall be provided to the planning department within ten business days of such changes. 
(9)  The general public shall be allowed in all automatic amusement centers. No automatic amusement center shall restrict access to the site by the use of age restrictions or membership to the center. 
(10)  No automatic amusement center shall offer prizes, tickets, or other merchandise over $5.00 in value. Automatic amusement centers shall not allow customers to maintain a running tally of points for prizes or other goods. 
(11)  Automatic amusement centers shall be prohibited from offering gift certificates, gift cards, or other cash substitutes. 
(12)  There shall be no alcohol beverages, dispensed, sold, or otherwise consumed, on the premises. 
(13)  Automatic amusement devices are prohibited from having switchable, programmable, or random generator devices to allow a rate of return to business operators or machine owners. 
(14)  All applicable state permits shall be submitted to the community development department. 
(15)  Prior to the issuance of an operation license, law enforcement and city officials shall inspect the automatic amusement devices for compliance with F.S. ch. 849. 
(16)  Once an operation license has been issued, the automatic amusement center operator shall allow law enforcement and city officials to inspect the automatic amusement devices on a routine basis. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 110-440, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 110-529. - Garage sales. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Garage sale means and includes all general sales, open to the public, conducted from or on residential premises in any residential zone, for the purpose of disposing of personal property, including, but not limited to, all sales entitled "garage," "lawn," "yard," "attic," "porch," "room," "back yard," "patio," "flea market," or "rummage" sale. 
    Personal property means property which is owned, utilized and maintained by an individual or members of his residence and acquired in the normal course of living in or maintaining a residence. The term "personal property" does not include merchandise which was purchased for resale or obtained on consignment. 
(b)  Permit required. No garage sale shall be conducted without first obtaining a permit from the city. A resident seeking to conduct a garage sale shall file a written application for a permit with the city community development department. 
(c)  Permit fee. There shall be an administrative processing fee for the issuance of the permit required by this section as adopted by resolution and contained in appendix A to this Code. 
(d)  Time limitations. The total period of the sale must not exceed 48 consecutive hours, and must be conducted only during the daylight hours between sunrise and sunset. A garage sale may not be conducted more often than once every three months from the same premises, unless title to the real property upon which such sale is to be conducted has been transferred to others who otherwise qualify under this article to conduct such a sale. 
(e)  Advertising signs. 
(1)  One sign shall be permitted on the premises where the garage sale is being conducted; 
(2)  Two directional signs shall be permitted off the premises where the garage sale is being conducted, provided no directional signs shall be permitted if the garage sale premises is located on a major thoroughfare; 
(3)  No sign shall be exhibited for more than two days prior to the first date the garage sale is to take place; 
(4)  Under no circumstances are advertising signs for yard sales allowed on city right-of-way or city property. 
(f)  Public nuisance. The individual to whom such permit is issued and the owner or tenant of the premises on which such sale or activity is conducted shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of good order and decorum on the premises during all hours of such sale or activity. No such individual shall permit any loud or boisterous noise or conduct on the premises, nor permit vehicles to impede the passage of traffic on any roads or streets in the area of such premises. All such individuals shall obey the reasonable orders of any member of the police or fire department of the city, in order to maintain the public health, safety and welfare. 
(g)  Revocation or refusal of permit. 
(1)  False information. Any permit issued under this article may be revoked or any application for issuance of a permit may be refused if the application submitted by the applicant or permit holder contains any false, fraudulent, or misleading statement. 
(2)  Conviction of violation. If any individual is convicted of an offense under this article, the city is instructed to cancel any existing garage sale permit held by the individual convicted and not to issue such individual another garage sale permit for a period of two years from the date of conviction. 
(h)  Persons exempted from article. The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect the following: 
(1)  Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials. 
(3)  Any sale conducted by any merchant, mercantile or other business establishment from or at a place of business wherein such sale would be permitted by the zoning regulations of the city or any other sale conducted by a manufacturer, dealer or vendor, and which sale would be conducted from properly zoned premises and not otherwise prohibited in other ordinances. 
(4)  Any bona fide charitable, educational, cultural or governmental institution or organization when the proceeds from this sale are used directly for the institution or organization's charitable purposes and the goods or articles are not sold on a consignment basis. 
(Code 1999, § 110-439; Ord. No. 2009-03, pt. 1, 3-16-2009) 
Sec. 110-530. - Residential development and improvement. 
(a)  Applicability. These regulations shall apply to all single-family and two-family residential dwellings located in zoning districts R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, RM-1, RM-2, R-2 and R-3 as designated on the future land use map. 
(b)  Roofs. All roofs shall be constructed in the following manner: 
At least 70 percent of the footprint of air conditionable space plus attached garage space must be covered by a roof with a minimum 4:12 pitch. Subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Roof overhang shall not be less than 16 inches. 
(2)  Front doors shall have covered entry and landing. 
(3)  No flat roof shall be visible from the street adjacent to a front yard except that flat aluminum roof panels used as carports behind the front yard setback. 
Exception: These standards shall not apply to those properties located in the RM-1 or RM-2 zoning district. 
(c)  Windows. The installation of reflective glass and/or reflective window film is prohibited. This prohibition shall not be interpreted to prohibit the installation of non-reflective window film designed to protect glass from wind damage. 
    Windows used in front facade shall be of a consistent type and shall be placed in a manner to create a unified architectural design. 
(d)  Shutters, storm panels and storm rollups. Shutters, storm panels and storm rollups shall meet the following design standards: 
(1)  Permanently installed shutters: 
a.  Shutters shall be painted to match either the principal color or the trim color of the structure to which they are attached. 
b.  Permanently installed hardware for storm panels and storm rollups shall be painted to match the principal color or the trim color of the structure to which is attached, according to which will make such hardware the least noticeable. 
c.  No permanently installed plywood panels are permitted. 
(2)  Storm shutters and panels which are not permanently installed shall meet the following utilization standards: 
a.  They may be put in place or closed not more than 72 hours before and 72 hours after a storm event; 
b.  They may be put in place or closed for two periods of up to 15 days each between June 1 and November 30 (the hurricane season) when the owner is absent; and 
c.  They may be put in place on rear windows during any period of time. 
(e)  Utilities. 
(1)  Utility meters and related conduits shall be located on side or rear walls and conduits located other than in the rear of the building shall be painted to match either the wall or trim color. 
(2)  On-site utility services shall be installed underground. 
(f)  Outside areas. 
(1)  Mechanical equipment shall be installed in a side or rear yard. When installed in side yard, such mechanical equipment shall be located no closer than five feet to the front facade of the structure. 
(2)  Clotheslines shall be installed in locations which shall not be conspicuous from the public streets or from adjoining properties. Fences, patio or porch railings may not be used as clotheslines. Clotheslines must not be higher than six feet or 20 feet in length. Fences or walls for the enclosure of clothes drying areas may be erected to a maximum height of six feet; provided, however, such construction is in compliance with zoning regulations as to location on the property, the size of the area to be enclosed, and the height of the fence or wall. 
(3)  No person shall place, use, keep, store, or maintain any upholstered furniture not manufactured for outdoor use, including, without limitation, upholstered chairs, upholstered couches, and any mattresses on any open porch, yard, or exterior area of structures. For purposes of this section, the interior of any fully enclosed porch, including, without limitation, a porch enclosed by screening material, that cannot be accessed from outside except through a door that can be locked shall not be considered an open porch. This section shall not apply during a lawful yard sale or garage sale while such furniture is offered for sale; nor shall it apply while such furniture is otherwise lawfully held for garbage collection at the curbside or other such area designated by the city for such pick-up. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, pt. 1, 3-21-2016) 
Sec. 110-531 - Commercial development and improvement. 
(a)  Applicability. These regulations shall apply to all commercial and industrial structures located in zoning districts C, I and 27 Corridor as designated on the future land use map. 
(b)  Shutters, storm panels and storm rollups. Shutters, storm panels and storm rollups shall meet the following design standards: 
(1)  Permanently installed shutters: 
a.  Shutters shall be painted to match either the principal color or the trim color of the structure to which they are attached. 
b.  Permanently installed hardware for storm panels and storm rollups shall be painted to match the principal color or the trim color of the structure to which is attached, according to which will make such hardware the least noticeable. 
c.  No permanently installed plywood panels are permitted. 
(2)  Storm shutters and panels which are not permanently installed shall meet the following utilization standards: 
a.  They may be put in place or closed not more than 72 hours before and 72 hours after a storm event; 
b.  They may be put in place or closed for two periods of up to 15 days each between June 1 and November 30 (the hurricane season) when the owner is absent; and 
c.  They may be put in place on rear windows during any period of time. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, pt. 1, 3-21-2016) 
Appendix A - TAX AND FEE SCHEDULE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein are the municipal fees, charges and rates for the City of Clewiston, Florida. The fees, charges and rates were adopted by the City Commission by resolution. For the purpose of the following tables, the designation "TBD" means that the fees are to be determined by subsequent ordinance or resolution of the City Commission of the City of Clewiston, Florida. 

Sec. 1. - Development and construction permit fee schedule residential, commercial and industrial building. 
    Shall be based on a bona fide contract price, and the building official shall require a copy of such contract, or the International Code Council (Building Valuation Table) published in the Building Safety Journal shall be used. (See Schedule "A-1"). 
1. Electrical Minimum fee $65.00 See worksheet A-4 2. Plumbing Minimum fee $65.00 See worksheet A-4 3. Mechanical/AC Minimum fee $65.00 See worksheet A-4 4. Miscellaneous Any item covered under miscellaneous permit fees  
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 2. - Mobile home, manufactured unit, modular home, modular unit. 
    Mobile Homes, Manufactured Units, Modular Homes, Modular Units, (does not include concrete slabs or foundations, additions such as carports, utility rooms, screen porches, Florida rooms, and the like or any areas not included from the manufacturer and sold as a complete unit. For these additions see Section 3.) 
1.  Single Wide Units (16' or less in width) ..... $450.00 
2.  Double Wide Units ..... 550.00 
3.  Triple Wide Units ..... 650.00 
4.  Each additional fractional portion ..... 100.00 
(In  addition to the triple wide fee) 
5.  Pre-Moving Structural Inspections 
per mile if unit is outside Hendry County. ..... 45.00 
per hour 
($120.00 minimum) 
plus $2.50 
6.  Plan review fee for Modular or similar structure foundation systems ..... 45.00 
    Items contained in subsections 1-3 above, include all required inspections to complete permit. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-09, § 1, adopted Sept. 19, 2016, changed the title of § 2 from "Mobile home, mobile unit, modular home, modular unit" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 3. - Miscellaneous fees 
    The following fees shall be based on a bona fide contract price (contract to be furnished) or unit prices to determine a value. Where a value is determined for the permit, the permit fee shall be based upon the valuation of permit fees to determine the applicable base permit fee(s): 
1.  Concrete Slab (drive, stoops, patios, etc.) ..... $4.00/sq.ft. 
2.  Asphalt Pavement (drives, parking area, etc.) ..... 3.00/sq.ft. 
3.  Roof Over existing Structure ..... 8.00/sq.ft. 
4.  Swimming Pool (water surface area, excluding electric and plumbing) ..... 45.00/sq.ft. 
a.  Above Ground Pools (Flat fee) ..... 30.00 
5.  Screened Cage Area (Enclosure Only) ..... 6.00/sq.ft. 
6.  Seawall ..... 3.00/sq.ft. 
7.  Boat Docks, Piers, Wharfs, Wood Decks ..... 15.00/sq.ft. 
a.  With Roof ..... 23.00/sq.ft. 
8.  Carport/Aluminum Roof and Screen Porch Aluminum Roof 
a.  Slab excluded ..... 9.00/sq.ft. 
b.  Slab included ..... 13.00/sq.ft. 
9.  Carport/Conventional and/or Screen Porch/Conventional wood frame 
a.  Slab excluded ..... 25.00/sq.ft. 
b.  Slab included ..... 29.00/sq.ft. 
10.  Utility Sheds/Site Built 
a.  Slab excluded ..... 21.00/sq.ft. 
b.  Slab included ..... 25.00/sq.ft. 
11.  Renovation and Remodeling, interior or exterior structural (Major) ..... 65.00/sq.ft. 
12.  Pole Barns-Residential/Commercial (At least 3 open sides) 
a.  Slab excluded ..... 13.00/sq.ft. 
b.  Slab included ..... 17.00/sq.ft. 
13.  Re-Roof Existing Structure (Minimum $65.00) ..... 3.00/sq.ft. 
14.  Pre-engineered utility shed (slab excluded) ..... 65.00 
15.  Fences ..... 65.00 
16.  Renovation and remodeling interior or exterior non-structural (minor) 
Flat fee (Less than $2500 Value) ..... 65.00 
17.  Demolition Permit ..... 65.00 
18.  Renewal of Expired Permit ..... 50% of original fee 
19.  Reinspection Fee ..... 60.00 
20.  Duplicate permit card (lost, stolen, etc.) ..... 15.00 
21.  Tent fee (Under 200 square feet) ..... 65.00 
Over 200 square feet ..... 90.00 
22.  Personalized Inspections ..... 45.00 per hour 
($120.00 minimum) plus $2.50 per mile if outside of City. 
23.  Tank/Containment Area ..... 0.03/gallon 
24.  Solar, Wind and Water Energy Generating Devices ..... $65.00 
(Ground, Wall, or Roof Mounted) 
25.  Energy Code Review ..... 45.00 
26.  Sewer (connection inspection) Permit ..... 65.00 
27.  Plan review fee ..... 30% of the base building permit fee 
28.  Elevators (per floor) ..... 25.00 
29.  Research fees (2 hour minimum) ..... 20.00 per hour 
Copy and faxing fees 
a.  Copies up to 8.5" x 14": Black & White, Single-Sided ..... 0.15 
per copy 
b.  Copies up to 8.5" x 14": Black & White, Double-Sided ..... 0.20 
per copy 
c.  Copies up to 8.5" x 14": Color, Single-Sided ..... 0.25 
per copy 
d.  Copies up to 8.5" x 14": Color, Double-Sided ..... 0.30 
per copy 
e.  Copies 11" X 17": Black & White, Single-Sided ..... 0.25 
per copy 
f.  Copies 11" X 17": Black & White, Double-Sided ..... 0.35 
per copy 
g.  Copies 11" X 17": Color, Single-Sided ..... 0.55 
per copy 
h.  Copies 11" X 17": Color, Double-Sided ..... 0.75 
per copy 
i.  Large Format Copies ..... Actual Cost 
j.  Certification of Documents (fee is in addition to duplication fee) * ..... $1.00/ 
document 
k.  Copies Provided on CD/DVD ..... 2.00/each 
l.  Copies Provided on Mini CD/DVD (if available) ..... 4.00/each 
m.  Copies Provided on VHS Tape (if available) ..... 4.00/each 
n.  Copies Provided on Cassette Tape (if available) ..... 5.00/each 
o.  Copies Provided on Jump Drive (if available) 
p.  Postage and Packaging if Mailed Out (USPS/UPS/FED-EX ..... Current Rate 
30.  Building Permit Certification Surcharge ..... 1.5% of permit fee 
min. $2.00 
31.  Construction Industry Recovery Fund ..... 1.5% of permit fee 
min. $2.00 
32.  Training Surcharge (all permits with measurable sq ft) ..... 0.02/sq.ft. 
33.  Electric Fees (minimum fee) ..... 65.00 
a.  Temporary electric for construction trailers ..... 65.00 
b.  Change of Service or Reactivation of inactive service ..... 65.00 
c.  New Electrical Services First 100 Amps ..... 0.90 per amp 
34.  Change of Occupancy (Change in Use) Inspection ..... 90.00 
35.  Certificate of Occupancy/Certificate of Completion ..... 30.00 
36.  Temporary buildings (other than office trailers) ..... 60.00 
(not to exceed 365 days) 
37.  Move Building inside of the county (Minimum fee-under 600 square feet ..... 60.00 
(Over 600 square feet, less than 2000 square feet) ..... 220.00 
(Over 2000 square feet) ..... 500.00 
(Price does not include electric, mechanical or plumbing inspections) 
38.  Signs up to 100 sq ft excluding electric and concrete ..... 110.00 
Over 100 sq ft ..... 180.00 
Temporary Signs ..... 45.00 
39.  Plans Revision fee ..... 45.00 
40.  Lien Search fee ..... 40.00 
per parcel 
41.  Land Clearing ..... 150.00 
42.  Spoil Removal (1500 cubic yards or less) ..... 150.00 
43.  Permit Extensions ..... 65.00 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 4. - Valuation of permit fees. 
    Minimum fee is $65.00 per permit paid at time of application to be credited at issuance of permit. 
    A permit application shall be provided with a signed copy of the contract between the owner and contractor. If a contract price has not been provided on the signed proposal or contract, the values assigned in Section 1 shall be used to determine the base permit fee(s). 
A.  1.  Permit fees based upon valuation shall be calculated based upon the following: 
Values of $1.00 to $1999.00 (base fee) ..... $65.00 
a.  Each fraction of $1,000.00 (up to $149,999.00) shall be an additional $4.00, added to the base fee. 
2.  For a project valued at $150,000.00, the base permit fees shall be ..... 664.00 
a.  Each additional fraction thereof (increments of $1,000.00) shall be an additional $5.00, added to the base fee. 
  
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-09, § 1 (Exh. A), adopted Sept. 19, 2016, repealed § 4 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. The former § 4 pertained to Schedule A-1, square footage construction costs. See § 6 for similar provisions. 
Sec. 5. - Permit fee work sheet. 
Plan Examiner's Initials___________ 
Owner _____ Contractor _____ Occupancy type _____ 
Contract price _____ Date _____ PMT type _____ Const type _____ 
Area name Square footage Valuation ____________________________________________________________Totals __________ 
Radon SQ FT _____ CIRF SQ FT _____ TF SQ FT _____ 
PROJECT TOTAL SQUARE FOOTAGE _____ 
Base bldg permit fee $ _____ Certificate of occupancy $ _____ Energy code cost $ _____ Sewer cost $ _____ Electrical cost $ _____ Plan review (30% of Base) $ _____ Plumbing cost $ _____ Radon gas surcharge $ _____ Mechanical cost $ _____ C.I. recovery fund $ _____ Technical review $ _____ Training surcharge $ _____  
TOTAL PERMIT COST   $_______ 
Plumbing (based on drain size) Mechanical Mechanical A/C @ $ .07/Sq.Ft. _____ 3" 90.00 Walk-in coolers @ $ .08/Sq.Ft. _____ Residential 4" 135.00 Display cases @ $5.00 EA _____ Commercial 4" 135.00 Hoods @ $1.50/Ft. _____ 6" 290.00 Cooling towers @ $1.20/Ton _____ 8" 555.00 Gas @ $6.00/Appliance _____ 10" 989.00 TOTAL MECHANICAL $ _____ TOTAL PLUMBING  $ _____  
Electrical   Total AMPS_______ 
First 100 AMPS At $ .90 Per AMP= $_______101 AMPS Plus At $ .60 Per AMP= $ _____ 
Total Electrical $ _____ × $1.73= $ _____ for 3 Phase SVC 
A THREE PHASE ELECTRICAL SERVICE (NEW RESIDENTIAL/COMMERCIAL ONLY) SHALL BE MULTIPLIED BY A FACTOR OF 1.73 AND FIGURED AT A RATE OF 90 CENTS FOR THE FIRST 100 AMPS AND 60 CENTS FOR EACH ADDITIONAL AMP UP TO 200 AMPS. NO MULTIPLIER WILL BE USED ON A THREE PHASE PUMP SERVICE (COMMERCIAL OR RESIDENTIAL). 
_____
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-09, § 1 (Exh. A), adopted Sept. 19, 2016, repealed § 5 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. The former § 5 pertained to Schedule A-2, schedule of permit fees. 
Sec. 6. - Schedule "A-1." 
Square Foot Construction Costs a, b, c, d 
Group (2015 International Building Code) IA IB IIA IIB IIIA IIIB IV VA VB A-1 Assembly, theaters, with stage 226.92 219.10 213.80 205.04 192.95 187.36 198.56 176.18 169.73 A-1 Assembly, theaters, without stage 207.97 200.15 194.85 186.09 174.15 168.55 179.61 157.38 150.92 A-2 Assembly, nightclubs 177.49 172.34 167.98 161.18 151.95 147.76 155.52 137.58 132.93 A-2 Assembly, restaurants, bars, banquet halls 176.49 171.34 165.98 160.18 149.95 146.76 154.52 135.58 131.93 A-3 Assembly, churches 209.94 202.13 196.83 188.07 176.32 170.72 181.59 159.54 153.09 A-3 Assembly, general, community halls, libraries, museums 175.12 167.31 161.01 153.25 140.50 135.90 146.77 123,72 118.27 A-4 Assembly, arenas 206.97 199.15 192.85 185.09 172.15 167.55 178.61 155.38 149.92 B Business 181.12 174.43 168.67 160.26 146.18 140.70 153.97 128.34 122.72 E Educational 192.29 185.47 180.15 172.12 160.72 152.55 166.18 140.46 136.18 F-1 Factory and industrial, moderate hazard 108.53 103.54 97.56 93.81 84.17 80.36 89.86 70.57 66.08 F-2 Factory and industrial, low hazard 107.53 102.54 97.56 92.81 84.17 79.36 88.86 70.57 65.08 H-1 High Hazard, explosives 101.60 96.60 91.63 86.88 78.44 73.62 82.93 64.84 N.P. H234 High Hazard 101.60 96.60 91.63 86.88 78.44 73.62 82.93 64.84 59.35 H-5 HPM 181.12 174.43 168.67 160.26 146.18 140.70 153.97 128.34 122.72 I-1 Institutional, supervised environment 180.72 174.14 169.28 161.12 149.06 145.04 161.12 133.69 129.43 I-2 Institutional, hospitals 304.80 298.11 292.36 283.95 268.92 N.P. 277.65 251.09 N.P. I-2 Institutional, nursing homes 211.20 204.51 198.75 190.34 177.26 N.P. 184.05 159.42 N.P. I-3 Institutional, restrained 206.08 199.38 193.63 185.22 172.62 166.14 178.93 154.78 147.16 I-4 Institutional, day care facilities 180.72 174.14 169.28 161.12 149.06 145.04 161.12 133.69 129.43 M Mercantile 132.23 127.09 121.73 115.92 106.18 102.99 110.26 91.82 88.16 R-1 Residential, hotels 182.28 175.70 170.83 162.68 150.87 146.84 162.68 135.49 131.23 R-2 Residential, multiple family 152.86 146.27 141.41 133.25 122.04 118.01 133.25 106.66 102.41 R-3 Residential, one- and two-family 143.93 139.97 136.51 132.83 127.95 124.61 130.57 119.73 112.65 R-4 Residential, care/assisted living facilities 180.72 174.14 169.28 161.12 149.06 145.04 161.12 133.69 129.43 S-1 Storage, moderate hazard 100.60 95.60 89.63 85.88 76.44 72.62 81.93 62.84 58.35 S-2 Storage, low hazard 99.60 94.60 89.63 84.88 76.44 71.62 80.93 62.84 57.35 U Utility, miscellaneous 77.82 73.48 69.04 65.52 59.23 55.31 62.58 46.83 44.63  
  
a. Private Garages use Utility, miscellaneous 
b. Unfinished basements (all use group) = $15.00 per sq. ft. 
c. For shell only buildings deduct 20 percent 
d. N.P. = not permitted 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-09, § 1 (Exh. A), adopted Sept. 19, 2016, repealed § 6 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. The former § 6 pertained to Schedule A-3, contractor registration fees. 
Sec. 7. - Land use and zoning. 
    Costs incurred by the city by professional surveyors or consultants will be paid by the applicant. Final Plat public hearing will not be scheduled until this (these) fee(s) have been paid. Charges for advertisement and notification to adjoining property owners are to be paid by the applicant prior to all public hearings. Signs must be placed on properties under review by the applicant. Proof of sign placement shall be furnished by the applicant to the city prior to all public hearings. 
ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARY CHANGE (NOT PUD)All Zoning Districts $1,000.00 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) REZONINGRegular PUD $1,500.00 (less than 10 acres) $2,500.00 (10 acres or greater) Plus $20.00 for (each additional acre over 10 acres) $3,000.00 Mixed Use. Plus $20.00 for each additional acre over 20 acres. Amendments to an approved PUD $1,000.00 plus $20.00 per acre SUBDIVISIONSPreliminary Plat Approval $4,000.00 plus $20.00 per acre Final Plat Approval $4,000.00.plus $10.00 per acre and surveyor's costs Construction plan review $1,500.00 Large Lot Subdivision Approval $1,000.00 plus $10 per acre Lot split review $150.00 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AMENDMENTSLarge Scale Map Amendment $3,000.00 (10 acres or greater) Small Scale Map Amendment $1,500.00 (less than 10 acres) Text Amendment $1,500.00 PETITIONSVariance $500.00 plus $150.00 per additional request. Major Special Exceptions (requires site development plan) $1,500.00 Minor Special Exception (change of use only) $500.00 Amendments to an approved Major Special Exception $1,000 plus $20.00 per additional acre Mobile Home Park Master Plans $2,500.00 Vacation of easement, ROW, or plat $2,500.00 Text Amendments to the Code of Ordinances $1,500.00 Administrative Waivers $500.00 Special Permits $150.00 Special Event $50.00 ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEWS Letter of Zoning or Land Use verification $150.00 Appeal of Administrative Decision $500.00 SITE DEVELOPMENT AND IMPROVEMENT PLANSSite Development Plans within the 27 corridor district $1,500.00 All other Site Development Plans $1,000.00 Each Additional Review after 2nd Review $250.00 Site Development Plan - Minor Change $250.00 Site Improvement Plans $250.00  
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-09, § 1 (Exh. A), adopted Sept. 19, 2016, repealed § 7 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. The former § 7 pertained to Schedule A-4, permit fee work sheet. 
Sec. 8. - Fire prevention and inspection fees. 
A.  Construction Inspection Fees 
1.  Hydrant Flow Test ..... $65.00 
2.  Dry Hydrant Test ..... 75.00 
3.  Fire Main Underground Test ..... 65.00 
4.  Fire Sprinkler (per Zone), per hour ..... 65.00 
5.  Fire Pump Flow/Acceptance Test ..... 120.00 
6.  Hood Suppression System ..... 65.00 
7.  Fire Detection (Alarm System) ..... 65.00 
Minimum Fee ($2.00 per device) 
8.  Building Permit Final ..... 65.00 
9.  Carnival/Amusement Inspection (per inspection) ..... 90.00 
10.  Burn Site Inspections ..... 65.00 
11.  LP Gas Lines ..... 65.00 
12.  Temporary Structures ..... 65.00 
13.  Fuel Tanks (each per inspection) ..... 65.00 
14.  Reinspection Fee ..... 60.00 
15.  Plan Reviews Building and Site plans each ..... 45.00 
16.  Licensing, approvals and inspection ..... 65.00 
B.  Requested Inspection Fees 
1.  Certificate of Occupancy/Change of Use/Requested Annual Inspection ..... 65.00 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-19-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-09, § 1 (Exh. A), adopted Sept. 19, 2016, repealed § 8 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. The former § 8 pertained to Schedule A-5, review and processing fees and derived from 1999 Code, § 18-751; Res. No. 2006-06, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Aug. 21, 2006. 
Sec. 9. - Local business taxes. 
(a)  Business taxes. The following are levied upon each person coming under the provisions of section 66-79 in the Code of Ordinances: 
(1) Abstracts Companies, agents, firms or persons engaged in the business of making abstracts of title for public records (local office) $70.00 (2) Advertising a. Banners, floats, cartoons, or by other means when no vehicle is used, when not connected with permanent local business, per week 40.00 b. Each vehicle so used, per day 10.00 c. Sign or billboard, per 100 sq. ft. or less 5.00 d. Solicitors of 30.00 (3) Airplane Commercial airline maintaining ticket office 50.00 (4) Agents a. Cash registers, adding machines, typewriters, iron safes, refrigerating machines, vacuum cleaners, home lighting plants and similar equipment at retail and not licensed as merchant 50.00 b. Claims and collections, other than bank or lawyers 50.00 c. Display rooms, soliciting business and keeping merchandise for display only 100.00 d. Employment 30.00 e. Insurance (See bonding) 30.00  More than one company 50.00 f. Laundry 20.00  Located outside of city, same as laundry license g. Lending money on personal property (See banks; money brokers) h. Monuments or tombstones 30.00 i. Real estate (See real estate agency) 450.00 j. Rental and rent collections, with office or otherwise 30.00 k. Sewing machines, other than merchants 50.00 (5) Apartments, hotels, motels, tourist courts, roominghouses or light housekeeping a. Three units or less No charge b. Four units 40.00 c. All over four units, per unit 1.00 (6) Architects (See professional) (7) Arms (See merchants) (8) Art studio Permitting display and incidental sales, resident 30.00 (9) Attorney at law (See professional) (10) Auction shops (Merchant's licenses does not apply), per day 50.00 (11) Auctioneer Each per year 150.00 (12) Auditors and accountants (See professional) (13) Auto camps (See trailer or auto camps) (14) Automatic musical machine (See vending machines) (15) Automobiles a. Agency, new and secondhand, no garage or filling station 100.00 b. Batteries, manufacture, repair and charging 50.00 With garage business No charge c. Dealer, secondhand, cars and parts, no garage or filling station 50.00 d. Filling stations, retailing gasoline, illuminating oils, lubricating oils, tires, automobile and accessories, one gasoline pump installed 30.00 Each additional gasoline pump installed 5.00 e. For hire, each vehicle 50.00 f. Garage, including repair shop, sale of parts, tires and accessories 50.00 g. Garage or lot with filling station, in conjunction with another business 20.00 h. Parking lot 40.00 i. Repair shop-top and body, if not operated with garage 40.00 j. Taxicabs, each vehicle 50.00 k. Tire vulcanizing, repairing, retreading, etc., requires garage license. l. Trucking business, (intrastate and interstate) maintaining office and telephone 50.00 m. All items above when included with automobile dealer's license 150.00 n. U-drive trucks and/or trailer rental business, only 50.00 In conjunction with another business 20.00 (16) Awning and tent making shop 50.00 (17) Bakery 50.00 Pastries only 30.00 (18) Balloons, novelties, tricks, etc. Peddlers or vendors, per day 20.00 (19) Banks, trust companies, national banks or person doing a banking business 150.00 (20) Barbecue stands (drive-in) a. Up to three tables 50.00 b. In connection with restaurant, additional 20.00 (21) Barbershops a. Up to two chairs 50.00 b. Each additional chair 10.00 (22) Beauty parlor a. One operator 30.00 b. Two or more operators 50.00 (23) Beer and wine (See chapter 6) (24) Bicycle repair shops 15.00 (25) Bill posters 30.00 (26) Billiards or pool tables Each table 30.00 (27) Boardinghouses (See apartments, etc.) a. If meals are served to roomers only then one-half of restaurant license fee also applies. (28) Boats a. Builder, including ways, boat houses and yards, storage of boats 30.00 b. For hire, inboard motorboats, each, if separate from fishing camps 5.00 c. For hire launches 20.00 (29) Boiler and machine shop 50.00 (30) Bonding companies 50.00 (31) Book agent or magazine salesman Per salesmen (See also chapter 58) 40.00 (32) Books and stationery 20.00 (33) Bootblack stands Except in barbershops or hotels 10.00 (34) Boots and shoes Dealer in secondhand 20.00 (35) Bottling works Local, including delivery trucks 50.00 (36) Bowling alleys Each alley 10.00 (37) Brokers Those who sell to registered merchants only and act as intermediary between buyer and seller for the consideration of a brokerage or commission from either for the sale of merchandise 70.00 a. Dealing in insurance 70.00 b. Dealing in stocks and bonds 70.00 c. Investments 70.00 (38) Builders (See contractors) (39) Building and loan associations Local 50.00 (40) Building material and supplies (See merchants) (41) Bus station Intercity 50.00 (42) Cabinet or carpenter shops Employing three or more persons 50.00 (43) Cable TV 50.00 (44) Cafes and cafeterias Accommodations for 60 persons or less 50.00 a. All over 60, each 0.50 (45) Cameras, photographic supplies, developing 50.00 (46) Candy a. Factories 70.00 b. Kitchens 30.00 (47) Carnivals and street carnivals and similar aggregations including those sponsored by local organizations Per day (See also shows, circuses) 200.00 (48) Cement block and artificial stone manufacturer 50.00 (49) Cement septic tank manufacturer Must comply with requirements of state department of health 30.00 (50) Chiropodist (See professional) (51) Chiropractors (See professional) (52) Cigarette vending machine Coin-operated, in addition to license for sale of cigarettes, no charge with other licenses 10.00 (53) Circus Per day, including parade (See also carnivals, shows) 100.00 (54) Civil engineers (See professional) (55) Clairvoyants, receiving remuneration No license for less than 30 days, per day 60.00 (56) Cleaning and blocking hats only 20.00 (57) Cleaning, pressing and dyeing 50.00 (58) Clothing (See merchants) (59) Coin-operated machines or devices When not specifically covered by other business tax, except telephones and U.S. stamp machines, per machine (See also vending machine) 10.00 (60) Cold storage plant For general use of public 40.00 (61) Commission merchants Handling on consignment or commission only, or in addition to other business tax receipt 70.00 (62) Concrete, ready-mixed Delivered on trucks 50.00 (63) Contractors a. General building, includes special contractors 120.00 b. Subcontractors or limited, such as electrical only, whether on time and material basis or otherwise (See also chapter 22, article II) 50.00 (64) Dance halls 100.00 (65) Dancing schools 10.00 (66) Delicatessen, alone 30.00 (67) Dentist (See professional) (68) Detective agency, Each principal 50.00 (69) Directory Public for profit 20.00 (70) Dog, pony or other animal show a. Per day 50.00 b. Plus deposit of $100.00, as per circus (71) Drays For hire, each 20.00 (72) Drugstore (See merchants) (73) Dynamite Dealer in a. Not licensed as merchant 50.00 b. Location subject to approval of city commissioners (74) Electrician (See contractors) (75) Embalmers and funeral directors (See professional) (76) Engineers (See professional) (77) Exhibitions or curiosities Per day (See also shows, circuses) 70.00 (78) Express companies or agencies 70.00 (79) Exterminators 50.00 (80) Ferris wheel, merry-go-round, etc., per day 50.00 (81) Filling stations (See automobiles) (82) Reserved (83) Fish market, oysters, and poultry Wholesale or retail 50.00 (84) Fishing camp Includes boats, cabins or trailers not exceeding five rooms and merchandise pertaining to fishing 70.00 (85) Florist shop 20.00 (86) Fortuneteller No business tax receipt issued for less than 30 days, per day 60.00 (87) Fruits and vegetables a. Sold from car on railroad tracks, per day 30.00 b. Sold from conveyance at retail or otherwise if not taxed as merchant (Other than provided) 30.00 (88) Furniture a. Repairs and upholstering 30.00 b. Secondhand dealer 50.00 (89) Garage (See automobiles) (90) Gas distributors, bottled a. Not connected with other business 50.00 b. When connected with other business 30.00 (91) Gasoline, oils and grease Jobbing or wholesale (retail, see automobiles) 100.00 (92) Gunsmiths, locksmiths 20.00 (93) Hawkers O merchandise or preparations purporting to possess medicinal virtues per day 70.00 (94) Hotels (See apartments, hotels, etc.) (95) House movers 50.00 (96) House trailer sales and/or dealer 150.00 (97) Ice a. Factories (Including selling at plant and delivery from own trucks) with capacity of not more than 50 tons per day 100.00 b. Factories with capacity of 50 to 100 tons per day 150.00 c. Sales station (Wholesale or retail) platform sales and trucks only 50.00 (98) Ice cream a. Manufacturers, wholesale and retail, including truck 50.00 b. Mix, manufacturing or selling or delivering from trucks 30.00 c. Retail selling from vehicle 20.00 (99) Insurance companies Including any insurance company selling any type of insurance within the boundaries of the city, regardless whether such sales are made through an agent with offices located in the city, by direct solicitation or otherwise 50.00 (100) Itinerants a. Any person or persons going from house to house, repairing furniture, clocks, jewelry, stoves, kitchen utensils or any other things, not having a shop located in the city, per week 20.00 b. Chiropractors, osteopaths, physicians or surgeons 225.00 c. Merchants and vendors, temporarily engaged in the sale of goods, wares or merchandise, and occupying any building or structure for the sale thereof-same as merchant (101) Jewelry (See also watch repair) a. Sold from stand, to include gold workers and all similar trades, per day 30.00 b. Stores (same as merchants) (102) Job printing Alone 30.00 Additional to newspapers No charge (103) Jobbers Wholesale or manufacturing, not local, selling and/or delivering from truck to retailers no charge (104) Jukeboxes (See vending machines) (105) Junk shops and dealers Junk, old trash, rags, metal, rubber, etc., including those gathering about city in wagons (see also chapter 22, article III) 50.00 (106) Kindergarten and/or child nursery (Where there are more than four children kept, regardless of age, by a person over 21 years of age during the day time and/or night time on a regular basis and where the business is operated in the home of the person paying the tax or other place of business of the person paying the tax, but outside the child's home) 30.00 (107) Knife and scissors sharpeners 50.00 (108) Labor or emigration agents Including anyone who, as agent for another, solicits or procures laborers within the city, whether to be employed in the city or elsewhere, except free agencies approved by city commission 450.00 (109) Launches for hire (See boats) (110) Laundries a. Employing all hand labor 20.00 b. Self-service 30.00 c. Steam, including dry cleaning 70.00 (111) Reserved (112) Livestock dealer 50.00 (113) Locksmith and gunsmith If alone 20.00 (114) Lodginghouses (See apartments) (115) Lumber and/or building material dealers (See merchants) (116) Machine and repair shops Not otherwise listed 50.00 (117) Machine repair and/or maintenance Without a shop 50.00 (118) Marble, monument and stone cutting 30.00 (119) Massaging (Other than facial) 30.00 (120) Mattress factory and renovator 50.00 (121) Meats, fresh, wholesale or retail 50.00 (122) Merchant, retail (Other than oriental goods auction and bankrupt sale stores) a. Stock not in excess of $3,500.00 50.00 b. Stock from $3,500.00 to $8,500.00 100.00 c. Stock in excess of $8,500.00 150.00 d. Tailors (123) Milk and milk products a. Local and deliveries 50.00 b. If no store with merchant's license No charge (124) Mobile home parks or auto camps (See trailer or auto camps) (125) Money brokers or lenders a. Curbstone or without office, lending or advancing money on personal property 150.00 b. With office, loaning or advancing money on real or personal property; such as lending or advancing money on motor vehicles or purchasing notes or paper secured by motor vehicles 100.00 c. With or without office, all persons, except banks, or bankers taking, buying or selling assignments of or contract for the purchase, sale, transfer or assignment of wages or salaries, earned or to be earned in the future by any other person, firm or corporation 150.00 (126) Neon lighting Installation and service (See also chapter 6, articles II and VII) (127) Newspapers a. Published less than six times per week 30.00 b. Published six or more times per week 50.00 c. Stands, not in connection with other business 10.00 (128) Nursery Garden, tree, etc. 30.00 (129) Oculists, opticians and optometrists (See professionals) (130) Office supplies and furniture (See merchants) (131) Ornamental shrubbery or trees Vendor 30.00 (132) Osteopath (See professional) (133) Packing houses, fruits, vegetables, meats, etc. 70.00 (No business tax receipt required for grower's cooperative association not operating for profit) (134) Painters (See contractors) (135) Palmist No business tax receipt issued for less than 30 days, per day 60.00 (136) Parking lot (See automobiles) (137) Pawnbrokers Nontransferable (State law reference-Secondhand dealers, F.S. ch. 538; disposal of pawned property, F.S. § 715.04) 150.00 (138) Peanut vendor 20.00 (139) Peddlers 200.00 (140) Personal service 30.00 (141) Photographers, ferrotypers, crayon artists (See also cameras) 50.00 (142) Physicians, surgeons (See professional) (143) Piano tuners 20.00 (144) Planing mill and novelty works: a. If alone 50.00 b. In connection with lumber yard no charge (145) Pony and/or horse rides on live animals Per week 50.00 (146) Popcorn When not connected with other business 20.00 (147) Professional practitioners The following professional practitioners are classified as professional and each person engaged in the practice of any such profession shall be required to cover his practice by paying the tax of 50.00 a. Attorneys at law b. Accountants and auditors c. Architects and drafting architects d. Chiropodists e. Chiropractors f. Civil, consultant or drafting engineers g. Dentists h. Embalmers and funeral directors i. Oculist, opticians and optometrist j. Osteopathic physicians k. Physicians, medical doctors or surgeons l. Surveyors m. Tax experts or consultants n. Veterinarians (148) Radio and electrical appliances Only sales and repairs, alone 50.00 (149) Real estate a. Broker, each 50.00 b. Broker, salesmen, each 50.00 c. Salesmen, each 30.00 d. Selling from street, sidewalk or curb or with no phone or fixed place of business in city 625.00 (150) Rinks, skating 50.00 (151) Rug and carpet cleaners 20.00 (152) Salesmen (Same as merchant) (153) Sandwiches Sale of sandwiches not operated in connection with other business 20.00 (154) Sanitariums, hospitals Or institutions of like character, operated for profit 50.00 (155) Sash, door and blinds (See lumber or merchants) (156) Sawmills Not operated in connection with other business 50.00 (157) Shoe, boot and harness repair shop 30.00 (158) Shooting galleries Per day 10.00 a. When in connection with other business 30.00 (159) Shows (See also theaters, circuses, carnivals, motion pictures) a. Not otherwise specified, giving performances, each day 200.00 b. Side shows (See circus) c. Street carnivals and similar aggregations, each booth, stand or separate attraction not otherwise specified, per day 50.00 (160) Sign painters (See also chapter 18, article VII) 30.00 (161) Soda fountain, ice cream salon or sundae store a. No drugs or medicines, allows sale of wrapped sandwiches 30.00 b. If toasted sandwiches or sandwiches made to order are served, additional license required 20.00 (162) Solicitors For business houses outside the city calling on stores, offices and places of business only No charge (163) Storage warehouses 50.00 (164) Sugar manufacturer 100.00 (165) Sundry store Allows sale of merchandise of miscellaneous items, stock not to exceed $2,500.00, including soda fountain and service of meals where seating capacity does not exceed 20 persons (See also soda fountains) 50.00 (If seating capacity exceeds 20 persons, requires separate restaurant business tax receipt.) (166) Surveyor (See professional) (167) Tailor (See merchant, retail) (168) Taxicabs (See automobiles) (169) Tearooms or shops (Same as cafes) (170) Telegraph systems 60.00 (171) Telephone system 200.00 (172) Theaters a. Including motion pictures (See also circuses and shows) based on number seats available for use to patrons, per seat over 500 seats 0.20 b. Minimum 100.00 (173) Theatrical shows, traveling players and minstrels In local building fit for such exhibitions, selling no merchandise other than theater admission 30.00 a. Per day 30.00 b. Per week 100.00 (174) Tinsmith and sheet iron worker 30.00 (175) Tire retreading (See automobile) (176) Tobacco, cigars, cigarettes and cold drinks, candies 20.00 (177) Towels, linen or laundry supply 50.00 (178) Trailer or auto camps (not tourist cabins): a. Capacity up to 50 trailers 50.00 b. Capacity over 50 trailers 100.00 (179) Trucks and vehicles a. Doing wholesale or retail business except as otherwise specifically taxed, per vehicle, local business only 10.00 b. Doing business either wholesale or retail by the delivery of rented, processed or serviced goods, wares and merchandise (Per vehicle, local only) 10.00 (180) Undertakers (See embalmers) (181) Upholsterers (See furniture) (182) Vacuum cleaners Dealer in or agent for, not paying merchandise business tax (See agent) (183) Vending machines (See also cigarette vending machine) a. Automatic (drink dispensing) machine if not owned by business where in operation 20.00 b. Larger coin machines if not owned by business where in operation 40.00 c. Music boxes, jukeboxes, per machine (Separate from all other business tax) 30.00 d. Skill machines, commonly referred to as pinball games, marble tables and similar devices, per machine, each skill machine or music machine must display receipt showing: 30.00  1. Serial number of business tax receipt  2. Manufacturer's name  3. Serial number of manufacturer  4. To whom taxed  5. Location shown on business tax receipt  6. Description of machine (184) Veterinary surgeon (See professional) (185) Vulcanizing and tire repairing (See automobiles) (186) Watch and jewelry repairing: a. If alone 50.00 b. With jewelry No charge (187) Water companies (Bottled) 30.00 (188) Watermelons, other fruits and vegetables Produced by seller (See fruit) (189) Weighing machines No charge (190) Wood yard 20.00 (191) Zoos 20.00  
(b)  Assignment of merchant's tax. Business not specifically described above may be assigned a merchant's tax at rate specified therefor. 
(Code 1960, § 11-10; Code 1982, § 11-10; Code 1999, § 66-79; Ord. No. 80-2, § 1, 9-22-1980; Ord. No. 92-07, § 1, 10-19-1992; Ord. No. 2000-05, § 1, 9-7-2000) 
Sec. 10. - Animals. 
(a)  Impoundment fees. The charges for the impoundment and feeding of each dog or domestic animal per day shall be provided as follows (language from sections 14-53 and 14-119): 
Impoundment Fees Amount  
For taking up and impounding ..... $15.00 
For boarding each animal, per day .....  10.00 
For posting impoundment notice .....   2.00 
For feeding each animal, per day .....   3.00 
For selling each animal .....   5.00 
(b)  License; vaccination. The license fee and vaccination fee is as follows (language from section 14-73): 
License and Vaccination Fees Amount  
Annual rabies vaccination and license tag (obtained at the county health department sponsored clinic) ..... $7.00 
Annual license tag only .....  3.00 
Duplicate license tag .....  2.00 
Sec. 11. - Mobile home inspection fee and use or occupancy fee. 
(a)  Every mobile home subject to the inspection as required (language from section 50-67 of the Code of Ordinances), shall be subject to a $25.00 inspection fee, for each mobile home unit. Such fee is payable at the time application is made for inspection. 
(b)  Prior to the use or occupancy of any mobile home, all work required shall be inspected by the city community development department, after which a certificate of occupancy shall be issued if it is found that said mobile home meets the requirements of the Code of Ordinances and the laws of the state. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the fee for the permit and inspection work required by the city shall be $25.00 per mobile home. 
(c)  If the mobile home was inspected, within 30 days prior to requesting a certificate of occupancy, then the inspection fee pursuant to this section shall be a $15.00 fee. 
Sec. 12. - Peddlers or solicitors application required. 
    An application fee for peddlers or solicitors of $200.00 shall accompany the sworn application (language from section 58-3 of the Code of Ordinances). 
Sec. 13. - Enforcement of lien for public improvements. 
    Any lien provided for in chapter 62 of the Code of Ordinances may be enforced and collected by suit at law or in equity, or the city may maintain a personal action against the owner to recover the same or it may enforce its lien and maintain its personal action at the same time, until actually paid the amount due. In any suit by the city, either at law or in equity, for the collection of the amount of such lien, the city shall be entitled to recover a reasonable attorney's fee not exceeding $25.00 for the installation of suit and the sum of ten percent of the amount of the recovery, together with the costs of the proceedings, which attorney's fees and costs shall also become a lien upon such lands. 
Sec. 14. - Business tax receipts transfer. 
(a)  Business tax receipts may be transferred (language from section 66-60): 
(1)  From one location to another location provided that the business tax receipts are presented to the city for the approval of such transfer. 
(2)  With the approval of the city with the business for which they were taken out, except as otherwise provided by law, when there is a bona fide sale and transfer of the property used and employed in the business as stock in trade. 
(3)  To a new owner, when there is a bona fide sale of the business, upon payment of a transfer fee of up to ten percent of the annual business tax, but not less than $3.00 nor more than $25.00, and presentation of the original business tax receipt and evidence of the sale. 
(b)  Business tax receipts shall not be subject to transfer where the essential nature of the business has been changed or where the business tax receipt holder has been exempt from payment of all or any part of the business tax. 
(c)  Upon written request and presentation of the original business tax receipt, any business tax receipt may be transferred from one location to another location in the city upon payment of a transfer fee of up to ten percent of the annual business tax, but not less than $3.00 nor more than $25.00. 
Sec. 15. - Bicycle registration. 
    No bicycle shall be operated unless the same shall have been registered by the police department or its agents and an inspection tag issued by the police department and the tag attached to the bicycle (language from section 70-117 of the Code of Ordinances). It shall be the duty of each person owning a bicycle to have the bicycle registered at the city hall or the police station. The police shall refuse to issue a tag for any bicycle which is determined to be in an unsafe mechanical condition, unless and until such mechanical defects have been corrected. A fee of $0.50 shall be paid for each tag, and the tags shall expire on February 1 of each year. Upon expiration of any tag, the tag may be renewed upon application and payment of the same fee as upon an original application. 
Sec. 16. - Water and sewer tapping fees. 
(a)  The following tapping or connection fees shall be charged to each person who taps or connects into the city water system: 
Tapping and Connection Fees Amount 3/4-inch meter (including backflow preventer) $550.00 1-inch meter  650.00 11/2-inch meter  700.00 2-inch meter  800.00  
(b)  Each person shall, who connects to the city sewer system, pay $50.00 to the city as a tapping or connection fee. 
(c)  Said fees shall be paid and permit issued therefor prior to the connection (language from sections 74-110 and 74-112). 
Sec. 17. - Utility rates. 
(a)  The following are the monthly water rates (language from section 74-109): 
Amount Consumed Amount Minimum, plus the following: $6.00 First 10,000 gallons  3.91 10,001 to 20,000 gallons (per 1,000 gallons)  4.30 20,000 gallons (per 1,000 gallons)  4.73 Plus, any increase in average costs incurred by the city in obtaining and distributing potable water to its customers above $2.00 per 1,000 gallons.  
(b)  The following are the monthly sewer rates (language from section 74-111): 
Consumption Charges Minimum charge effective February 1, 2010, plus the following: $5.00 First 10,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons  3.71 10,001 to 20,000 gallons (per 1,000 gallons)  3.57 Over 20,000 gallons (per 1,000 gallons)  3.43  
(Note: minimum applies whether water is supplied or not) 
Sec. 18. - Monthly electrical rates. 
    The following uniform monthly electricity rate shall be charged by the city for electric current furnished to consumers of electricity (language from section 74-113 of the Code of Ordinances): 
(1)  Where such electric current is used for a single-family dwelling unit occupied by one family or household: 
a.  Customer charge, per month ..... $  6.50 
b.  First 2,000 kWh, per kWh .....   0.0560 
c.  All above 2,000 kWh, per kWh .....   0.0565 
d.  Customer using less than 400 kWh will receive a credit (per kWh) .....   0.0100 
The minimum monthly bill shall be the customer charge, plus other applicable charges, covered by ordinance, state statutes or federal law. 
(2)  Where such electric current is used for nonresidential customers with an electrical demand requirement of less than ten kWh per month: 
a.  Customer charge, per month ..... $  7.30 
b.  All kWh, per kWh .....   0.0700 
The minimum monthly bill shall be the customer charge, plus other applicable charges, covered by ordinance, state statutes or federal law. 
(3)  Where such electric current is used for nonresidential customers with an electrical demand requirement of ten kWh or more: 
a.  Customer charge, per month ..... $35.00 
b.  First 2,000 kWh, per kWh .....   3.60 
c.  All above 2,000 kWh, per kWh .....   0.0510 
d.  Billing demand. The maximum 15-minute integrated demand established, or 70 percent of the highest demand for the prior 11 months. 
The minimum monthly bill shall be the customer charge, plus billing demand, and other applicable charges covered by ordinance, state statutes or federal law. 
(4)  The rate charged by the city for electric energy furnished to consumers of electricity shall be decreased or increased $0.0001 per kilowatt hour for each $0.0001, or a major fraction thereof, decrease below or increase above $0.0375 per kilowatt hour as determined by the average cost to the city each month including a power cost true-up (plus $0.002 per kilowatt hour). The power cost true-up shall be the difference between the power cost actually incurred in second month preceding and the power cost recovered through application of the power cost base and the power cost adjustment. 
(5)  The uniform monthly electricity rate charged by the city for electric current furnished to consumers in subsections (1) through (3) of this section, inclusive, shall be decreased or increased the applicable proportionate part of any taxes and assessments imposed by any governmental authority below, or in excess of, those in effect on May 1, 1981; which are assessed on the basis of meters or customers or the price of, or revenues from, electric energy or services sold, or the volume of energy purchased for sale or sold. 
Sec. 19. - Monthly garbage collection rates. 
(a)  The uniform monthly garbage collection rates set forth in this subsection shall be charged by the city to all persons to whom garbage collection service is furnished or made available by the city (language from section 74-114 of the Code of Ordinances). Monthly garbage collection rates shall be established by resolution as follows: 
(1)  Containerized garbage, per cubic yard ..... $ 8.50 
(2)  Residential and other garbage, per month .....  19.95 
(3)  Special residential garbage, per month .....   4.00 
(b)  The city commission may, from time to time, by resolution, increase or decrease the rates set forth in subsection (a) of this section not to exceed the following: 
(1)  For garbage picked up by city-furnished container, per cubic yard of container pickup ..... $10.00 
(2)  For garbage picked up, per month .....  20.00 
Sec. 20. - Fee on electrical accounts levied for mosquito control. 
    In order to raise sufficient money to provide for a program of mosquito control, there is hereby levied upon each light account furnished lights or electrical service by the city, a monthly fee of $7.00, such fee to be known as the "mosquito fee." Minimum charge for mosquito control fee to persons meeting the criteria established by the city is $3.00. Such fee shall be added to the monthly statement sent out by the city to those persons furnished electrical service and shall be collected at the same time as bills for electrical service are paid (language from section 74-115 of the Code of Ordinances). Failure to pay such fee shall subject the consumer to the same penalty as failure to pay the electrical bill, including discontinuance of service. 
(Ord. No. 2015-14, § 1, 10-19-2015) 
Sec. 21. - Initial deposit and connection charges for electric and water service. 
    There shall be a service charge of $10.00 made for the connection of a new account or an existing account which had been disconnected for some reason other than nonpayment of a bill, violation of a contract, or violation of the city's rules and regulations (language from section 74-116 of the Code of Ordinances). 
Sec. 22. - Water and sewer development fee. 
(a)  The development water and sewer fee (language from section 74-149 of the Code of Ordinances), within the corporate limits of the city, for each category of service shall be determined by applying the listed equivalent residential units factor listed in subsection (b) of this section to each category of service and based upon residential unit development fees being set at $600.00 for sewer service and $1,133.00 for water service. 
(b)  Development water and sewer fees for units located within the corporate limits of the city: 
SCHEDULE OF WATER AND SEWER DEVELOPMENT FEES 
Type of unit Sewer System 
Capacity Fee Water System 
Capacity Fee Equivalent 
Residential Units Apartment/condominium $600.00 $1,133.00 1.0 Banquet room, per 15 seats 300.00 567.00 0.5 Barbershop, single chair 600.00 1,133.00 1.0 Barbershop, additional chair each 60.00 113.00 0.1 Beautyshop, single chair 600.00 1,133.00 1.0 Beauty shop, additional chair each 120.00 227.00 0.2 Carwash, per bay 1,800.00 3,399.00 3.0 Care center, per bed 240.00 453.00 0.4 Church, per 100 seats 1,200.00 2,266.00 2.0 Dentist, doctor, etc., office per 1,000 sq. ft. 600.00 1,133.00 1.0 Duplex 1,200.00 2,266.00 2.0 Garage, one bay 600.00 1,133.00 1.0 Garage, additional bays each 120.00 227.00 0.2 Gas station, no bay 600.00 1,133.00 1.0 Gas station, one bay 660.00 1,246.00 1.1 Gas station, additional bays each 120.00 227.00 0.2 Hair salon 660.00 1,133.00 1.0 Hair salon, additional chair each 120.00 227.00 0.2 Hospital, per bed 480.00 906.00 0.8 Laundromat, per machine 540.00 1,020.00 0.9 Mobile home park, per unit 600.00 1,133.00 1.0 Mobile home, on residential lot 600.00 1,133.00 1.0 Motel or hotel, per room 360.00 680.00 0.6 Office, per 1,000 sq. ft. 360.00 680.00 0.6 Recreational vehicle park, per space 360.00 680.00 0.6 Restaurant, per ten seats 600.00 1,133.00 1.0 Retail/wholesale store, per 1,000 sq. ft. 180.00 340.00 0.3 School, toilets only, per 35 students 750.00 1,416.00 1.25 School, toilets and kitchen, per 35 students 780.00 1,473.00 1.3 School, toilets, kitchen/gym, per 35 students 1,200.00 2,266.00 2.0 Single-family residence 600.00 1,133.00 1.0 Storage/warehouse, per 1,000 sq. ft. 90.00 170.00 0.15  
(c)  The development water and sewer fee for areas to which service is provided by the city, located outside the corporate limits of the city, shall be 125 percent of the amounts assessed for a similar unit located within the corporate limits of the city. This provision shall not include water service connections of the South Shore Water Association (SSWA) or its successors. Development water fees for the SSWA shall be at the in-city rate. 
(d)  The applicant/fee payer will be required to build or to provide the cost of construction of the distribution system and all water facilities onsite regardless of size necessary to provide service to the land development activity. 
Sec. 23. - Collection scheduling and placement for public works pickup. 
    Special pickups will be coordinated by the resident and the public works department as to time, place, date and items to be picked up (language from section 74-187 of the Code of Ordinances). A minimum fee of $35.00 will be charged. The director of public works or his designee shall charge an additional amount above the minimum based on excessive volume, difficulty of collection, and other relevant factors. This fee shall be charged with the customer's next regular utility bill. 
Sec. 24. - Garage sales permit fee. 
    There shall be an administrative processing fee of $5.00 for the issuance of the permit required by this section (language from section 110-529 of the Code of Ordinances). 
Sec. 25. - Wreckers. 
FLORIDA HIGHWAY PATROL ROTATION TOWING RATE STRUCTURE 
TROOP F 
RATE DETERMINATION BY TROOP COMMANDER 
SEPTEMBER 01, 2002 
DeSoto Hendry Class A Wreckers 

(including roll-back or slide-back carries) Base rate (per mile charge beyond ten-mile radius) $ 85.00 $ 85.00 Mileage rate 3.00 3.00 Hourly rate (for waiting or working on scene after first 30 minutes) 50.00 50.00 Class B Wreckers Base rate 150.00 150.00 Mileage rate 4.00 4.00 Hourly rate 75.00 75.00 Class C Wreckers Base rate 250.00 250.00 Mileage rate 5.00 5.00 Hourly rate 125.00 125.00  
SEPARATE CHARGES 
A. Removal of drive shaft Minimum 1/4-hour rate or actual time worked at hourly rate for both counties 
$125.00 B. Air hook-up C. Remove/pull axle D. Remove bumper E. Remove air foils F. Landoll trailer-Semi roll-back or drop-back trailer or truck G. Air bags $2,000.00 or sublet H. Extra manpower-per man $35.00  
MAXIMUM STORAGE 
Class A 
Inside ..... $20.00 
Outside ..... 12.00 
Class B ..... 40.00 
Class C 
Single unit ..... 40.00 
Double unit ..... 60.00 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1960 CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1960 Code, as supplemented, which are included herein. Sections of the 1960 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the tables immediately following this table. 
1960 Code 
Section Section 

this Code 1-1-1-3 1-1-1-3 1-4 1-10 1-5 1-13 2-12.1 74-4 2-13 94-21, 94-22 2-14 94-23 2-17.1 94-24 2-19 62-2 3-1 6-1 3-4-3-7 6-2-6-5 4-1 14-124 4-2 14-127 4-2.1 14-128 4-3 14-1 4-4 14-126 4-5 14-125 4-6, 4-7 14-2, 14-3 4-7 14-129 4-11 14-5 14-27 4-12 14-28 4-15 14-102 4-16 14-105 4-17, 4-18 14-52, 14-53 4-19 14-29 4-21 14-30 4-22 14-50, 14-51 4-23 14-103 4-24 14-4 14-104 4-25 14-49 5-3-5-5 82-1-82-3 6-5 18-2 6-6 18-174 6-7 18-142 6-8 18-144 6-9 18-143 6-11-6-14 18-175- 
18-178 6-15 18-181 6-16, 6-17 18-179, 
18-180 6-18 18-182 6-20 18-422 8-24 18-103 8-25 18-104- 
18-113 8-26 18-114 9-2 38-2 9-4 38-3 9-9-9-11 38-27-38-29 9-12 38-31 9-13 38-30 9-14, 9-15 38-32, 38-33 9-16 38-1 9-17 38-4 10-2 34-19-34-23 10-3 74-6 10-7 74-115 10A-6-10A-10 22-43-22-47 10B-1 62-49 62-80-62-82 10B-4 62-52 10B-5, 10B-6 62-83, 62-84 10B-7 62-53 10B-8 62-50 10B-10 62-51 11-1-11-6 66-56-66-61 11-7 66-55 11-9 66-62 11-10 66-66 App. A, § 9 12-6 66-21 13-1 54-1 14-1-14-9 58-1-58-9 16-12 18-44 17-1 46-19 17-2 46-46 17-3 46-20 46-47 17-4 46-21 18-10-18-12 62-26-62-28 18-12.1 62-29 18-13 62-25 18-14 62-30 18-17 74-3 19-4 100-208 19-7 100-210 19-32 18-477 19-33 100-258 19-35 100-237 21-6 66-19 21-7-21-10 66-22-66-25 23-2 70-20 23-3 70-19 23-4.1 70-47 70-50 23-9 70-48 23-11 70-46 25-1-25-5 74-109- 
74-113 25-6 74-1 74-114 25-7 74-2 25-8, 25-9 74-106, 
74-107 25-10 74-5 25-11-25-13 74-7 25-14-25-16 74-8-74-10 25-20, 25-21 74-11, 74-12 25-22 74-108 25-23 74-13 27-2, 27-3 106-1, 106-2 27-4-27-6 106-37- 
106-39 27-7-27-16 106-41- 
106-50 27-17 106-74, 
106-75 27-18-27-20 106-76- 
106-78 27-21 106-100- 
106-111 27-22-27-24 106-4-106-6 27-25 106-3 106-7-106-9  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1982 CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1982 Code, as supplemented, which are included herein. Sections of the 1982 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the tables immediately following this table. 
1982 Code 
Section Section 

this Code 1-1-1-3 1-1-1-3 1-4 1-10 1-5 1-13 1-6 1-11 1-7-1-9 1-14-1-16 1-10 1-9 3-1 6-1 3-3-3-6 6-2-6-5 4-1-4-3 14-2-14-4 4-14-4-18 14-124- 
14-128 4-20 14-129 4-34 14-5 14-27 4-35-4-38 14-49-14-52 4-41 14-53 4-42, 4-43 14-28, 14-29 4-45-4-48 14-102- 
14-105 4-49 14-30 4-56-4-60 14-1 5-1-5-3 82-1-82-3 6-1 18-2 6-4 18-68 6-105, 6-106 18-103, 
18-104 6-106(a)- 
6-106(i) 18-105- 
18-113 6-107 18-114 6-151 18-44 6-173 18-174 6-174-6-177 18-142- 
18-145 6-178-6-185 18-175- 
18-182 6-212 18-422 6-223 100-4 6-225 100-6 6-226 100-237 6-227 100-258 6-228 100-208 6-230 100-208 6-231, 6-232 100-210 6-276, 6-277 18-476, 
18-477 6-301-6-307 18-398- 
18-404 6-366-6-376 18-204- 
18-214 6-377 18-203 6-389, 6-390 18-237, 
18-238 6-390 18-246 6-391-6-397 18-239- 
18-245 6-399, 6-400 18-247, 
18-248 6-411-6-416 18-275- 
18-280 6-428-6-432 18-309- 
18-313 6-444-6-451 18-345- 
18-352 7-1-7-4 38-1-38-4 7-18-7-24 38-27-38-33 8-1 74-6 8-5 34-20 8-5(a) 34-19 8-6, 8-7 34-21, 34-22 8-10 34-23 8-12 74-115 8-13 34-24 9-1 22-42 9-1-9-4 34-52-34-55 9-6 34-56 9-17-9-21 22-43-22-47 10-1 62-49 10-2-10-4 62-80-62-82 10-6, 10-7 62-83, 62-84 10-9 62-50 10-11-10-13 62-51-62-53 11-1-11-6 66-56-66-61 11-7 66-55 11-9 66-62 11-10 66-63, 66-64 66-66 App. A, § 9 11-26-11-28 22-68-22-70 11-29 22-99 12-1 54-1 12-13(b)-12-13(e) 30-19-30-22 13-1-13-10 58-1-58-10 14-1(a), 14-1(b) 94-21, 94-22 14-2, 14-3 94-23, 94-24 14-4 94-1 15-1 46-19 15-2, 15-3 46-46, 46-47 15-5, 15-6 46-20, 46-21 16-1, 16-2 62-2, 62-3 16-14-16-19 62-25-62-30 17-2-17-10 106-1-106-9 17-22, 17-23 106-38, 
106-39 17-24-17-33 106-41- 
106-50 17-44-17-48 106-74- 
106-78 17-59, 17-60 106-100, 
106-101 17-61 106-37 106-102 17-62-17-70 106-103- 
106-111 18-11, 18-12 66-19, 66-20 18-14-18-18 66-21-66-25 19-1, 19-2 70-19, 70-20 19-16-19-19 70-46-70-49 19-31 70-50 19-40-19-44 78-42-78-46 20-1-20-3 50-1-50-3 20-4-20-7 50-5-50-8 20-18-20-20 50-35-50-37 20-21, 20-22 50-39, 50-40 20-23-20-25 50-42-50-44 20-36, 20-37 50-64, 50-65 20-41 50-68 20-50, 20-51 22-133, 
22-134 20-53, 20-54 22-135, 
22-136 22-1 74-4 22-2-22-4 74-1-74-3 22-5 74-5 22-6-22-8 74-7 22-9-22-14 74-8-74-13 22-16(b) 110-430 22-25 74-106 22-26 74-107 74-152 22-27-22-33 74-108- 
74-114 22-34 74-116 22-40-22-45 74-146- 
74-151 22-61, 22-62 74-78, 74-79 22-63(a), 22-63(b) 74-80, 74-81 24-2 110-1 24-3, 24-4 110-147, 
110-148 24-5, 24-6 110-2, 110-3 24-7 110-149 24-8(a)-24-8(c) 110-167- 
110-169 24-8(e) 110-169 24-9(a)-24-9(e) 110-192- 
110-196 24-10(a)-24-10(e) 110-216- 
110-220 24-11(a)-24-11(e) 110-249- 
110-253 24-12(a)-24-12(d) 110-285- 
110-288 24-12(e) 110-290 24-13(a)-24-13(e) 110-314- 
110-318 24-13(g) 110-319 24-14(a) 110-342 24-14(b)-24-14(d) 110-344- 
110-346 24-14(e)-(h) 110-347 24-14(j) 110-348 24-14.1 110-370 24-14.1(b), 
24-14.1(c) 110-372, 
110-373 24-14.1(d)-(f) 110-374 24-14.1(g), (h) 110-375 24-15(a), 24-15(b) 110-394, 
110-395 24-15(c)-24-15(e) 110-397- 
110-399 24-15(g) 110-400 24-16(a) 110-429 24-16(c) 110-431 110-433 24-16(d), 24-16(e) 110-434, 
110-435 24-17(a)-24-17(f) 110-83- 
110-88 24-18, 24-19 110-524, 
110-525 24-24(a)-24-24(f) 110-57- 
110-62 24-25 110-34 24-26(a) 110-29 24-26(b) 110-4 24-26(c), (d) 110-29 24-26(e)-24-26(g) 110-31- 
110-33 24-26(h) 110-5 24-27(d) 110-5 6.5-1(a) 26-4 6.5-1(a)(3), 
6.5-1(b) 26-80, 26-81 8.5-23-8.5-25 42-40-42-50 11.5-1, 11.5-2 10-19, 10-20 11.5-3-11.5-6 10-44-10-47  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1999 CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1999 Code, as supplemented through March 16, 2009, which are included herein. Sections of the 1999 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1999 Code 
Section Section 

this Code 1-1 1-1 1-16 1-2-1-15 1-2-1-15 2-1, 2-2 2-1, 2-2 2-11-2-14 2-48-2-51 2-26-2-34 2-76-2-84 6-1-6-5 6-1-6-5 10-31, 10-32 10-19, 10-20 10-33-10-36 10-44-10-47 14-1 14-1 14-5 14-2-14-4 14-2-14-4 14-31-14-34 14-27-14-30 14-51-14-54 14-49-14-52 14-92-14-95 14-102- 
14-105 14-111- 
14-115 14-124- 
14-128 14-117 14-129 15-55 14-53 18-1 18-2 18-46 18-44 18-49-18-51 18-45-18-47 18-71 18-68 18-326- 
18-337 18-103- 
18-114 18-386 100-4 18-388 100-6 18-389 100-258 18-390 100-237 18-421 100-208 18-423 100-208 18-424, 
18-425 100-210 18-501, 
18-502 18-476, 
18-477 18-521- 
18-524 18-142- 
18-145 18-525- 
18-533 18-174- 
18-182 18-551- 
18-562 18-203- 
18-214 18-581- 
18-592 18-237- 
18-248 18-611- 
18-614 18-275- 
18-278 18-616 18-279, 
18-280 18-636- 
18-640 18-309- 
18-313 18-656- 
18-663 18-345- 
18-352 18-681- 
18-687 18-398- 
18-404 18-712 18-422 18-751 18-443 App. A, § 8 22-131- 
22-136 22-42-22-47 22-151, 
22-152 22-133, 
22-134 22-154, 
22-155 22-135, 
22-136 22-161- 
22-163 22-68-22-70 22-191 22-99 26-1 26-4 26-3, 26-4 26-80, 26-81 30-31 30-19 30-33-30-35 30-20-30-22 34-31-34-34 34-19-34-22 34-36 34-23 34-38 34-24 34-81-34-84 34-52-34-55 34-86 34-56 34-91, 34-92 34-90, 34-91 38-1-38-4 38-1-38-4 38-31, 38-32 38-27, 38-28 38-34 38-29, 38-30 38-35-38-37 38-31-38-33 42-46-42-56 42-40-42-50 46-31-46-33 46-19-46-21 46-51 46-46, 46-47 50-1-50-8 50-1-50-8 50-36-50-46 50-35-50-45 50-71-50-74 50-64-50-67 50-79 50-68 54-1 54-1 58-1-58-10 58-1-58-10 62-1-62-3 62-1-62-3 62-33-62-38 62-25-62-30 62-101- 
62-105 62-49-62-53 62-126- 
62-130 62-80-62-84 66-31-66-37 66-19-66-25 66-66-66-73 66-54-66-61 66-75-66-79 66-62-66-66 66-79 App. A, § 9 70-31, 70-32 70-19, 70-20 70-61-70-64 70-46-70-49 70-66 70-50 71-1-71-6 74-166- 
74-171 71-7-71-9 74-185- 
74-187 71-10, 71-11 74-213, 
74-214 74-1-74-13 74-1-74-13 74-41-74-44 74-45-74-48 74-46-74-48 74-50-74-52 74-76-74-79 74-78-74-81 74-106- 
74-109 74-106- 
74-109 74-110, 
74-110 74-110, 
74-111 74-112- 
74-116 74-112- 
74-116 74-141- 
74-146 74-146- 
74-151 78-86-78-90 78-42-78-46 82-1-82-3 82-1-82-3 90-1-90-21 90-1-90-21 94-1 94-1 94-31-94-34 94-21-94-24 98-1-98-3 98-1-98-3 98-31-98-35 98-25-98-29 98-61, 98-62 98-60, 98-61 98-91- 
98-100 98-81-98-90 98-126- 
98-134 98-109- 
98-117 98-156- 
98-167 98-148- 
98-159 102-31- 
102-54 102-19- 
102-42 102-81- 
102-91 102-73- 
102-83 102-121- 
102-132 102-110- 
102-121 102-161- 
102-165 102-141- 
102-145 102-191, 
102-192 102-174, 
102-175 106-1-106-9 106-1-106-9 106-36- 
106-49 106-37- 
106-50 106-76- 
106-80 106-74- 
106-78 106-106- 
106-120 106-100- 
106-114 110-1-110-5 110-1-110-5 110-31- 
110-36 110-29- 
110-34 110-56- 
110-61 110-57- 
110-62 110-91- 
110-96 110-83- 
110-88 110-121- 
110-125 110-120- 
110-124 110-161- 
110-163 110-147- 
110-149 110-181- 
110-183 110-167- 
110-169 110-201- 
110-205 110-192- 
110-196 110-226- 
110-230 110-216- 
110-220 110-246- 
110-250 110-249- 
110-253 110-266- 
110-271 110-285- 
110-290 110-311- 
110-316 110-314- 
110-319 110-336- 
110-342 110-342- 
110-348 110-361- 
110-366 110-370- 
110-375 110-386 110-394, 
110-395 110-388- 
110-392 110-396- 
110-400 110-411- 
110-417 110-429- 
110-435 110-418- 
110-426 110-454- 
110-462 110-436- 
110-438 110-524- 
110-526 110-439 110-529  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
LAWS OF FLORIDA 
    This is a listing of the Laws of Florida found in the Code. 
Laws of Fla. 
Chapter Year Section Section 
this Code 10433 (1925) art. VII, § 6 62-1 22237 (1943) 2-5 14-1  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number Date Section Section 
this Code 248  5-12-1975 1 110-147 251  7-21-1975 1 110-57- 
110-62 76-5  6-21-1976 2, 3 110-147 76-8 11- 8-1976 1 110-394, 
110-395 110-397- 
110-400 76-9  1-10-1977 2 110-57- 
110-62 77-8 11- 7-1977 1 66-19 66-21 77-9  1- 9-1978 1 38-1 38-4 38-27-38-33 77-1131  1-23-1978 82-3 78-3  3- 6-1978 1 18-422 78-1  4-10-1978 1-3 110-147 7-85  6- 5-1978 3 14-50 78-5  6- 5-1978 1 14-5 14-27 3 14-51, 14-52 14-102 14-105 78-6  6- 5-1978 1 58-1-58-9 78-8 11- 6-1978 1 74-115 78-9 11- 6-1978 1 74-1 74-114 78-10 11- 6-1978 74-109 78-11 11- 6-1978 1 74-111 79-3  6-18-1979 1 6-5 79-6 10- 8-1979 1 74-114 79-9  1- 7-1980 1 14-30 14-50-14-52 14-102 14-105 2 14-5 14-27-14-29 14-49 14-53 14-103, 
14-104 80-2  9-22-1980 1 66-66 App. A, § 9 80-3  9-22-1980 1 74-114 80-4  9-22-1980 1 74-113 80-5 11-17-1980 1 22-68-22-70 81-1  1-19-1981 1 74-109 81-2  4-20-1981 1 74-113 81-6  7- 6-1981 1 74-111 81-8  9-21-1981 1 110-394, 
110-395 110-397- 
110-400 2 110-429- 
110-431 110-433- 
110-435 81-9  1-18-1982 1 62-3 82-2  2-15-1982 1 74-109 82-5  2-15-1982 1 6-3 82-6  3- 1-1982 2 18-398- 
18-404 82-3  3-15-1982 1 10-19, 10-20 10-44-10-47 82-14 10-18-1982 1 74-114 82-15 10-18-1982 1 74-115 82-16 11-15-1982 1, 2 110-147 82-17 11-15-1982 1 74-114 83-2  1-17-1983 1 22-99 83-4  3- 7-1983 1 74-109 83-5  4-18-1983 1 110-147 83-6  4-18-1983 1 74-109 83-8 10- 3-1983 1 74-113 83-10  1- 9-1984 1, 2 110-147 84-1  9-22-1984 1 74-115 84-3 10- 1-1984 1 6-3 85-1  2-18-1985 1 34-24 85-7  8- 5-1985 1 58-10 85-8 10-14-1985 1 1-16 85-10 12- 2-1985 1 70-49 86-2  2- 3-1986 1 74-109 86-5  7-14-1986 1 18-422 86-6  7-14-1986 1 1-16 86-4  7-29-1986 1 110-57- 
110-62 2 110-57- 
110-62 86-7  7-29-1986 1 74-111 87-1  6- 1-1987 1 74-146- 
74-152 87-6  8- 3-1987 1 74-149 87-8  9-21-1987 1 22-133- 
22-136 87-9  9-21-1987 1 14-52 2 14-102 87-10 11-16-1987 1 30-19-30-22 88-2  3-21-1988 pt. 1 74-114 88-5  8-15-1988 pt. 1 22-42 34-52-34-56 88-7 10-17-1988 1 74-147 2 74-152 89-2  8- 7-1989 pt. 1 82-3 89-3 10- 9-1989 pt. 1 74-114 89-4 10- 9-1989 pt. 1, § 2 42-41 pt. 1, § 3 42-40 pt. 1, § 4, 42-49, 42-50 pt. 1, § 5 pt. 1, § 6- 42-42-42-48 pt. 1, § 12 89-6  2- 5-1990 pt. 1 26-4 26-80, 26-81 91-2  4- 1-1991 1 110-524 91-4  4- 1-1991 pt. 1 10-44 91-5  6-17-1991 pt. 1 74-113 91-15  8-19-1991(Res.) 1 74-114 92-01  1-20-1992 pt. 1, § 2 42-41 pt. 1, § 3 42-40 pt. 1, § 4, 42-49, 42-50 pt. 1, § 5 pt. 1, § 6- 42-42-42-48 pt. 1, § 12 92-04  6- 1-1992 pt. 1 78-42-78-46 92-05  6-29-1992 pt. 1 74-79-74-81 92-12  9- 9-1992(Res.) 1 74-114 92-07 10-19-1992 1 66-66 App. A, § 9 92-08 12- 7-1992 1 74-149, 
74-150 93-01  3-15-1993 pt. 1 18-203- 
18-214 18-237- 
18-248 18-275- 
18-280 18-309- 
18-313 18-345- 
18-352 93-03  4-19-1993(Res.) 1 74-116 93-14 10-11-1993(Res.) 74-114 94-01 12-19-1994 pt. 1(6-4) 18-68 pt. 1(6-6(b))- 18-45-18-47 pt. 1(6-6(d)) pt. 1(6-177) 18-145 pt. 1(6-223) 100-4 pt. 1(6-225) 100-6 pt. 1(6-276) 18-476 pt. 1(14-4) 94-1 pt. 1(17-21)- 
pt. 1(17-34) 106-37- 
106-50 pt. 1(17-67) 106-108 pt. 1(17-71)- 
pt. 1(17-73) 106-112- 
106-114 pt. 1(20-1)- 
pt. 1(20-3) 50-1-50-3 pt. 1(20-3.1) 50-4 pt. 1(20-4)- 
pt. 1(20-7) 50-5-50-8 pt. 1(20-18)- 
pt. 1(20-20) 50-35-50-37 pt. 1(20-20.1) 50-38 pt. 1(20-21)- 
pt. 1(20-27) 50-39-50-45 pt. 1(20-36)- 
pt. 1(20-39) 50-64-50-67 pt. 1(20-44) 50-68 pt. 1(21-1)- 
pt. 1(21-3) 98-1-98-3 pt. 1(21-4)- 
pt. 1(21-8) 98-25-98-29 pt. 1(21-21), 98-60, 98-61 pt. 1(21-22) pt. 1(21-23) 98-81 pt. 1(21-24(a))- 98-82-98-86 pt. 1(21-24(e)) pt. 1(21-25(a))- 98-88-98-90 pt. 1(21-25(c)) pt. 1(21-40)- 
pt. 1(21-51) 98-148- 
98-159 pt. 1(22-24(f)) 98-87 pt. 1(24-3), 
pt. 1(24-4) 110-147, 
110-148 pt. 1(24-5.2) 110-2 pt. 1(24-6) 110-3 pt. 1(24-7) 110-149 pt. 1(24-8(a))- 
pt. 1(24-8(c)) 110-167- 
110-169 pt. 1(24-8(d)) 110-169 pt. 1(24-9(a))- 
pt. 1(24-9(e)) 110-192- 
110-196 pt. 1(24-10(a))- 
pt. 1(24-10(e)) 110-216- 
110-220 pt. 1(24-11(a))- 
pt. 1(24-11(e)) 110-249- 
110-253 pt. 1(24-12(a))- 
pt. 1(24-12(d)) 110-285- 
110-288 pt. 1(24-12(d)), 
pt. 1(24-12(e)) 110-289, 
110-290 pt. 1(24-13(a))- 
pt. 1(24-13(f)) 110-314- 
110-319 pt. 1(24-14(a))- 
pt. 1(24-14(e)) 110-342- 
110-346 pt. 1(24-14(f)-(j)) 110-347 pt. 1(24-14(k)) 110-348 pt. 1(24-14.1(i)) 110-375 pt. 1(24-14.1(b)) 110-371 pt. 1(24-14.1(d)) 110-373 pt. 1(24-14.1(e)-(h)) 110-374 pt. 1(24-14.1(j)) 110-375 pt. 1(24-14.1) 110-370 110-372 pt. 1(24-15(a))- 
pt. 1(24-15(g)) 110-394- 
110-400 pt. 1(24-16(a))- 
pt. 1(24-16(g)) 110-429- 
110-435 pt. 1(24-17(a)) 110-83 pt. 1(24-17) 110-84- 
110-88 pt. 1(24-24(a))- 
pt. 1(24-24(d)) 110-57- 
110-60 pt. 1(24-26(a)) 110-29 pt. 1(24-26(b)) 110-4 pt. 1(24-26(c)), 
pt. 1(24-26(d)) 110-29 pt. 1(24-26(e))- 
pt. 1(24-26(h)) 110-30- 
110-33 pt. 1(24-26(i)) 110-5 pt. 1(25-1)- 
pt. 1(25-5) 102-19- 
102-23 pt. 1(25-7) 102-24, 
102-25 pt. 1(25-8)- 
pt. 1(25-18) 102-26- 
102-36 pt. 1(25-21)- 
pt. 1(25-26) 102-37- 
102-42 pt. 1(25-30)- 102-73- 
102-83 pt. 1(25-40) pt. 1(25-67)- 
pt. 1(25-69) 102-141- 
102-143 pt. 1(25-70(a)), 
pt. 1(25-70(b)) 102-144, 
102-145 pt. 1(25-74), 
pt. 1(25-75) 102-174, 
102-175 pt. 1(26-1) 90-1 pt. 1(26-2(A))- 
pt. 1(26-2(D)) 90-2-90-5 pt. 1(26-3) 90-6 pt. 1(26-4(A))- 
pt. 1(26-4(F)) 90-7-90-12 pt. 1(26-5(A))- 
pt. 1(26-5(E)) 90-14-90-18 pt. 1(26-5) 90-13 pt. 1(26-6)- 
pt. 1(26-8) 90-19-90-21 96-06  6-17-1996 1 38-1 97-01  2- 4-1997 1 74-110 97-03  8-18-1997 pt. 1 110-525 97-02  9- 2-1997(Res.) 1 74-114 97-03  9- 2-1997(Res.) 1 74-115 98-04  7-20-1998 pt. 1 70-49 2000-01  3-20-2000 pt. 1 110-395 2000-02  3-20-2000 pt. 1 110-395 2000-03  3-20-2000 pt. 1 110-430 2000-02  3-20-2000(Res.) 1 74-114 2000-05  9- 7-2000 1 66-66 App. A, § 9 2000-06 10-16-2000 1 74-113 2000-08 10-16-2000 1 74-111 2000-09 10-16-2000 1 74-115 2001-01  5-21-2001 1 82-3 2002-04  9-23-2002 pt. 1 74-111 2002-18  9-23-2002(Res.) 1 74-114 2002-06 10-21-2002 pt. 1 14-29 pt. 2 14-102 2003-03  9-22-2003 pt. 1 74-115 2003-04 10-13-2003 pt. 1 98-109- 
98-117 2005-02  4-18-2005 pt. 1 110-524- 
110-526 2005-11 12-19-2005 pt. 2 74-45-74-52 2005-12 12-19-2005 pt. 1 74-110 2005-13 12-19-2005 pt. 2 102-110- 
102-121 2006-01  3-20-2006 pt. 2 110-120- 
110-124 2006-02  3-20-2006 pt. 1 110-454- 
110-462 2006-03  3-20-2006 pt. 1 74-149 2006-04  6-19-2006 pt. 1 102-35 2006-06  8-21-2006(Res.) 1(exh. A) App. A, § 8 exh. A 18-443 2007-04  5-21-2007 110-439 110-526 110-440 110-528 2007-06  5-21-2007 1 94-52 2007-07  5-21-2007 1-9 94-53-94-61 2007-08  7-16-2007 pt. 1 70-49 2007-12  1-28-2008 pt. 1 74-166- 
74-171 74-185- 
74-187 74-213, 
74-214 2008-02  5-19-2008 pt. 1 34-90, 34-91 2008-08  1-26-2009 pt. 1 74-111 2009-02  3-16-2009 pt. 1 2-1, 2-2 2-48-2-51 2-76-2-84 pt. 2 2-1, 2-2 2-48-2-51 2-76-2-84 2009-03  3-16-2009 pt. 1 110-529 2009-04  6-15-2009 1 110-395 2010-01  2-15-2010 pt. 2(26-1)- 26-1-26-4 pt. 2(26-4) pt. 2(26-5(a)-(d)) 26-29 pt. 2(26-5(e)) 26-30 pt. 2(26-6) 26-51 pt. 2(26-7), 26-80, 26-81 pt. 2(26-8) pt. 2(26-9) 26-52 pt. 2(26-10) 26-31 pt. 2(26-11), 26-53, 26-54 pt. 2(26-12) pt. 2(26-13)- 
pt. 2(26-17) 26-56-26-60 pt. 2(26-18) 26-5 2010-03  7-19-2010 2(18-386)- 
2(18-391) 100-1-100-6 2(18-392)- 
2(18-405) 100-32- 
100-45 2(18-406)- 
2(18-413) 100-64- 
100-71 2(18-414), 
2(18-415) 100-101, 
100-102 2(18-416)- 
2(18-425) 100-134- 
100-143 2(18-426)- 
2(18-433) 100-170- 
100-177 2(18-434)- 
2(18-436) 100-208- 
100-210 2(18-437)- 
2(18-440) 100-229- 
100-232 2(18-440) 100-239 2(18-441)- 
2(18-446) 100-233- 
100-238 2(18-448) 100-258 tables 100-144 2010-04 12-20-2010 2-4 70-74-70-76 2010-05  1-24-2011 1 102-75 2010-06  1-24-2011 1, 2 74-214 2010-07  1-24-2011 1 2-85 2011-01  3-21-2011 1 100-71 2011-03 10-17-2011 1 14-1 2012-01  5-21-2012 1 110-493- 
110-500 2013-01  2-18-2013 pts. 1-6       Added Ch. 2, art. IV 
§§ 2-106-2-111 2013-02  3-18-2013 1 2-2(b) 2013-04  7-15-2013 2, 3       Added 70-77 2013-05  8-19-2013       Added Adopt. ord., p. xi 2013-06  9-16-2013 1-20       Added Ch. 98, art. VII 
§§ 98-181-98-200 2014-01  9-15-2014 1 102-75(e), (f) 2015-01  4-20-2015 2       Rpld 98-109-98-117 3       Added 98-109-98-125 4       Added 18-70 2015-03 10-19-2015 1 74-115(a) 2015-14 10-19-2015 1 App. A, § 20 2016-01  3-21-2016 pt. 1       Added 110-530, 110-531 2016-07 11-21-2016 1 102-31 2016-08 11-21-2016 1 74-116 2016-09  9-19-2016 1 App. A, §§ 1-3 1       Rpld App. A, §§ 4-8 1       Added App. A, §§ 4-8 2016-11  1-23-2017 1       Rpld 14-5, 14-27, 14-29 2       Added 14-6 3       Added 14-5 2017-01  3-20-2017 2       Added 110-63 2017-02  2-20-2017 1       Added 74-7(d) 2017-03  2-20-2017 1 110-2 2 110-395 2017-04  3-20-2017 1 110-287 2017-05  3-20-2017 1       Added 42-19 2017-07  4-17-2017 1 110-218 2017-08  5-15-2017 1 110-2 2017-09  5-15-2017 1 110-435 2017-10  6-19-2017 1 110-494, 110-495(2)       Rpld 110-496, 110-497 110-498-110-500 2017-11  6-19-2017 1 110-524 2017-15  7-17-2017 1       Added Ch. 70, art. V, 
§§ 70-96-70-102 2017-16  9-18-2017 1 58-10(b)(3) 2017-17  9-18-2017 1-4       Added Ch 22, art. VII, 
§§ 22-151-22-154 2017-18 11-20-2017 1 110-526 2017-20 12-18-2017 1       Added Ch. 2, art. V, 
§ 2-200 2017-21  1-22-2018 1 102-75(e), (f) 2018-01  2- 5-2018       Rpld 2-76-2-85       Added 2-76-2-83, 
2-85 2018-06  1- 7-2019 1 110-499(a)  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Florida Statutes (F.S.). 
F.S. 
Section Section 

this Code 1.01(2) 1-2 1.01 66-21 2.04 1-10 7.26 1-2 55.11 Ch. 62, Art. III 60.05 Ch. 34, Art. II 60.06 Ch. 34, Art. II chs. 97-106 Char. Art. IV Ch. 112, pt. VII 2-110 112.3143(3) Char. § 3.09 161.055 98-112 ch. 162 14-5 Ch. 26 (note) 70-102 162.01-162.12 26-5 162.02 26-2, 26-3 162.03 Ch. 26, Art. II 162.04 26-1 162.05 Ch. 26, Art. II 26-29 162.06 Ch. 26, Art. III 26-51 162.06(4) 26-53 162.07 26-52 162.08 26-31 162.09 26-53 162.09(1) 26-52 162.09(2)(A) 14-5 162.09(3) 26-55 162.10 26-55 162.11 26-54 162.12 26-51 26-56 162.13 26-5 162.21 14-6 Ch. 26, Art. IV 162.21(2) 26-4 162.21(3)(a), (b) 26-79 162.21(3)(c) 26-80 162.21(4)- 
162.21(8) 26-82-26-86 162.21 74-48 162.22 1-15 ch. 163 90-1 94-53 ch. 163, pt. III 2-49 163.3161- 
163.3211 94-24 163.3161 et seq. Ch. 110 (note) 163.3174 94-24 163.3177 110-2 163.3178 110-2 163.3180 Ch. 90 (note) 163.3220 90-4 163.340(2) 94-56 163.340(9) 94-54 163.356 Ch. 2, Art. II, 
Div. 2 163.357 2-49 163.360 2-50 163.387 2-50 ch. 166 Char. (note) 94-53 110-1 166.021 Ch. 2 (note) Char. § 2.01 166.021(4) R.L. (note) 166.041 110-57 110-59 166.041(3)(c) 6-2 166.0425 Ch. 100 166.043 2-1 166.0435 Ch. 18, Art. III 166.0442 Ch. 2, Art. V 166.201 et seq. Ch. 66 (note) 166.221 58-3 166.231 Ch. 66, Art. II 166.231- 
166.235 66-19 166.231(2) 66-20 166.231(4), (5) 66-21 166.231(7) 66-22 ch. 170 Ch. 62, Art. II 102-145 ch. 173 62-28 177.011 et seq. Ch. 106 (note) 177.091 106-50 177.091(7) 106-109 180.135 74-2 74-7 ch. 190 102-145 ch. 192 et seq. Ch. 66 (note) 193.1142 94-57 193.122 94-57 196.199(1)(c) Ch. 62, Art. III ch. 205 Ch. 66 (note) Ch. 66, Art. III 205.042 Ch. 66, Art. III 66-54 205.043 Ch. 66, Art. III 205.043(3) 66-60 205.053 66-56 205.063 et seq. 66-57 205.065 Char. § 6.02 Char. § 6.03 ch. 257 Ch. 62, Art. III 257.25 62-52 257.261 62-83 267.011 98-61 287.055 Ch. 2, Art. III 2-77 287.087 2-85 ch. 298 102-145 ch. 316 Ch. 70 (note) 316.003 370-77(a) 316.007 Ch. 70 (note) 316.008 Ch. 70 (note) 316.0083 et seq. 70-77(b) 316.0083 70-74-70-76 316.073 14-128 316.189(1) 70-19 316.1895 70-19 316.1945 70-49 316.1955 70-49 102-30 102-32 102-34 102-36 316.1956 70-49 102-30 316.1967 70-49, 70-50 316.515 50-2 320.01 98-118 320.8249 98-122 320.8325 Ch. 50, Art. III 327.60(2) 82-2 337.406 Ch. 58 (note) 339.241 Ch. 22, Art. III Ch. 34 (note) 366.02 98-112 ch. 373 74-45 373.036 98-112 ch. 380 90-4 381.0065 98-112 381.008 et seq. 110-2 ch. 386 10-45 ch. 397 110-63 397.311(18) 110-63 401.501 et seq. Ch. 30, Art. II ch. 403 82-1 403.413 Ch. 74, Art. VI 403.702 et seq. Ch. 74, Art. VI 403.713 Ch. 34 (note) ch. 479 100-65 ch. 487 98-153 489.101 et seq. Ch. 30, Art. II 489.105 22-19 ch. 496 Ch. 58 (note) 501.021 et seq. Ch. 58 (note) 506.17 Ch. 22, Art. V 506.503 Ch. 22, Art. V 506.509 Ch. 22, Art. V 22-100 506.513 Ch. 22, Art. V 22-101 506.5131 Ch. 22, Art. V 506.51341 22-102 ch. 509 66-64 ch. 513 Ch. 50, Art. II 50-2 513.01 50-2 513.02 50-36 ch. 538 Ch. 22, Art. III, 
Ch. 22, Art. IV 22-68 Ch. 58 (note) App. A, § 9 538.01 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. III 538.03 22-67 538.04 22-45 22-68 538.06 22-45 22-69 538.06(5) 22-70 538.18 et seq. 22-67 Ch. 34, Art. III ch. 553 Ch. 18 (note) 553.73 18-68 26-3 26-85 553.73(5) 18-70 98-115 553.73(10) 98-112 553.79 26-3 26-85 553.80 26-3 26-85 561.01 6-1 561.422 6-2 chs. 562-565 Ch. 6 (note) 562.45 6-3 562.45(2) 6-2 563.01 6-1 564.01 6-1 565.01 6-1 chs. 567, 568 Ch. 6 (note) ch. 585 Ch. 14 (note) 585.14 14-2 585.145 14-2 604.50 98-112 ch. 633 Ch. 38 (note) 633.0215 Ch. 38, Art. II 38-27 633.025 38-27 633.121 38-2 ch. 702 74-7 ch. 705 Ch. 34 (note) 705.101 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. III 715.04 App. A, § 9 760.01 et seq. Ch. 42, Art. II 760.20 et seq. Ch. 42, Art. II Ch. 42, Art. II, 
Div. 2 760.21 42-41 760.22 42-40 760.23 42-49 760.24 42-49 760.25 42-49 760.29 42-50 760.30 42-42 ch. 767 14-5 775.082 14-49 22-100 26-84 775.083 14-49 26-84 ch. 784 Ch. 54 (note) 784.07 38-2 ch. 790 Ch. 54 (note) ch. 796 Ch. 54 (note) 806.10 38-2, 38-3 806.101 38-4 812.055 Ch. 34, Art. III ch. 823 Ch. 34 (note) 823.01 Ch. 34, Art. II 823.07 et seq. Ch. 54 (note) 823.08 74-187 ch. 828 Ch. 14 (note) 828.27 14-49 828.27(1)(b) 14-6 839.13 1-14 843.01 Ch. 54 (note) 843.02 Ch. 54 (note) ch. 849 Ch. 54 (note) 110-528 ch. 870 Ch. 54 (note) 877.03 Ch. 54 (note) ch. 901 Ch. 46 (note) 901.18 Ch. 54 (note) 938.15 1-16 ch. 943 Ch. 46 (note) 943.085- 
943.255 26-78 943.13 Ch. 46, Art. II 943.22 46-46  
