CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF CRESTVIEW, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: December 27, 1993 
Effective: December 27, 1993 
> 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
CRESTVIEW, FLORIDA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Ted H. Mathis 
Mayor 
____________ 
Brenda E. Bush 
Samuel H. Hayes 
William F. Kilpatrick 
Thomas O. Smith 
Fred F. Stephens 
City Council 
____________ 
Don E. Morrison 
Administrative Assistant 
____________ 
J. Jerome Miller 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Edward M. Neal 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Crestview, Florida. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1983 Code, as supplemented through October 22, 1990, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1983 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLES CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Mary Rose DiMarco and Alyce A. Whitson, Supervising Editors, and Charles Vignos, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Ed Neal, City Clerk and Jerry Miller, City Attorney for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida  
Adopting Ordinance 
Ordinance No. 819 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Crestview, Florida; Providing for Authority; Providing for Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein, Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code, and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be It Ordained by the City Council of Crestview, Florida. 
    Section 1. Authority. The authority for enactment of this ordinance is Section 2 of the City Charter. 
    Section 2. Title. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Crestview, Florida" published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 102, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 3. Repeal of Certain Ordinances. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before June 28, 1993, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. These repealed provisions shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Penalty. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or by both a fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Incorporation of additions or amendments. Additions of [or] amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the City to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Adoption after June 28, 1993. Ordinances adopted after June 28, 1993 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. Effective date. This ordinance shall become effective on the date enacted by the City Council and ratified by the Mayor. 
    Passed and adopted by the City Council of Crestview, Florida on this 27th day of December 27, 1993. 
/s/ William F. Kilpatrick 
      William F. Kilpatrick 
      Council President   Attest: 
/s/ Edward M. Neal 
      Edward M. Neal 
      City Clerk       Approved by me this 27th day of December, 1993. 
/s/ Ted H. Mathis 
      Ted H. Mathis 
      Mayor   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature and ordinances that amend subject matter not found in the Code are not codified and are considered "Omitted." 
    By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 1432 Included Supp. No. 19 1439 Included Supp. No. 19 1440 Included Supp. No. 19 1441 Included Supp. No. 19 1443 Included Supp. No. 19 1462 Included Supp. No. 20 1465 Included Supp. No. 20 1466 Included Supp. No. 20 1467 Omitted Supp. No. 20 1468 Included Supp. No. 20 1469 Included Supp. No. 20 1471 Included Supp. No. 20 1472 Included Supp. No. 20 1473 Included Supp. No. 20 1482 Included Supp. No. 21 1483 Included Supp. No. 21 1487 Included Supp. No. 21 1490 Included Supp. No. 21 1511 Included Supp. No. 21 1513 Included Supp. No. 21 1514 Included Supp. No. 21 1499 Included Supp. No. 22 1500 Included Supp. No. 22 1510 Omitted Supp. No. 22 1519 Included Supp. No. 22 1529 Included Supp. No. 22 1578 Included Supp. No. 22 1591 Omitted Supp. No. 22 1596 Included Supp. No. 22 1598 Included Supp. No. 22 1601 Included Supp. No. 22 1602 Included Supp. No. 22 1604 Included Supp. No. 22 1608 Included Supp. No. 23 1609 Omitted Supp. No. 23 1611 Included Supp. No. 23 1615 Included Supp. No. 23 1624 Included Supp. No. 23 1625 Included Supp. No. 23 1627 Included Supp. No. 23 1628 Included Supp. No. 23 1634 Included Supp. No. 23 1674 Included Supp. No. 23 1675 Included Supp. No. 23 1682 Included Supp. No. 23  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The Town of Crestview was originally incorporated under the general law on April 11, 1916, (Incorporation Record, Okaloosa County, Vol. 1, pp. 3, 4). This incorporation was validated by act of the Legislature in 1917 by Ch. 7634. The town was re-incorporated by Ch. 9718, Acts 1923, then by Ch. 25754, Sp. Acts 1949, as the City of Crestview. Various amendments to Ch. 25754 were adopted through the 1961 legislature. Ch. 57-1245, Sp. Acts 1957, re-incorporated the city under a city manager form of government, however, this act failed of adoption at the referendum election. 
The present Charter was enacted as Ch. 63-1249, Sp. Acts 1963, was approved at a referendum election held on June 25, 1963, by a vote of 1032 in favor to 460 against and is included as Part I of this Code. The title is omitted as well as provisions contained relating to the referendum election. The article numbers and headings, sections and subsections, catchlines, etc., have been supplied by the editors, as well as some subsection and paragraph numbers and letters. The section numbers are as they appear in the official act. 
State Law reference- Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. ch. 166; Charter amendments, F.S. § 166.031. 

ARTICLE I. - SUCCESSION; ELECTION OF CITY OFFICIALS 

Sec. 1. - City abolished and recreated; corporate limits. 
(a)  The present municipal government existing under the name of the City of Crestview, in Okaloosa County, Florida, be, and the same is hereby abolished. 
(b)  There is hereby established a new City of Crestview, in Okaloosa County, Florida, the same including the following described real estate: 
The West Half (W 1/2) of the West Half (W 1/2) of Section Sixteen (16); the West Half (W 1/2) of the North West Quarter (NW 1/4) of Section Twenty-one (21); the North Half (N 1/2) of Section Twenty (20); the North East Quarter (NE 1/4) of Section Nineteen (19); the East Half (E 1/2) of Section Eighteen (18); the South East Quarter (SE 1/4) of Section Seven (7); all of Section Seventeen (17); the South Half (S 1/2) of Section Eight (8); the West Half (W 1/2) of South West Quarter (SW 1/4) of Section Nine (9); all of the East Half (E 1/2) of the West Half (W 1/2) of Section Sixteen (16) North of the L & N [CSX] Railroad Company's right-of-way; the East Half (E 1/2) of the South West Quarter (SW 1/4) of Section Nine (9); and all other real estate which may have been heretofore considered as a portion of the City of Crestview annexed or joined by petition or legislative act; all in Township Three (3) North, Range Twenty-three (23) West of Tallahassee Meridian, in Okaloosa County, Florida, and the jurisdiction of the City Government shall cover all persons, property, franchises and privileges, located, being or coming within the city limits. 
Editor's note- Current boundary description is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 2. - General powers, rights, privileges and immunities. 
    Said city shall have and exercise all the powers, rights, privileges and immunities of cities incorporated under the general laws of this state. 
Editor's note- Parts of this section which have not been amended by referendum after July 1, 1973, and which are not extraterritorial powers have been editorially deleted as unnecessary as home rule powers of a municipality are derived from the constitution and F.S. ch. 166. 
State Law reference- Home rule powers, F.S. ch. 166. 
Sec. 3. - Governmental departments and officers. 
    The affairs of the city and public undertakings by it shall be deemed and held to be governmental in nature, and shall be carried out under the following departments, to-wit: Executive, Legislative and Financial, Police and Public Works, and shall be administered by officers and boards as follows: Mayor, City Council, Chief of Police, City Clerk, Tax Assessor, Tax Collector, City Physician and City Attorney. The council shall elect one of its members as President of the Council, who shall perform the duties of presiding officer of the Council and who shall be entitled to vote on all questions coming before the council. The council may by ordinance establish from time to time any boards in its discretion, which may be necessary to carry out the administrative or ministerial purposes of the council and the tenure, duties and compensation of such board or boards shall be fixed by the council and such board or boards may be abolished by the council. 
Editor's note- The "Department of Public Works" has been renamed as the "Public Services Department." This section has been editorially amended to delete the words "if he so desires" in regard to the President of the Council voting. 
Sec. 4. - Election of mayor, and council and clerk; terms; qualifications; fees, vacancies; appointment of certain officers and employees; committees of council; dates of elections. 
    The mayor, members of the council and clerk all of whom shall be qualified electors, shall be elected by the qualified electors, shall be elected by the qualified electors of the municipality voting in an election as hereafter provided, for the terms and in the manner hereinafter provided, who shall hold their respective offices until their successors are duly elected and qualified, to-wit: 
(a)  The term of office of the mayor shall be four years commencing with the term for which the Mayor is elected in 2003. If at any time the mayor moves his official residency from the city limits herein described, a vacancy shall automatically occur in the said office. 
(b)  The city council shall consist of five (5) electors who shall be designated as follows: 
Councilman at Large Group 1 
Councilman at Large Group 2 
Councilman - Precinct 1 [-East] 
Councilman - Precinct 2 [-West] 
Councilman - Precinct 3 [-North] 
All councilmen shall be elected by votes cast city wide and their terms of office, except as hereinafter provided, shall be for four years. The councilman from Precinct 1 shall reside in Precinct 1, the councilman from Precinct 2 shall reside in Precinct 2, and the councilman from Precinct 3 shall reside in Precinct 3; councilman from Precinct 1, Precinct 2 and Precinct 3 shall be elected for a 2 year term in the 2003 election and shall be elected for four year terms thereafter; councilman at large may be elected without regard to the territorial limits of precincts. If at any time a councilman elected from a precinct moves his or her official residency from the city limits herein described a vacancy shall automatically occur in said office. In such elections candidates running in any group receiving the highest vote shall be deemed elected. 
(c)  [Editorially deleted the names of the persons comprising the first city council as obsolete.] 
(d)  The term of office of clerk shall be four years, and he or she shall be elected. The candidate receiving the greatest number of votes cast shall be elected. If at any time-the clerk shall move his official residency from the city limits herein described a vacancy shall automatically occur in said office. 
(e)  That should there be a tie vote in such election for the office of the mayor, any one or more group or groups of members of the council, and clerk, the council elected at such election upon assumption of office shall, by plurality vote, name the person who shall serve as such officer. 
(f)  The officers elected shall assume the duties of such offices [within 30 days after the election] as decided by ordinance, provided, no contract shall be entered into by incumbent officials between the dates of election and assumption of office of newly elected officials binding said city beyond date of assumption of office of newly elected officials, except in case of extreme emergency. 
(g)  [Editorially deleted.] 
(h)  No person shall be eligible to be a candidate for the office of mayor, or member of the council or clerk unless they shall possess the qualifications required to hold such office and shall have paid a qualifying fee for such office, as may be required by ordinance of the municipality. 
(i)  The mayor, members of council or the clerk shall not hold any other elective city, county, state or Federal office. If the mayor, a member of the council or clerk ceases to possess any one or more of the qualifications specified in this section, or is convicted of a felony, while in office, then in either event a vacancy shall automatically occur. 
(j)  Any vacancies occurring in any elective office shall be filled for the unexpired term by appointment by a majority of the council. 
(k)  [Editorially deleted tax collector and tax assessor as obsolete and superseded by F.S. ch. 192 et seq.] 
(l)  All officers and employees not elective by this Act shall be appointed or employed by the council unless otherwise provided herein, subject to the provisions hereinafter provided. 
(m)  The council shall, by ordinance or resolution, determine the number and character of the standing committees needed and prescribe their powers and duties consistent with the provisions of this Act. Such committees shall be appointed by the president of the council as soon after organization of the council as practicable. Vacancies in such committees shall be filled by appointment by the president of the council for the unexpired term. 
(n)  The municipal elections shall be held on the second Tuesday in March. Elections shall be held every two (2) years. 
(Ord. No. 847, § 3, 10-10-94; Ord. No. 1095, § 2, 8-26-02) 
State Law reference- State election code, F.S. chs. 97-106. 
ARTICLE II. - POWERS 

Sec. 5. - Public protection; buildings; streets; health and sanitation; penalties for violation. 
(a)  Public protection; penalties. [Editorially deleted.] 
Editor's note- This subsection has been editorially deleted as references to mayor's court or trial by mayor are obsolete as municipal courts were abolished by Article V, § 20(d)(4) of the Florida Constitution and the city has municipal home rule powers as granted to all city by F.S. ch. 166. 
(b)  Fire protection; buildings; utilities. The council may provide by ordinances for the acquirement by construction, purchase, or otherwise, of municipal waterworks, electric light and power plants, gas works, cremation plants within or outside of the city limits, and may distribute and sell water, gas, electric light and power for profit, and install meters or measures for the same at the cost of the consumer for the meter and the installation. 
Editor's note- Parts of this subsection which have not been amended by referendum after July 1, 1973, and which are not extraterritorial powers have been editorially deleted as unnecessary as home rule powers of a municipality are derived from the constitution and F.S. ch. 166. 
(c)  Health and sanitation. [Editorially deleted.] 
Editor's note- This subsection has been editorially deleted as the city has the home rule powers provided by state law. 
Sec. 6. - Transportation; franchises and rights-of-way; street paving; sewers and drainage; railroad trains and crossings; special assessments. 
(a)  Transportation. [Editorially deleted.] 
Editor's note- This subsection has been editorially deleted as preempted by F.S. § 335.141. 
(b)  Franchises and rights-of-way. [Editorially deleted.] 
Editor's note- This subsection which has not been amended by referendum after July 1, 1973, and which is not an extraterritorial power has been editorially deleted as unnecessary as home rule powers of a municipality are derived from the constitution and F.S. ch. 166. 
(c)  Streets, sidewalks, sewers, drainage. [Editorially deleted.] 
Editor's note- This subsection has been editorially transferred to the Code of Ordinances as certain provisions of a Charter adopted prior to July 1, 1973, and not subsequently amended by referendum have been converted to ordinances by operation of F.S. § 166.021(5). This section is section 74-8 in the Code of Ordinances. 
Sec. 7. - Licenses; transportation rates; shows and amusements; gambling; explosives; weapons; weights and measures; animals. 
(a)  Licenses. [Editorially deleted.] 
Editor's note- This subsection has been editorially deleted as superseded by the requirements in state law. 
State Law reference- Occupational license tax, F.S. ch. 205; regulatory fees, F.S. § 166.221. 
(b)  Transportation rates. [Editorially deleted.] 
Editor's note- This subsection has been editorially deleted as superseded by the requirements in state law. 
(c)  Shows and amusements; gambling. [Editorially deleted.] 
Editor's note- This subsection which has not been amended by referendum after July 1, 1973, and which is not an extraterritorial power has been editorially deleted as unnecessary as home rule powers of a municipality are derived from the constitution and F.S. ch. 166. 
State Law reference- Distribution of obscene materials law uniform in state and preempted by state F.S. §§ 847.013(4) and 847.09(1). 
(d)  Explosives. [Editorially deleted.] 
Editor's note- This subsection which has not been amended by referendum after July 1, 1973, and which is not an extraterritorial power has been editorially deleted as unnecessary as home rule powers of a municipality are derived from the constitution and F.S. ch. 166. 
(e)  Weapons, fireworks. [Editorially deleted.] 
Editor's note- This subsection which has not been amended by referendum after July 1, 1973, and which is not an extraterritorial power has been editorially deleted as unnecessary as home rule powers of a municipality are derived from the constitution and F.S. ch. 166. 
State Law reference- Regulation of firearms and concealed weapons, F.S. ch. 790; regulation of fireworks, F.S. ch. 791. 
(f)  Weights, measures, inspections. [Editorially deleted.] 
Editor's note- This subsection which has not been amended by referendum after July 1, 1973, and which is not an extraterritorial power has been editorially deleted as unnecessary as home rule powers of a municipality are derived from the constitution and F.S. ch. 166. 
State Law reference- Weights and measures, F.S. ch. 531. 
(g)  Animals. [Editorially deleted.] 
Editor's note- This subsection which has not been amended by referendum after July 1, 1973, and which is not an extraterritorial power has been editorially deleted as unnecessary as home rule powers of a municipality are derived from the constitution and F.S. ch. 166. 
Sec. 8. - Punishment of offenses. 
    [Editorially deleted.] 
Editor's note- This section has been editorially deleted as superseded by state law misdemeanors, F.S. ch. 775. 
State Law reference- Crimes, penalties, F.S. ch. 775. 
Sec. 9. - Landscaping and beautification; unsafe buildings; powers under general law. 
    [Editorially deleted.] 
Editor's note- This section which has not been amended by referendum after July 1, 1973, and which is not an extraterritorial power has been editorially deleted as unnecessary as home rule powers of a municipality are derived from the constitution and F.S. ch. 166. 
ARTICLE III. - THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 10. - Powers and duties of mayor-To enforce laws and ordinances, investigations and reports; veto of ordinances; judicial duties; compen- sation. 
    The mayor shall be chief executive officer of the city and shall see that the provisions of this character [Charter], ordinances, laws and rules of the city are complied with, and enforced. He shall have the power to make general investigations into the official conduct and affairs of all city officers or employees of the city, and may examine into the conditions of all city books, papers, records, property, and equipment. It shall be his duty to make a report to the council [of] all violations or neglect of duty or any misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance in office, neglect of duty or improper conduct on the part of any city officer or employee that may come to his knowledge. He shall put down riots and unlawful assemblies, and may use the police and common power of the city for such purposes, and shall see that peace, good order, safety and good morals are preserved within the city, he may veto any official ordinance of the city council, subject to the limitations hereinafter prescribed, may call the council together in special session, and shall recommend to the council such measures from time to time as to him shall seem wholesome and proper. The mayor shall receive as salary for his services such an amount as shall be set by the council but in no event may the amount be reduced during his term of office without two-thirds vote of the council. 
Editor's note- References to mayor's court, trial by mayor and the imposition of penalties by mayor have been editorially deleted as they are obsolete as municipal courts were abolished by Article V, § 20(d)(4) of the Florida Constitution. 
Sec. 11. - Same-Disqualification of mayor or president of council; impeachment. 
    In case of the absence, sickness, resignation, disqualification or other disability of the mayor, the president of the city council shall discharge the duties of the mayor and receive the mayor's salary, if any there be, during such time he shall serve as acting mayor. In case of the absence, sickness, disqualification or disability of the president of the council to act for the mayor in such case, the president pro tem of the council shall discharge such duties with like compensation. No mayor, or acting mayor, or councilman, shall sit in any cause to which he is a party or in which he, or any person related to him by consanguinity or affinity within the third degree, shall be a party to, or interested in the result thereof; the mayor may be impeached by the city council for misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance in office, for drunkenness, habitual intoxication or gross immorality, and by two-thirds vote of the council may be removed. 
State Law reference- Code of ethics, F.S. § 112.311 et seq. 
Sec. 12. - The city council; president; rules; meetings; compensation; investigations; political activities; budget. 
(a)  President of council. The members shall elect annually one of their number as president of the council, who shall preside over its meetings, enforce such rules as may be adopted by the council, and perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Act or by any ordinance not in conflict with this Act. The council may elect a president pro tem to act in the absence or disability of the president, and in other cases herein provided. 
(b)  Rules of proceedings. The council may prescribe its own rules of proceeding, and fix a penalty upon its members for disobedience, nonattendance, or disorderly conduct, and, for satisfactory cause and after due notice, may by 2/3 vote, expel any member and declare his place vacant upon the council. 
(c)  Meetings. The Council shall meet at such times as may be prescribed by ordinance or resolution, but not less frequently than once each month. 
Editor's note- The first sentence of this subsection regarding newly elected officers taking office has been editorially deleted as superseded by the uniform election procedure in Laws of Fla. ch. 92-270. Parts of this subsection have been editorially transferred to the Code of Ordinances as certain provisions of a Charter adopted prior to July 1, 1973, and not subsequently amended by referendum have been converted to ordinances by operation of F.S. § 166.021(5). The part of this section which was transferred is section 2-29 in the Code of Ordinances. 
(d)  Compensation. [Editorially deleted.] 
Editor's note- Section 12(d) of the Charter was amended by Ordinance No. 495 pursuant to F.S. § 166.021(4). It appears as section 2-26 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(e)  Quorum. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum to transact any business, but a less number may adjourn from day to day and compel the attendance of absent members by imposing such fines and penalties as may be fixed by ordinance. 
(f)  Investigations; subpoenas; oaths. The council may, in the investigation of charges against municipal officers, assistants, and employees, and members of the council, or of any other matters coming before them, issue subpoenas and compulsory process under the hands of the president of the council, the clerk, and the seal, for the attendance of any person, firm or corporation, and for the production of books, papers, and records; and the president of the council and clerk shall each have authority to administer oaths and affirmations, and take depositions. 
(g)  Political activities. [Editorially deleted.] 
Editor's note- This subsection has been editorially deleted as preempted by F.S. § 104.31(3). 
(h)  Budget. [Editorially deleted.] 
Editor's note- Section 12(h) of the Charter was amended by Ordinance No. 511 pursuant to F.S. § 166.021(4). It appears as section 2-191 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 495, § 1, 5-8-77; Ord. No. 511, § 1, 6-12-79) 
ARTICLE IV. - CITY OFFICERS 

Sec. 13. - Powers and duties of city clerk. 
    The clerk, who shall be fully engaged in work for the city, shall attend all meetings of the council, and shall keep a correct record of the proceedings of the council and shall record, and attest all ordinances. He shall draw and sign vouchers upon the depositories, which vouchers shall be countersigned by the president of the council, and keep a true and correct account of same. He shall prepare and submit to the council at the first meeting in each month a statement of all finances, receipts and disbursements passing through his office. He shall also have published semiannually in some newspaper inside the corporate limits, a sworn statement showing for what purpose the money was collected and for what purpose it was expended. He shall sign all licenses issued by the city, and issue receipts for all moneys paid to him, and shall deposit said money to the proper depositories at the first regular banking day after receipt. He shall be custodian of all books pertaining to the clerk's office, and of the city records not otherwise provided for. All fiscal books shall be maintained under modern bookkeeping methods and shall be posted up to date. Failure to keep books posted up to date shall constitute malfeasance of office. He shall be clerk of the Board of Public Works. When the clerk is also tax assessor he shall perform all the duties provided for said offices. He shall give such bond as the city council may fix, and shall perform all duties now or hereafter imposed upon the clerk by this Act, or by any ordinance of the council, not inconsistent herewith. His compensation shall be fixed by the council. The clerk shall in his discretion employ and dismiss all employees of his office; provided that the council by 2/3 vote may discharge for cause any employee in the Clerk's office. The salaries and number of employees of the office of the clerk shall be set by the council or his employees or any reduction in number of employees except by two-thirds vote of the council. Additional employees or raises in salaries may be added by majority vote of the council subject to the limitations of the budget hereinafter provided. 
Editor's note- References to mayor's court and trial by mayor were editorially deleted as obsolete as municipal courts were abolished by Article V, § 20(d)(4) of the Florida Constitution. 
Sec. 14. - City depositories. 
    [Editorially deleted.] 
Editor's note- This section has been editorially transferred to the Code of Ordinances as certain provisions of a Charter adopted prior to July 1, 1973, and not subsequently amended by referendum have been converted to ordinances by operation of F.S. § 166.021(5). This section is section 2-192 in the Code of Ordinances. 
Sec. 15. - City attorney; duties. 
    The council may appoint annually at their first meeting after their election, or as soon thereafter as practicable, an attorney, who shall be the legal adviser of the council, the mayor and all officers upon all municipal matters, shall appear for the city in all civil cases in the courts, and shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by ordinance. He shall not accept adverse employment in any matter in which the city is interested. His compensation shall be fixed by the council. The city may also employ special counsel in any case in which the city attorney may be disqualified or unable to act, or in any other matters requiring the assistance of special counsel. 
Sec. 16. - City physician; duties. 
    The council may appoint annually at their first meeting, or as soon thereafter as practical, a physician who shall have and exercise such powers and duties as may be prescribed by ordinance. The council may by ordinance delegate to him the power to make rules and regulations regarding sanitary matters or health conditions of the city, which shall be in compliance with the rules and regulations of the State Board of Health, and any other matters affecting the public health. He shall have power to enforce within the city all the rules and regulations of the State Board of Health, including quarantine not inconsistent with law. His compensation shall be fixed by ordinance. 
Sec. 17. - Chief of police; fire chief; duties; employees. 
    The mayor shall employ and discharge and prescribe all of the duties and powers of the chief of police, fire chief and all personnel in the police and fire departments; provided that the Council by 2/3 vote may discharge for cause the chief of police, fire chief and all other personnel in the police and fire departments. The duties and powers as prescribed by the mayor shall be such general and specific powers as are necessary and incident to the office or employment. It shall be the duty of the mayor to see that all policemen and firemen, including volunteer firemen, are trained in their duties. The council shall fix the compensation for the chief of police, fire chief and members of the police and fire departments according to set grades or standards and the salaries of same shall not be increased or decreased except by pro rata proportion thereafter. The number of employees of both departments shall be set by the council but there may be no reduction of employees except by two-thirds vote of the council. Additional employees may be added by majority vote of the council subject to the limitations of the budget hereinafter provided. 
Sec. 18. - Additional police officers. 
    [Editorially deleted.] 
Editor's note- This section has been editorially transferred to the Code of Ordinances as certain provisions of a Charter adopted prior to July 1, 1973, and not subsequently amended by referendum have been converted to ordinances by operation of F.S. § 166.021(5). This section is section 46-13 in the Code of Ordinances. 
ARTICLE V. - BONDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal borrowing authority, F.S. § 166.101 et seq.; bonds, F.S. §§ 130.01 et seq., 132.01 et seq., 159.01 et seq., 163.385, 215.43, 215.431, 215.84, 218.37-218.385; bond validation, F.S. ch. 75; maximum rate of interest, F.S. § 215.84. 

Sec. 19. - Issuance; election; form; revenue certificates; notices. 
    [Editorially deleted.] 
Editor's note- This section has been editorially deleted as the full authority for the issuance of bonds is contained in F.S. § 166.101 et seq. and other pertinent sections of Florida Statutes regarding bonds. 
Sec. 20. - Development Commission; contracts with; fees; form and interest rates; bids for sale; limitation of fees; limitation of certificates of indebtedness. 
    [Editorially deleted.] 
Editor's note- This section has been editorially deleted as the full authority for the issuance of bonds is contained in F.S. § 166.101 et seq. and other pertinent sections of Florida Statutes regarding bonds. 
Sec. 21. - Proceeds; expenditures; bids. 
    [Editorially deleted.] 
Editor's note- This section has been editorially deleted as the full authority for the issuance of bonds is contained in F.S. § 166.101 et seq. and other pertinent sections of Florida Statutes regarding bonds. 
Sec. 22. - Adverse election. 
    [Editorially deleted.] 
Editor's note- This section has been editorially deleted as the full authority for the issuance of bonds is contained in F.S. § 166.101 et seq. and other pertinent sections of Florida Statutes regarding bonds. 
ARTICLE VI. - TAXATION 

Secs. 23-38. - Reserved. 
    [Editorially deleted.] 
Editor's note- The provisions of this article consisting of §§ 23 through 38 have been deleted as superseded by state law, F.S. § 166.201 et seq. providing taxing authority, F.S. § 193.116 providing that the county shall make all assessments and collection of ad valorem taxes, and F.S. ch. 193 providing for the tax collection, sales and liens. 
ARTICLE VII. - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 39. - Procedure to be provided by ordinance; election precincts; qualifications of electors; publication of lists; election officers. 
    The council shall provide by ordinance for the holding of elections, as provided by law, for election of city officers and for special elections. The returns and canvassing of results of same, the appointment of clerks, inspectors, and bailiffs, the designation of precincts and polling places, and the registration and qualification of electors shall comply with state laws governing elections. 
(a)  Precincts: The City of Crestview shall be divided into three precincts, numbered as follows: Number One, East Crestview, comprising all that territory within the corporate limits east of Main Street and South of U.S. Highway No. 90; Number Two, West Crestview, comprising that territory within the corporate limits west of Main Street and south and west of U.S. Highway No. 90; Number Three, North Crestview, comprising all that territory within the corporate limits north of U.S. Highway No. 90. 
(b)  Qualifications of Electors: [Editorially deleted as superseded by F.S. § 98.031 et seq.] 
(c)  Publication: [Editorially deleted as superseded by F.S. § 98.031 et seq.] 
(d)  Election officers: The Okaloosa County supervisor of elections shall appoint before each city election such election officers as are necessary to conduct the election in accordance with the general state election law and the polling places shall open and close in accordance with the general state election law. 
(Laws of Fla. ch. 67-1252, § 1; Ord. No. 611, § 4, 6-24-85) 
Editor's note- This section has been editorially amended to delete conflicts with and to reference the state law including Laws of Fla. ch. 92-270 which provides for the filing, qualifying and election dates, canvass of returns, time period within which to assume office and absentee balloting. 
State Law reference- Uniform election laws for Okaloosa County cities, Laws of Fla. ch. 92-270. 
Sec. 40. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 611, § 3, adopted June 24, 1985, repealed § 40 in its entirety. Former § 40 was concerned with the registration of electors. 
Sec. 41. - Bonds of officers; oath of office. 
    The council shall fix the amount of bond to be given by all officers, or by others dealing with the city in cases where bond shall be required. And should any officer required by this act, or by ordinance, to give bond, fail for fifteen (15) days after his election or appointment to furnish bond approved by the council, his office shall be declared vacant and shall be filled as herein provided until the next general city election. 
Editor's note- The portions of this section regarding oath of office have been editorially deleted as superseded by F.S. §§ 99.021, 876.05. See also AGO 82-64. 
Sec. 42. - Suspension or removal of officers. 
    Any officer whose removal or suspension from office is not otherwise provided for herein, may be removed or suspended by the mayor with the approval of a majority of the city council, at any time. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PENAL PROCEDURES 

Sec. 43. - Confinement or release under bond; amount of bond. 
    [Editorially deleted.] 
Editor's note- This section has been editorially deleted as references to mayor's court and trial by mayor are obsolete as municipal courts were abolished by Article V, § 20(d)(4) of the Florida Constitution. 
Sec. 44. - Commitment; appeals. 
    [Editorially deleted.] 
Editor's note- This section has been editorially deleted as references to mayor's court and trial by mayor are obsolete as municipal courts were abolished by Article V, § 20(d)(4) of the Florida Constitution. 
Sec. 45. - Estreatment of bond. 
    [Editorially deleted.] 
Editor's note- This section has been editorially deleted as references to mayor's court and trial by mayor are obsolete as municipal courts were abolished by Article V, § 20(d)(4) of the Florida Constitution. 
ARTICLE IX. - STREETS AND PUBLIC LANDS 

Sec. 46. - Title vested in city; control. 
    [Editorially deleted.] 
Editor's note- This section which has not been amended by referendum after July 1, 1973, and which is not an extraterritorial power has been editorially deleted as unnecessary as home rule powers of a municipality are derived from the constitution and F.S. ch. 166. 
Sec. 47. - Official survey and map. 
    [Editorially deleted.] 
Editor's note- This section which has not been amended by referendum after July 1, 1973, and which is not an extraterritorial power has been editorially deleted as unnecessary as home rule powers of a municipality are derived from the constitution and F.S. ch. 166. 
ARTICLE X. - ORDINANCES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Uniform minimum requirements and procedure for adoption of ordinances, F.S. § 166.041. 

Sec. 48. - Execution; veto. 
    No ordinance shall become effective until signed by the presiding officer of the council and be attested by the clerk. The mayor may sign same to indicate his approval, or may veto same under the provisions of this act, or city ordinance, or may permit to become a law without his signature. If not signed or vetoed by him within ten (10) days after submission to him, or if vetoed and then passed over his veto by two-thirds vote of all the members of the council, it shall become a law. 
Editor's note- This section has been editorially amended to delete the provision regarding the adoption of ordinances as superseded by F.S. § 166.041. 
Sec. 49. - Not to affect state property. 
    None of the provisions of this act shall authorize or empower the executive or legislative authorities of said City of Crestview to pass an ordinance, rule or regulation which shall in any manner affect the keeping by the State of Florida, any property, real or personal, owned by the State of Florida, within the corporate limits of said city, and any ordinance, rule or regulation of said city or its authorities, abridging the rights of the State of Florida in the conduct and control of its property shall be null and void. 
Sec. 50. - Notice by posting. 
    [Editorially deleted.] 
Editor's note- This section has been editorially deleted as superseded by F.S. § 166.041. 
Sec. 51. - Effect of prior ordinances. 
    All ordinances heretofore passed and adopted by the city council of the City of Crestview shall remain as ordinances and resolutions of the city until repealed by the city council of said city. 
Sec. 52. - Ratification when obligation incurred. 
    All ordinances heretofore passed and adopted by the City of Crestview whereby any bond or other obligations of said city are created, or whereby any contract made and entered into by said city with any other person, firm or corporation are hereby ratified and confirmed and none of which shall be repealed by this act. 
ARTICLE XI. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 53. - Indebtedness; limitation; purchases. 
(1)  [Editorially deleted.] 
Editor's note- This section has been editorially deleted as all limitations on the exercise of certain home rule powers in a Charter adopted prior to July 1, 1973, and not subsequently amended have been repealed by operation of F.S. § 166.021(4). 
(2)  Competitive bids. [Reserved.] 
Editor's note- Section 53(2) of the Charter was amended by Ordinance No. 521 pursuant to F.S. § 166.021(4). It appears as section 2-201 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Laws of Fla. ch. 67-1254, § 1; Ord. No. 488, 3-8-76; Ord. No. 521, § 1, 5-12-80) 
Sec. 54. - Public services department-Jurisdiction; superintendent. 
    There is hereby created the Public Services Department which shall include but not be limited to the following departments: streets, water, sewerage, parks, and sanitation; and it may include such other departments, not previously designated departments by this charter, as the council may from time to time deem necessary. The council shall as soon as practicable after the effective date of this Act, appoint a superintendent, who shall be the administrative head of the Public Services Department, and shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all departments thereunder. He shall be chosen on the basis of his ability and experience. The council by two-thirds vote shall be able to dismiss said superintendent upon good cause shown and after a hearing. No member of the council shall be appointed superintendent, and no member of the council can resign and be appointed superintendent during his elective term or for two (2) years after his term expires. The superintendent shall receive such salary as may be fixed by the council. In case of sickness or absence of the superintendent or in case of a vacancy in said office, the council may appoint another person to act for the superintendent during his absence or sickness or during such vacancy, and the person so appointed may act for the superintendent and perform all his duties as though performed by the superintendent. Such acting superintendent shall not serve in such capacity for more than ninety (90) days. 
(Ord. No. 772, § 2, 5-26-92) 
Sec. 55. - Same-Powers and duties of superintendent. 
    The superintendent shall be responsible to the council for the proper administration of all affairs of the city in his charge, and to that end, subject to such Civil Service provisions as may be provided for by ordinance and except as otherwise provided herein, he shall have the power to appoint and remove all officers and employees in the Department of Public Services of the city; and the superintendent may authorize the head of a department [or] office responsible to him to appoint and remove, with the same limitations, subordinates in such department or office. Appointments made by or under the authority of the superintendent shall be on the basis of ability and experience of such appointee in the work which his is to perform. 
(Ord. No. 772, § 2, 5-26-92) 
Sec. 56. - Same-Appointment and duties of employees not to be influenced. 
    Neither the council, nor any of its committees or members, nor the mayor, nor the clerk shall direct or request the appointment of any person to or his removal from office, except for cause, by the superintendent or any of his subordinates, or in any manner take part in the appointment or removal of officers and employees in the Public Service Department of the city. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the council and its members, the mayor, and the clerk shall deal with that portion of the administrative service for which the superintendent is responsible solely through the superintendent, and neither the council nor any member thereof, nor the mayor, nor the clerk shall give orders to any subordinates of the city, either publicly or privately. Any violation of the provisions of this section by a member of the council, or the mayor, or the clerk shall be a misdemeanor, conviction of which shall immediately forfeit the office of the member so convicted. 
(Ord. No. 772, § 2, 5-26-92) 
Sec. 57. - Salaries of elective officers. 
    The council shall at no time lower, or cause to be lowered, the salary or compensation of any elective officer to an amount less than his original or initial salary or compensation, as fixed at the time he was elected. 
Sec. 58. - Abolition of municipality; petition; election. 
    [Editorially deleted.] 
Editor's note- This section has been editorially deleted as superseded by F.S. §§ 165.022, 165.051. 
Sec. 59. - Assets of former city. 
    That the title, rights and ownership of property, collected and uncollected taxes, dues, claims, judgments, moneys, decrees and choses in action, heretofore held or owned by the City of Crestview (abolished by this chapter) shall pass to and be vested in the municipal corporation organized by and under this act to succeed the municipality abolished. 
Sec. 60. - Obligations, contracts and debts of former city. 
    That no debt, obligation or contract of the City of Crestview, Florida, including bonds and debentures heretofore issued, shall be impaired or avoided by this act, but such debts, obligations, contracts, and bonds shall pass to and be binding upon the new municipality which is hereby organized and created. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE LAWS OF FLORIDA 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any special act amendments thereto. 
Laws of Fla. 
Chapter Section  Section 
this Charter 63-1249 1-60 1-60 67-1252 1 39 67-1254 1 53  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location of the sections of any ordinances amending the basic Charter. 
Ordinance 
Number Adoption 
 Date Section  Section 
this Charter 488  3- 8-76 53 495  5- 8-77 1 12 511  6-12-79 1 12 521  5-12-80 1 53 611  6-24-85 4 39 772  5-26-92 2 54-56 847 10-10-94 3 4(f) 1095  8-26-02 2 4  
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Subpart A - GENERAL ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
  

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Crestview, Florida" and may be so cited. 
(Code 1983, § 1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Code of Ordinances, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Charter. The word "Charter" means the Charter of Crestview as printed in part I of this volume. 
    City. The words "the city" or "this city" mean the City of Crestview and shall extend to and include its several officers, agents and employees. 
    City council. Whenever the words "city council" are used, they shall be construed to mean the city council of the City of Crestview. 
    Code. Reference to "this Code" or "the Code" means the Code of Ordinances, City of Crestview, Florida, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Commercial service. The term "commercial service" means one or more categories of refuse service provided to firms, office complexes, companies or businesses within the corporate limits. 
    Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act is required to be done a certain length of time before any proceedings shall be had, the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall not be counted. 
    Corporate limits. Wherever the commission of an act is prohibited or declared unlawful, or the performance of an act is required, such reference shall be construed as though followed by the term "within the corporate limits of the city." 
    County. The words "the county" or "this county" mean the County of Okaloosa. 
State Law reference- Boundaries of Okaloosa County, F.S. § 7.46. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or some other city officer or employee to do some act or perform some duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or perform the duty. 
    F.A.C. The abbreviation "F.A.C." shall mean the Florida Administrative Code, as amended. 
    F.S. The abbreviation "F.S." means the latest edition or supplement of the Florida Statutes, as amended. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
    Includes. The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
    Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, the interpretation shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provisions imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such person or officers. 
    Land and real estate. "Land" and "real estate" include rights and easements of an incorporeal nature. 
    Law. "Law" means all applicable laws of the United States of America, the State of Florida and the City of Crestview. "Law" includes all applicable county ordinances. 
    Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
    Other city officials or officers. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, departments, etc., by title only, i.e., "city clerk," "chief of police," etc., they shall be deemed to refer to the officials, boards, commissions and departments of the city. 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
    Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Premises. "Premises," when used as applicable to property, extends to and includes land and buildings. 
    Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
    Public place. "Public place" means any place to or upon which the public resorts or travels, whether such place is owned or controlled by the city or any agency of the state or is a place to or upon which the public resorts or travels by custom or by invitation, express or implied. 
    Publish. "Publish" means to print in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality the entire document or a brief summary thereof with a listing of places where copies have been filed and times when they are available for inspection. 
    Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Reasonable time. In all cases where provision is made for an act to be done or notice to be given within a reasonable time, it shall be deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of such act or the giving of such notice. 
    Residence. "Residence" means an abode in which a person permanently resides. 
    Shall, may, must, "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive; and "must" is construed as being mandatory and not permissive. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
    Signature, subscription. The words "signature" and "subscription" may include a mark when the person cannot write, his name being written near it and being witnessed by a person who writes his own name as a witness. 
    State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Florida. 
    Street. The word "street" shall embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the city, and shall include the entire width of the right-of-way thereof if the sense so requires or admits. 
    Tenant. The words "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease, or who occupies, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the present or past tense include the future as well as the present or past. 
    Written, in writing. The words "written" and "in writing" may include typewriting, printing on paper and other mode of representing words and letters. 
    Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year unless a fiscal year is indicated. 
(Code 1983, § 1-2; Ord. No. 1070, § 2, 9-10-01) 
State Law reference- Construction of Florida Statutes, F.S. § 1.01. 
Sec. 1-3. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this and the following chapters and sections, so far as they are the same as those of the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Crestview, Florida," adopted by ordinance on November 28, 1983, or of ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of this Code, shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1983, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Catchlines of sections; history notes, etc., references to Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Cross references and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code, or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, or sections are to the chapters, articles and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1983, § 1-4; Ord. No. 1070, § 2, 9-10-01) 
Sec. 1-5. - History notes. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. 
(Code 1983, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1983, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Crestview, Florida, is hereby amended to read as follows: ...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. Such deletions or revisions may be indicated with struck-through type. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "The Code of Ordinances, City of Crestview, Florida, is hereby amended by adding a section to be numbered _____, which said section reads as follows: ...." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. Such additions may be indicated with underlined type. 
(d)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1983, § 1-7; Ord. No. 1070, § 2, 9-10-01) 
State Law reference- Minimum procedural requirements for adoption of ordinances and resolutions, F.S. § 166.041. 
Sec. 1-8. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1983, § 1-8) 
Sec. 1-9. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing, before the effective date of this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 1-9) 
State Constitution reference- No bill of attainder, ex post facto law or law impairing the obligation of contracts shall ever be passed, Fla. Const. art. I, § 10. 
Sec. 1-10. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city, or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the city; 
(2)  Any right or franchise, permit or other right granted by any ordinance; 
(3)  Any personnel regulations; 
(4)  Any ordinance establishing positions, classifying positions and setting salaries of city officers and employees; 
(5)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, alley or other public way in the city; 
(6)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades in the city; 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance or any ordinance levying or imposing taxes; 
(8)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(9)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(10)  Any ordinance establishing the official plat of the city, the zoning map or any amendments thereof; 
(11)  Any zoning ordinance; 
(12)  Any ordinance prescribing traffic and parking regulations for specific streets and locations; 
(13)  Any temporary or special ordinance; 
(14)  Any ordinance annexing territory or excluding territory from the city; 
(15)  Any provisions of chapter 63-1249, Special Acts of 1963, Florida Legislature, as amended by special law or otherwise, which have been converted to ordinances by F.S. § 166.021(5) and have not been superseded or repealed; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
(Code 1983, § 1-10) 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00, or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or by both a fine and imprisonment. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties provided in this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any ordinance shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be, by the city, abated as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Code 1983, § 1-11) 
State Law reference- Fines and forfeitures in County Court payable to municipality, F.S. § 34.191; punishment for misdemeanors, F.S. §§ 775.082, 775.083. 
Sec. 1-12. - Right of entry. 
    Whenever any officer or employee of the city is required or authorized by any state statute, the provisions of this Code, or any ordinance or resolution, or rules and regulations or orders issued thereunder, in order to carry out his duties thereunder, to enter any premises or vehicle for the purpose of making an inspection thereof or of anything therein contained or for the purpose of carrying out his duties, such officer or employee shall have the right to enter any such premises or vehicle at any reasonable time in pursuance of such duties; provided, that such entry and inspection shall be made in a lawful manner. 
(Code 1983, § 1-12) 
State Law reference- Inspection warrants, F.S. § 933.20 et seq. 
Sec. 1-13. - Refunds of amounts paid for permits issued by city departments-Procedure generally. 
    No person shall be entitled to any refund of the amount paid for any permit issued by any department of the city unless such refund is applied for in writing within six months from the date of issuance of such permit, or within the extended time thereof if the permit has been extended under an applicable ordinance. 
(Code 1983, § 1-13) 
Sec. 1-14. - Same-Service charge. 
    The city department which issues a permit for which a refund is claimed pursuant to the preceding section shall, before making any such refund, retain and deduct therefrom a sum equal to ten percent of the amount originally paid for the permit, which sum shall constitute a service charge and shall be paid into the city treasury. 
(Code 1983, § 1-14) 
Sec. 1-15. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 1-15) 
Sec. 1-16. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
(Code 1983, § 1-16) 
State Law reference- Falsely making, altering or counterfeiting a public record with intent to injure or defraud any person, F.S. §§ 831.01 and 839.13. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Governmental departments and officers, § 3; election of city clerk, § 4; election of the mayor and city council, § 4; powers and duties of the mayor and city council, art. III; powers and duties of the city clerk, § 13. 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; animals, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; civil emergencies, ch. 22; elections, ch. 26; environment, ch. 30; law enforcement, ch. 46; enforcement of city ordinances by chief of police, § 46-4; library, ch. 50; parks and recreation, ch. 58; pensions and retirement, ch. 62; taxation, ch. 82; land use regulations, ch. 102; subdivisions, § 102-481 et seq. 
State Law reference- Intergovernmental programs, F.S. ch. 163. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year shall commence on October 1, and shall end on September 30. 
(Code 1983, § 2-1) 
State Law reference- Mandate for fiscal year, F.S. §§ 166.241, 281.33. 
Secs. 2-2-2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- The mayor and city council, art. III; elections, § 4. 

Sec. 2-26. - Compensation. 
    The members of the council may receive as compensation for their services the sum of $420.00 each per month. 
(Code 1983, § 2-16) 
Sec. 2-27. - Administrative assistant. 
(a)  There is hereby created for the city the position of administrative assistant to the council. 
(b)  The administrative assistant to the council shall be selected by the council and can be replaced or released, or the position may be terminated, by the council. 
(c)  The administrative assistant to the council shall work directly under the council as their employee and shall perform whatever administrative duties he is assigned by the council and aid the council in carrying out their administrative duties as the governing body of the city. 
(d)  The administrative assistant shall be directly responsible to the council and shall have no independent authority to act for the city or council unless authorized specifically by the council. 
(e)  The administrative assistant shall assist other departments of the city government in carrying out their administrative duties if the other departments so request; provided, the council must approve any such work the assistant undertakes. 
(Code 1983, § 2-17) 
Sec. 2-28. - Resolution of fees; periodic review; public hearing. 
(a)  The city council shall review and modify, alter, change or increase fees, rates and charges by resolution when necessary. 
(b)  All fees, rates and charges shall be reviewed periodically by the city council, to include at least annually 60 days prior to budget adoption. 
(c)  Prior to an enactment of a change in fees, rates and charges, the city council shall give notice and conduct a hearing. This hearing may occur during a council session if desired. Approved changes shall be posted and notification given to the public. 
(Code 1983, § 2-18) 
Secs. 2-29-2-50. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1514, § 2, adopted October 28, 2013, amended the Code by repealing former § 2-29 in its entirety. Former § 2-29 pertained to special meetings, and derived from the Laws of Florida, ch. 63-1249, § 12(c). 
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-51-2-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING BOARD[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Land use regulations, ch. 102; subdivisions, § 102-481 et seq. 

Sec. 2-61. - Created. 
    The Crestview planning advisory board, referred to in this Code as the planning board, is hereby created and established and the planning board shall be organized and empowered as set out in this division. 
(Code 1983, § 2-41) 
Sec. 2-62. - Membership; term; vacancy; removal; compensation; ex officio members. 
(a)  The planning board shall consist of seven members, who shall be residents of the city, and appointed by the council. 
(b)  The terms of the members of the planning board shall be for four years, except that in the appointment of the first planning board under the terms of this article the first member shall be appointed for a term of one year, the second member shall be appointed for a term of two years, the third member shall be appointed for a term of three years, and the remaining members shall be appointed for terms of four years, each with eligibility for reappointment. 
(c)  Any vacancy in the membership of the planning board shall be filled for the unexpired term by the council, who shall have the authority to remove any member for cause, upon written charges, after a public hearing. 
(d)  All members of the planning board shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(e)  The mayor and administrative assistant shall be ex officio members of the planning board and shall receive no compensation for their work on the planning board other than the fixed salary of their office. 
(Code 1983, § 2-42; Ord. No. 904, § 2, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 2-63. - Quorum. 
    Four members of the planning board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business; provided, however, that no action shall be taken which is binding upon the planning board unless concurred in by not less than a majority of all members comprising the planning board. 
(Code 1983, § 2-43; Ord. No. 904, § 2, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 2-64. - Organization, rules, staff and finances. 
(a)  The planning board shall elect a chairman from among its members. 
(b)  The term of the chairman of the planning board shall be one year with eligibility for reelection. 
(c)  The planning board shall appoint a secretary, who may be an officer or employee of the municipality. 
(d)  The planning board shall make its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meeting. 
(e)  All meetings of the planning board at which official action is taken shall be open to the public and all records of the planning board shall be a public record. 
(f)  The planning board may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may contract with the state planning agency, city planners and other consultants for such services as it may require. 
(g)  The expenditures of the planning board, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the council. 
(Code 1983, § 2-44) 
Sec. 2-65. - Powers and duties. 
    From and after the time when the planning board shall have organized and selected its officers and shall have adopted its rules of procedure, then the planning board shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities set forth in this division. 
(Code 1983, § 2-45) 
Sec. 2-66. - Designation as local planning agency; membership and duties of agency. 
(a)  The planning board as established by this division is designated as the local planning agency in compliance with the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act. 
(b)  Membership of the local planning agency shall be as presently constituted and changed from time to time in accordance with the usual method of selecting a planning board. 
(c)  Duties of the planning board (referred to in this section as the local planning agency) shall include but are not limited to the following functions: 
(1)  The local planning agency shall prepare the comprehensive plan as required by state law. 
(2)  The local planning agency shall recommend to the council adoption of the comprehensive plan or any element or portion thereof. 
(3)  The local planning agency shall hold public hearings on the comprehensive plan after due public notice. 
(Code 1983, § 2-46) 
State Law reference- Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act, F.S. § 163.3161(1); local planning agency, F.S. § 163.3174. 
Sec. 2-67. - Final recommendation for adoption of comprehensive plan. 
    The council may designate a person or body to prepare the comprehensive plan; however, the responsibility for final recommendations for adoption by the council shall be the responsibility of the local planning agency. 
(Code 1983, § 2-47) 
Sec. 2-68. - Zoning board. 
    The planning board shall act as the zoning board for the city and shall have the duties and responsibilities and follow the procedures as set forth in section 102-37 of the Code. 
(Code 1983, § 2-48) 
Cross reference- Land use regulations, ch. 102. 
Sec. 2-69. - Subdivision of land. 
    The planning board shall prepare and recommend to the council for adoption rules and regulations governing the approval of maps and plats of the subdivision of land within the city in accordance with the requirement of F.S. ch. 177. 
(Code 1983, § 2-49) 
Cross reference- Subdivisions, § 102-481 et seq. 
Secs. 2-70-2-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TECHNICAL ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 2-81. - Created. 
    A technical advisory board shall be established for the purpose of assisting in the preparation and implementation of the comprehensive plan or elements thereof. 
(Code 1983, § 2-61) 
Sec. 2-82. - Composition; appointment, term of members; quorum; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  Membership of the technical advisory board shall consist of department heads or section chiefs from the following city departments: 
(1)  City clerk. 
(2)  Public services director. 
(3)  Fire chief. 
(4)  Administrative assistant. 
(5)  Police chief. 
(6)  Mayor. 
(7)  An appointed member of council. 
(8)  Code inspector. 
(b)  Membership of the technical advisory board may increase in order to assure minority representation or to meet regional planning requirements. 
(c)  A majority of the members of the technical advisory board present at any meeting shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(d)  Members of the technical advisory board shall be appointed by name by the council. 
(e)  The terms of office of members of the technical advisory board shall be for five years, or until their successors are appointed and qualified. Members must be notified in writing of their appointment and must accept in writing, indicating their willingness to serve, within ten days after receipt thereof, or they shall automatically forfeit their appointment. 
(f)  The council shall have the authority to revoke any appointment to the technical advisory board for reasonable cause. 
(g)  Vacancies on the technical advisory board occurring prior to the expiration of the term of the member shall be filled by the council for the unexpired term. 
(Code 1983, § 2-62) 
Sec. 2-83. - Duties. 
    Duties of the technical advisory board include, but are not limited to, the following functions: 
(1)  Provide technical assistance to the local planning agency in the preparation of the comprehensive plan or elements thereof. 
(2)  Provide technical assistance to the agency, committee, department or person designated to prepare the comprehensive plan or elements thereof. 
(3)  Recommend to the local planning agency the adoption of the comprehensive plan or elements thereof. All such recommendations shall also be forwarded to the council. 
(4)  Establish rules of procedure which will be reviewed by the planning board and council prior to adoption. 
(5)  Elect officers annually for the operation of the technical advisory board. 
(6)  Require that all meetings be public and that all records be available to the public. 
(7)  Monitor and oversee the effectiveness and status of a comprehensive plan and make recommendations to the local planning agency for changes or improvements to the plan. 
(Code 1983, § 2-63) 
Secs. 2-84-2-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY 

Sec. 2-96. - Authority. 
    The authority for enactment of this division is F.S. § 166.021; F.S. ch. 163, part III; and section 2 of the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 783, § 1, 10-12-92; Ord. No. 945, § 3, 5-26-98) 
Sec. 2-97. - Created. 
    Under the provisions of F.S. § 163.356, there is hereby established the community redevelopment agency. 
(Code 1983, § 2-76(a); Ord. No. 783, § 2, 10-12-92; Ord. No. 945, § 3, 5-26-98) 
Sec. 2-98. - Membership of board of commissioners. 
    The board of commissioners of the community redevelopment agency shall consist of the members of the city council and two additional commissioners appointed by the city council as provided for in Florida Statutes. 
(Code 1983, § 2-76(b), (c); Ord. No. 782, § 2, 10-12-92; Ord. No. 862, § 2, 9-11-95; Ord. No. 945, § 3, 5-26-98; Ord. No. 1462, § 2, 6-13-11) 
State Law reference- Community redevelopment agency, F.S. § 163.356. 
Sec. 2-99. - Chairman and vice-chairman. 
    The president and vice president of the city council shall function as the chairman and vice-chairman of the community redevelopment agency. 
(Code 1983, § 2-77; Ord. No. 782, § 2, 10-12-92; Ord. No. 862, § 2, 9-11-95; Ord. No. 945, § 3, 5-26-98) 
Sec. 2-100. - Powers. 
    The community redevelopment agency shall have all the powers and authority as set forth in general law. 
(Ord. No. 782, § 2, 10-12-92; Ord. No. 862, § 2, 9-11-95; Ord. No. 945, § 3, 5-26-98) 
Sec. 2-101. - Community redevelopment trust fund established. 
    There is hereby established and created, in accordance with the provisions of general law, a community redevelopment trust fund, hereafter referred to as the "fund," for the Crestview Redevelopment Agency. 
(Ord. No. 862, § 2, 9-11-95; Ord. No. 945, § 3, 5-26-98) 
Sec. 2-102. - Allocation and appropriation of funds. 
    The funds to be allocated to and deposited into the fund are hereby appropriated to the community redevelopment agency, hereafter referred to as the "agency," to finance community redevelopment projects within the city as authorized by general law and pursuant to a redevelopment plan approved and amended by resolution of the city council. The agency shall utilize the funds and revenues paid into and earned by the fund for all and every community redevelopment purpose delegated to it as contained in the plan or amendment thereto for redevelopment as provided by general law. Said funding accounts will be initiated by the city clerk but will be fully administered and managed by the agency's community redevelopment director in accordance with general law, the Community Redevelopment Act (F.S. § 163.330 et seq.) and this division, as any of those are amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 862, § 2, 9-11-95; Ord. No. 945, § 3, 5-26-98; Ord. No. 1598, § 2, 1-25-16) 
Sec. 2-103. - Payments into fund. 
    There shall be paid into the fund each year by all taxing authorities, as defined in general law, within the original community redevelopment area and expanded areas by amendment, the incremental increase in the income, proceeds, revenues and funds of taxing authority, as calculated in accordance with section 2-105 of this chapter and general law, based upon the tax base years set forth in section 2-104 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 862, § 2, 9-11-95) 
Sec. 2-104. - Tax rolls; frequency due. 
(a)  The most recent tax roll used in connection with the taxation of such property identified in the original community redevelopment plan shall be the Tax Roll of 1995 of Okaloosa County, Florida, and all deposits into the fund shall begin with incremental increases from tax rolls resulting in ad valorem tax revenues due subsequent to November 1, 1995 for the tax year January 1, 1995 through December 31, 1995 and subsequent years. 
(b)  Within the expanded areas only, the most recent tax roll used in connection with the taxation of such property shall be the Tax Roll of 1997 of Okaloosa County, Florida, and all deposits into the fund, within the expanded areas shall begin with incremental increases from tax rolls resulting in ad valorem tax revenues due subsequent to November 1, 1997 for the tax year January 1, 1998 through December 31, 1998 and subsequent years. Boundaries of the original community redevelopment area in Ord. No. 862, as originally passed shall remain in effect also. 
(Ord. No. 862, § 2, 9-11-95; Ord. No. 945, § 3, 5-26-98) 
Sec. 2-105. - Tax increment levied; method; amount. 
    Within the expansion areas and original area, said tax increment shall be that amount equal to 95 percent of the difference between: 
(1)  That amount of ad valorem taxes levied each year by each taxing authority, exclusive of any debt service millage, on taxable real property contained within the geographic boundaries of the community redevelopment area; and 
(2)  That amount of ad valorem taxes which would have been produced by the rate upon which the tax is levied each year by or for each taxing authority, exclusive of debt service millage, upon the total of the assessed value of the taxable property in the community redevelopment area, as shown upon the assessment roll used in connection with the taxation of such property by all taxing authorities prior to the effective date of this article providing for the funding of trust fund. 
(Ord. No. 862, § 2, 9-11-95; Ord. No. 945, § 3, 5-26-98) 
Sec. 2-106. - Payment of funds; date due; interest. 
    All taxing authorities as defined by general law, shall: 
(1)  Upon the adoption of this article providing for funding of the community redevelopment trust fund as herein provided, each taxing authority shall, by January 1 of each year, appropriate to such fund for so long as any indebtedness pledging increment revenues to the payment thereof is outstanding (but not to exceed 30 years) a sum which is no less than the increment as defined and determined in section 2-105 accruing to such taxing authority. No taxing authority is exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(2)  Any taxing authority which does not pay the increment to the trust fund by January 1 shall pay to the trust fund an amount equal to five percent of the amount of the increment and shall pay interest on the amount of the increment equal to one percent for each month the increment is outstanding. 
(Ord. No. 862, § 2, 9-11-95; Ord. No. 945, § 3, 5-26-98) 
Sec. 2-107. - Trust fund established; maintained. 
    The fund account(s) shall be initiated and remain operational with oversight of the city clerk and held in a separate trust fund account(s) by the city for and on behalf of the community redevelopment agency. All fund accounts will be effectively administered, monitored and utilized by the agency, and disbursed and appropriated as provided by law, this division or resolution of the agency board of commissioners, through the agency's designated community redevelopment director in order to ensure funds are allocated expeditiously and without undue delay for their statutory purpose. General agency oversight will be with the city council as the agency governing body and any city designated department. 
(Ord. No. 862, § 2, 9-11-95; Ord. No. 945, § 3, 5-26-98; Ord. No. 1598, § 2, 1-25-16) 
Sec. 2-108. - Tax increment computation; method. 
    The tax increment shall be computed by using the assessed value of the taxable real property in the original community redevelopment area for the year 1995 as the base, and using the assessed value of the taxable real property in the expanded portions of the community redevelopment area for the year 1997 as the base year, and in subsequent years using the assessed value of real property in the community redevelopment and expanded areas for that year as the second factor in determining the amount of tax increment accruing in that year. 
(Ord. No. 862, § 2, 9-11-95; Ord. No. 945, § 3, 5-26-98) 
Sec. 2-109. - Accountability and management of funds. 
    The agency accepts full responsibility for the receipt, custody, disbursement, accountability, management and proper application for all monies paid into the fund, subject to the provisions of section 2-102 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 862, § 2, 9-11-95; Ord. No. 945, § 3, 5-26-98) 
Sec. 2-110. - Advisory committee(s). 
    The city council may from time to time establish one or more advisory committees consisting of business owners, operators and others within the business community to assist and advise the community redevelopment agency as it administers tenets of the Crestview community redevelopment plan and any amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. 862, § 2, 9-11-95; Ord. No. 945, § 3, 5-26-98) 
DIVISION 5. - CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Code enforcement board, F.S. § 162.01 et seq. 

Sec. 2-111. - Purpose and jurisdiction. 
    The purpose of this division is to create a code enforcement board with authority to impose administrative fines and other noncriminal penalties to provide an equitable, expeditious, effective and inexpensive method of enforcing the codes and ordinances where a pending or repeated violation continues to exist, including, but not limited to, occupational license, business regulation, garbage and rubbish collection and disposal, health and sanitation, sewer and water, fire, building, planning and zoning, sign codes, landscaping, stormwater and land use, which jurisdiction shall vest in the code enforcement board. 
(Code 1983, § 2-79) 
Sec. 2-112. - Created. 
    A code enforcement board is hereby created as a citizen board to enforce the provisions of this Code, pursuant to F.S. ch. 162. 
(Code 1983, § 2-80) 
Sec. 2-113. - Membership; term. 
(a)  Members of the code enforcement board shall be residents of the city and shall have experience or an interest in the fields of zoning and building control. The membership of the board shall, whenever possible, include an architect, a businessman, an engineer, a general contractor, a subcontractor and a realtor. 
(b)  The initial appointments to the code enforcement board shall be as follows: 
(1)  Two members shall each be appointed for a term of one year. 
(2)  Three members shall each be appointed for a term of two years. 
(3)  Two members shall each be appointed for a term of three years. 
Thereafter, appointments shall be for a term of three years. 
(Code 1983, § 2-81) 
Sec. 2-114. - Legal representation. 
    The city attorney shall serve as legal counsel to represent the code enforcement board. From time to time, an attorney may be employed by the city council to represent the city by preparing and presenting cases before the board. 
(Code 1983, § 2-82) 
Sec. 2-115. - Powers. 
    The code enforcement board shall have the power and authority granted to local government code enforcement boards by general law. 
(Code 1983, § 2-83) 
Secs. 2-116-2-119. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - DRUG NUISANCE ABATEMENT BOARD[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1022, § 2, adopted March 27, 2000, amended the Code by repealing Ord. No. 982, which is the ordinance which created former div. 6, §§ 2-120-2-126. § 3 of Ord. No. 1022 amended the Code by adding a new div. 6, §§ 2-120-2-127, as herein set out. 

Sec. 2-120. - Definitions. 
    All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this division shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out. The provisions of this division shall also be liberally construed so as to effect its purposes. Terms used in this division, unless otherwise specifically provided, shall have the meanings prescribed by the statutes of the state for the same terms. 
    Board shall mean the drug nuisance abatement board of the city. 
    City attorney shall mean the legal counselor for the city or his designee. 
    Clerk shall mean the person who performs the clerical duties necessary to carry out the activities of the drug nuisance abatement board. 
    Code enforcement board shall mean the board to carry out tenets of this division. 
    Operator shall mean tenant, lessee or person having control or possession of the premises. 
    Public nuisance shall mean the same definition as defined in F.S. § 893.138. 
    Staff attorney shall mean a legal counselor appointed by the city council to represent the interests of the city staff. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 3, 3-27-00) 
Sec. 2-121. - Drug nuisance abatement board organization. 
(a)  Created; membership. There is hereby created and established a drug nuisance abatement board to hear evidence relating to the existence of drug-related public nuisances on premises located in the city. The board shall consist of the seven (7) members of the city code enforcement board who shall serve as members of the drug nuisance abatement board herein created. 
(b)  Quorum; compensation. The presence of four or more members shall constitute a quorum. Members shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 3, 3-27-00) 
Sec. 2-122. - Operating procedures of the board. 
(a)  Filing complaints; written notice to owner of premises. Any employee, officer or resident of the city may file a complaint with the board regarding the existence on premises located in the city of a public nuisance, as defined in section 2-120, after giving not less that three days written notice of such complaint to the owner of the place or premises complained of at his last known address. 
(b)  Service of notice; hearing. The drug nuisance abatement board through its clerk, shall schedule a hearing, and written notice of such hearing shall be sent by certified mail or hand delivery if certified mail is unsuccessful, notice of the hearing may be by publication as provided in F.S. ch. 49. 
(c)  Contents of notice. The aforesaid notice of hearing shall include: 
(1)  A statement of the time, place and nature of the hearing; 
(2)  A statement of the legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing is to be [held]; 
(3)  A reference to the particular sections of the statutes and ordinance involved; 
(4)  A short and plain statement summarizing the incidents complained of. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 3, 3-27-00) 
Sec. 2-123. - Conduct of hearings. 
(a)  The chairman of the board may call hearings of the board. Hearings may also be called by written notice signed by at least four members of the board. The board, at a hearing, may set a future hearing date. The board shall convene as the demand necessitates. The board shall adopt rules for the conduct of its hearings. Minutes shall be kept of all hearings and all hearings shall be open to the public. The city shall provide clerical and administrative personnel as may be reasonably required for the proper performance of the board's duties. 
(b)  The city attorney shall serve as legal counsel to represent the drug nuisance abatement board. From time to time, an attorney may be employed to represent the city staff by preparing and presenting cases before the board. 
(c)  All parties shall have an opportunity to present evidence and argument on all issues involved, to conduct cross-examination and submit rebuttal evidence, and to be represented by counsel. When appropriate, the general public may be given an opportunity to present oral or written communications. If the agency proposes to consider such material, then all parties shall be given an opportunity to cross-examination or challenge or rebut it. The board may consider any evidence, including evidence of the general reputation of the place or premises. All testimony shall be under oath and shall be recorded. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings. Orders of the board shall be based on competent and substantial evidence. 
(d)  After considering all evidence, the board may declare the place or premises to be a public nuisance as defined in section 2-120 and may enter an order immediately prohibiting: 
(1)  The maintaining of the nuisance; 
(2)  The operating or maintaining of the place or premises; or 
(3)  The conduct, operation, or maintenance of any business or activity on the premises which is conducive to such nuisance. 
All orders of the board shall be, by motion, approved by a majority of those members present and voting, except that at least four members of the board must vote in order for the action to be official. 
(e)  An order entered under subsection (c) shall expire after one year or at such earlier time as stated in the order. The board shall retain jurisdiction to modify its order prior to the expiration of such orders. 
(f)  The board or city may bring a complaint under F.S. § 60.05, seeking a permanent injunction against any public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 3, 3-27-00) 
Sec. 2-124. - Appeals. 
    An aggrieved party, including the city administration, may appeal a final administrative order of the nuisance abatement board to the circuit court of the first judicial circuit. Such appeal shall be limited to appellate review of the record created before the board. An appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the date of the written order appealed from. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 3, 3-27-00) 
Sec. 2-125. - Sue to enjoin. 
    When any nuisance, as defined in F.S. § 823.05, exists, the city attorney or any citizen of the county may sue in the name of the state on his relation to enjoin the nuisance, the person or persons maintaining it, and the owner or agent of the building or ground on which the nuisance exists. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 3, 3-27-00) 
Sec. 2-126. - Additional rights. 
    This article does not restrict the right of any person to proceed under F.S. § 60.05, against any public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 3, 3-27-00) 
Sec. 2-127. - Fines and assessment of costs and attorney fees. 
(a)  In addition to having authority to enter the order provided in section 2-123, the drug nuisance abatement board shall also have the authority to enter an order following the hearing conducted as provided in section 2-123 providing for the following: 
(1)  Fines not to exceed $250.00 per day against the owner of the property where a public nuisance is declared to exist so long as the public nuisance continues to exist. 
(2)  Requiring the owner of the property on which the public nuisance is declared to exist to pay reasonable attorney fees and costs incurred by the board in investigations of and hearings on public nuisances. 
(3)  Continuing the jurisdiction of the board over the property which has been declared a public nuisance for a period of one year. 
(4)  Fines not to exceed $500.00 per day against the owner of the property where a recurring public nuisance is declared to exist so long as the public nuisance continues to exist. 
(b)  A certified copy of any order imposing a fine or assessing costs and attorney fees may be recorded in the public records of the county, and upon such recording shall become a lien against the property described in the order upon which the public nuisance is declared to exist. 
(c)  Any fines, costs and attorney fees assessed pursuant to the order shall be payable to the city, and the city shall be the proper party to foreclose the lien as provided in subparagraph (d) below if the fines, costs and attorney fees are not paid. 
(d)  If the fines, costs and attorney fees assessed pursuant to the order are not paid in full the city shall have the right to foreclose the lien created by the order and in such foreclosure action shall be entitled to recover its costs and reasonable attorney fees. 
(e)  No lien created pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be foreclosed on real property which is homestead property as defined in Section 4, Article X of the Constitution of the State of Florida. 
(f)  The total fines imposed pursuant to this section shall not exceed $7,500.00. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 3, 3-27-00) 
DIVISION 7. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 

Sec. 2-128. - Established. 
    There is hereby established a Crestview Historic Preservation Board (hereinafter referred to as the board) in order to carry forward the purposes of the National Historic Preservation Act, as amended in 1980 (Pub. Law 96-515); and such other purposes as may be created by ordinance or law. 
(Ord. No. 1067, § 2, 8-28-01) 
Sec. 2-129. - Membership and organization. 
(a)  Membership. 
(1)  The board shall consist of 11 members and two alternates to serve on the board in the absence of board members. In any meeting, where the city determines that a board member will not be present for a meeting, the alternate will be called. Of the first members appointed, six shall be appointed for two years; and five shall be appointed for three years and two alternates for three years. Thereafter all appointments shall be for three years or until their successors are appointed. The city council shall appoint two members each and the two alternates while the mayor will appoint one member. Members of the board may or may not be a resident of the city during his or her entire term. Appointments to fill any vacancy of the Crestview Historic Preservation Board shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term of office, and shall be made by the city council or mayor within 60 days from the date of the vacancy. If any member fails to attend two of three successive meetings without cause and without prior approval of the chairperson, the board shall declare the member's office vacant, and the city council or mayor shall promptly fill such vacancy. The members shall serve in accordance with city ordinances and may be removed for cause. 
(2)  Appointments shall be made on the basis of experience or interest in the subject matter jurisdiction of the board. Whenever possible, the membership shall include three persons who are educated or who practice in one of the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archeology or related disciplines. If the city council or mayor is unable to find persons within those fields who are eligible and willing to serve on the board, then it shall make a finding to that effect and appoint members from the general public with other special interests or expertise. 
(b)  Organization. 
(1)  The board shall annually elect a chairperson, and one or more vice chairpersons from among its members as provided in its rules. The officers shall have such duties of chairing the meetings and other responsibilities as are assigned to them by the rules of the board. The administrative services department shall provide staff and secretarial support. 
(2)  The board may, from time to time, authorize the establishment of task forces to carry out specialized and detailed projects within the scope of its purposes; any task force may include persons who are not members of the board. 
(3)  The city shall furnish the board with administrative support, including fiscal support, subject to budgetary approval by the city council, sufficient to undertake the requirements of a certified local government and carry out delegated responsibilities 
(Ord. No. 1067, § 2, 8-28-01; Ord. No. 1177, § 2, 5-9-05) 
Sec. 2-130. - Powers and duties. 
    The board shall have the following powers and duties within the geographical boundaries of the city, which shall be complimentary to and carried out in accordance with, the responsibility of the state historic preservation officer as described in 36 C.F.R. 61.4(b), as may be amended from time to time: 
(1)  To meet at regular intervals but not less than four times per year. 
(2)  To direct, maintain and periodically update surveys and an inventory of historic buildings, areas, and archaeological sites in the city, which shall be compatible with the Florida Master Site File, and to plan for their preservation; copies of the final works products of such survey and inventory shall be forwarded to the state historic preservation office; 
(3)  To identify potential landmarks and potential landmark sites and to make recommendations to the city council as to whether those potential landmarks, and landmark sites should be officially designated as landmark and landmark sites; 
(4)  To recommend that the city council designate specified areas as historic districts and to identify which structures should be considered as contributing structures; 
(5)  To maintain and periodically update a detailed inventory of the designated historic districts, landmarks, and landmark sites within the city and a detailed inventory of potential landmarks and landmark sites, which inventories shall be open to the public for review and provided to the state historic preservation officer whenever updated; 
(6)  To develop specific guidelines for the alteration, construction, relocation or removal of, designated property; 
(7)  To promulgate standards for architectural review which are consistent with standards for rehabilitation which have been or may be established from time to time by the United States Secretary of the Interior; 
(8)  To review all requests for alteration, construction, demolition, relocation or removal of landmarks, landmark sites, and property in historic districts, and approve or deny applications for certificate of appropriateness for alteration, construction, demolition, relocation or removal of landmarks, landmark sites, and property in historic districts; 
(9)  To work with and advise the federal and state governments and other departments or boards of city government; 
(10)  To advise and assist property owners and other persons and groups including neighborhood organizations on physical and financial aspects of preservation, renovation, rehabilitation, and reuse and to advise and assist property owners in becoming eligible for federal and state tax incentives; 
(11)  To cooperate with and enlist the assistance of persons, organizations, corporations, foundations, and public agencies in matters involving historic preservation, renovation, rehabilitation and reuse; 
(12)  To initiate plans for the preservation and rehabilitation of individual historic buildings; 
(13)  To undertake public information programs including the preparation of publications and the placing of historic markers; 
(14)  To make recommendations to the city council concerning the acquisition of or acceptance of developmental rights, facade easements, the imposition of other restrictions and the negotiation of historical property contracts for the purposes of historic preservation; 
(15)  To review buildings which are owned by the city and which are at least 50 years old and considered for surplus by the city to determine their historical or architectural significance prior to sale by the city and to make recommendations concerning the disposition of properties considered to have historical or architectural significance; 
(16)  To review proposed capital improvement projects of the city and its independent agencies, or their agents or contractors, costing in excess of $25,000.00 in a historic district or affecting a designated landmark or landmark site. Such review shall be made annually during the city council's normal budgetary process, and the board shall advise the council of any concerns or objections that it may have about such projects. Capital improvement projects for the maintenance of existing facilities are excepted from this requirement; 
(17)  To conduct public hearings to consider historic preservation issues, the designation of landmarks, landmark sites, and historic districts, applications for certificate of appropriateness and nominations to the National Register of Historic Places; 
(18)  To make such rules and regulations as it deems necessary for the administration of ordinances for which it is responsible; 
(19)  To undertake any other action or activity necessary or appropriate to the implementation of its powers and duties or to the implementation of the purpose of this division and other provisions of the city code; 
(20)  To seek and retain services and expertise on proposals or matters requiring evaluation by a professional of a discipline not represented on the board; 
(21)  To appoint a representative from the board to attend pertinent informational or educational meetings, workshops and conferences; and 
(22)  To participate in survey and planning activities of the city as related to the certified local government designation. 
(Ord. No. 1067, § 2, 8-28-01) 
Secs. 2-131-2-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Appointment of license inspector, § 18-39; pensions and retirement, ch. 62; general employees' retirement plan, § 62-1. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-136. - Withholding records from successor. 
    If any officer of the city, after the expiration of the time for which he may have been appointed or elected, or in case of his death, his executors and administrators, or the person in possession thereof, shall wilfully and unlawfully withhold or detain from his successors the records, papers, documents or other writings appertaining and belonging to his office, or mutilate, destroy, take away, or otherwise prevent the complete possession by his successors of the records, documents, papers or other writings, he shall be punished as provided by section 1-11. 
(Code 1983, § 2-117) 
Sec. 2-137. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  No officer shall bid for, or enter into, or be in any manner interested in any contract for city work for which the officer or board is or may be a party to the letting. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided by section 1-11. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the mayor, council or other city officer to purchase supplies, goods or materials for public use from any firm or corporation in which any such official or officer is interested, nor shall the city pay for such supplies, goods or materials so purchased. Provided, that no official aforesaid who shall have recorded his vote against such illegal purchase, or who shall have been absent at the taking of the vote thereon, shall be convicted of a violation of this subsection. 
(Code 1983, § 2-118) 
State Law reference- Conflict of interest, F.S. § 112.313. 
Sec. 2-138. - Falsification, etc., of records. 
    If any mayor, clerk or other public officer of the city or any person whatsoever shall steal, embezzle, alter, corruptly withdraw, falsify or avoid any record, process, gift, charter, grant, conveyance or contract, or any other paper filed in any judicial proceeding in any court of the city, or shall knowingly and wilfully take off, discharge or conceal any issue, forfeited recognizance, or other forfeiture, or other paper abovementioned, or shall forge, deface, or falsify any document or instrument recorded or filed in any court, or any registry, acknowledgment or certificate, or shall fraudulently alter, deface or falsify any minutes, documents, books or any proceedings whatever of or belonging to any public office within the city, or if any person shall cause or procure any of the offenses aforesaid to be committed, or be in anywise concerned therein, the person so offending shall be punished as provided by section 1-11. In any prosecution under this section, it shall not be necessary to prove the ownership or value of any paper or instrument involved. 
(Code 1983, § 2-119) 
State Law reference- Falsifying public records, F.S. §§ 831.01 and 839.13. 
Secs. 2-139-2-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 866, § 2, adopted Feb. 26, 1996, repealed former div. 2, §§ 2-151-2-161, which pertained to similar subject matter. Section 3 of said ordinance added a new div. 2, §§ 2-151-2-162, to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 2-151. - Title and purpose. 
    The title of this division shall be known as the 1996 pay plan. The purpose of this division is to revise the overall pay plan of the city for exempt and nonexempt employees except those employees of a union shall be treated separately via the collective bargaining process. This division provides definitions and authorizes separate pay tables with incremented steps for exempt and nonexempt employees; reclassification by job titles to conform with the provisions of the revised classification plan; reclassification of all categories of employees to match revised job titles and pay plan schedules; implementation of a "save pay" clause into the pay plan; establishment of a council review of the pay plan beginning October 1, 1999 and every three years thereafter; requirement of initial employment and reemployment to be compensated as set forth in the personnel manual; creation of classification and pay manuals; and amendment of the personnel manual to accommodate the administrative tenets of the 1996 pay plan. 
(Ord. No. 866, § 3, 2-26-96; Ord. No. 1066, § 2, 8-28-01; Ord. No. 1176, § 2, 5-9-05) 
Sec. 2-152. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the content clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Appointing authority means official, officer or person which has the authority under the laws of the city to make appointments or hire to positions within the city work force. The appointing authority shall be construed to mean mayor, city council, city clerk or department head. 
    Appointment means the designation of an individual by the mayor, city council, city clerk or department head to become an employee of the city. 
    Classification manual means an administrative process containing personnel instructions used by the city to finalize classification and reclassification of manpower positions of the city. This manual may be incorporated into the Crestview Personnel Manual for administrative expediency. 
    Classification plan means a plan providing the process of classifying or reclassifying job titles into authorized manpower positions reflected on the manning document. 
    Compensatory time means time off allowed in lieu of overtime pay. 
    Demotion means the reduction in pay and responsibilities of an employee based on evaluation of job performance or reduction in manpower authorization. 
    Employment commitment means a period of time an employee agrees to serve the city in return for payment of tuition, educational or training expenses paid by the city on behalf of an employee. 
    Exempt employee means an employee as defined in the Fair Labor Standards Act. 
    Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) means a federal law enacted in 1938 and amended in 1966 and 1974 to include government employees under the scope of the law. 
    Fair Labor Standards Handbook means a publication divided into four major components that contain current developments, textual material, appendices and multiple entry index portions to administer the tenets of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA). 
    Job description means a written description of tasks and functions for an authorized manpower position. 
    Manning document means a listing of manpower authorizations, by department or function, that represents funded manpower identification positions approved within the annual budget. 
    Manpower authorization means a personnel authorization of a job or position for exempt or nonexempt employees created and funded by the city council. 
    Merit pay increase means an advancement in pay of an employee based upon a display of merit in performance of duties. 
    Nonexempt employee means a nonexempt employee as defined in the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA). 
    Pay means a salary or wages paid to officials and employees of the city. 
    Pay grade means a numerical designation by two digits that equate to a salary range. The range may contain incremental steps that equate to additional compensation based on a tenure factor, e.g., number of years of service completed, etc. 
    Pay manual means an administrative document containing instructions used by the city to finalize transactions relative to pay matters. This manual may be incorporated into the Crestview Personnel Manual for administrative expediency. 
    Pay period means a period of time utilized by accounting and finance to computate payroll. Payroll period commences on Wednesday and ends on Tuesday of the following week. 
    Pay plan means a schedule or table of compensation for all job classifications. 
    Pay table means a numerical display of pay grades and steps located in the Crestview Personnel Manual. 
    Personnel office means an office designated within city hall to conduct personnel, pay and administrative transactions for the management and support of city workers. 
    Promotion means an increase in responsibility or new duties with pay authorized commensurate with new responsibilities or new duties. A change in manpower authorization may or may not occur on the manning document. 
    Regular pay means designated pay awarded to the employee through a salary or wage per hour within a step authorization and pay grade. 
    Salary incentive program for law enforcement officers means compensation for educational achievements as set forth in F.S. ch. 943 and F.A.C. in force by the state department of law enforcement. 
    Supplemental compensation for exempt employees means payment to department heads as set forth in the Fair Labor Standards Act. 
    Supplemental compensation for firefighters means payment for educational achievement as set forth in F.S. ch. 633. 
    Time sheet means a payroll listing of employees by department submitted weekly to accounting and finance indicating attendance data. 
    Union means the Crestview Professional Firefighters Association, Local 4046, 1AFF recognized by the City of Crestview. 
(Ord. No. 866, § 3, 2-26-96; Ord. No. 1066, § 2, 8-28-01; Ord. No. 1176, § 3, 5-9-05) 
Sec. 2-153. - Nonexempt employees. 
    The 1996 pay plan for nonexempt employees (also known as wage per hour employees) consists of a schedule of wage grades, one of which is assigned to each job classification contained in the classification plan, indicating incremental steps and a minimum and maximum wage. The schedule consists of 30 pay grades numbered one through 30. Within each grade there are 30 incremental steps. In-step pay increases are earned after each year of creditable service, until the employee reaches the maximum wage for that grade (step 30). Each increment increase is three percent. Pay tables may be printed in the city personnel manual and be revised by a council-directed resolution as needed. 
(Ord. No. 866, § 3, 2-26-96; Ord. No. 1066, § 2, 8-28-01) 
Sec. 2-154. - Exempt employees. 
    The 1996 pay plan for exempt employees (also known as salaried employees) consists of a schedule of salary grades, one of which is assigned to each job classification in the classification plan, indicating incremental steps and a minimum and maximum salary. The plan consists of ten pay grades (A through J). Within each grade there are 20 incremental steps. In-step pay increases are earned after each year of creditable service. Each increment increase is three percent. Pay tables may be printed in the city personnel manual and be revised by a council-directed resolution as needed. 
(Ord. No. 866, § 3, 2-26-96; Ord. No. 1066, § 2, 8-28-01) 
Sec. 2-155. - Reclassifications; correction of documents. 
    Employees identified within the 1996 pay plan shall be reclassified according to the new pay grades and job titles authorized within the plan. Personnel records, manning documents, classification lists and alphabetical rosters shall be corrected to reflect new pay and personnel data at the earliest possible date after enactment of this division. 
(Ord. No. 866, § 3, 2-26-96) 
Sec. 2-156. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1176, § 4, adopted May 9, 2005, amended the Code by repealing former § 2-156 in its entirety. Former § 2-156 pertained to the creation and purpose of the personnel classification board; and derived from Ord. No. 866, adopted February 26, 1996; and Ord. No. 1066, adopted August 28, 2001. 
Sec. 2-157. - Initial employment; pay plan review. 
    All initial employment will be compensated at the first incremental step of the pay grade reflected on the manning document for the advertised job unless that individual possesses special expertise or experience or background then he or she may be hired at step 3 or less. Beginning October 1, 1999, and every three years thereafter the city council shall review the 1996 pay plan to ensure all classifications of employees are compensated in a fair and equitable manner. 
(Ord. No. 866, § 3, 2-26-96; Ord. No. 1066, § 2, 8-28-01) 
Sec. 2-158. - Save pay provision. 
    A save pay provision is hereby granted whereby the employee shall not lose compensation authorized at the time of the city-wide reclassification change. In certain cases, exempt and nonexempt employees may receive additional compensation as a result of the reclassification transactions effective by this division. 
(Ord. No. 866, § 3, 2-26-96) 
Sec. 2-159. - Leave of absence. 
    Employees granted extended or other leave without pay, such as maternity leave, shall upon their return be entitled to receive compensation at the grade and step within the pay table which they were receiving at the time of their beginning such leave or as a result of the 1996 reclassification. Time within the step shall resume as of the date of beginning such leave. 
(Ord. No. 866, § 3, 2-26-96) 
Sec. 2-160. - Accumulated annual leave. 
    Employees who are separated from the service of the city in good standing by retirement, resignation, layoff or other circumstances shall be paid for their accumulated annual leave. 
(Ord. No. 866, § 3, 2-26-96) 
Sec. 2-161. - Career incentive pay; supplemental compensation. 
    Career incentive pay will be paid to police department personnel as authorized by state law. Certificates of course completion shall be submitted to accounting and finance division. Supplemental compensation will be paid monthly to firefighters who qualify under F.S. ch. 633. Eligibility documentation shall be provided to accounting and finance division to substantiate payment. 
(Ord. No. 866, § 3, 2-26-96) 
Sec. 2-162. - Pay manual and classification manual established. 
    A pay manual and classification manual shall be staffed, printed and distributed to city departments relative to all pay and classification matters and may be incorporated into the Crestview Personnel Manual. The city council may revise, alter or amend the manuals by resolution when warranted. The office of the city clerk is designated as office of primary responsibility for the manuals. 
(Ord. No. 866, § 3, 2-26-96) 
Sec. 2-163. - Supplemental pay-Exempt employees. 
    The city council may grant supplemental compensation to exempt employees pursuant to tenets of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA). 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 2, 8-28-01) 
Sec. 2-164. - Union employees. 
    Employees who are members of the Crestview Professional Firefighters Association, Local 4046, 1AFF shall be subject to the pay tables adopted in the 1996 pay plan and any changes thereafter shall not be governed by provisions of this ordinance but shall be governed exclusively by the collective bargaining process. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 2, 8-28-01) 
Secs. 2-165-2-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY CLERK[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Charter reference- Powers and duties of city clerk, § 13. 

Sec. 2-171. - Duties. 
(a)  In addition to the duties in the Charter, the city clerk is hereby directed to perform special duties related to monthly administrative and financial reports and transactions in the administration of a Farmers Home Administration loan and grant during the construction cycle of a multiple purpose sewer treatment facility. 
(b)  The city clerk is hereby granted a lump sum payment in the amount of $2,000; payable on demand in exchange for performing special duties associated with the administration of a Farmers Home Administration loan and grant during the construction cycle of a multiple purpose sewer treatment facility. 
(Ord. No. 793, §§ 2, 3, 4-26-93) 
Secs. 2-172-2-179. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CITY MANAGER 

Sec. 2-180. - City manager authority over city personnel. 
    In addition to the authority, duties and obligations specified in the city Charter, and except as may be inconsistent with the charter and/or adopted ordinances and policies of the city, the city manager shall: 
(1)  Determine the employment qualifications of the department heads and otherwise handle all aspects of the filling of vacancies in the positions of the department heads, provided that their appointment shall be by majority vote of the city council. 
(2)  Have complete and full authority acting on behalf of the city council over each and every department, department head and employee of the city, and full authority over all operations of the city. However, when any action is required by the charter or ordinances on the part of the city council, such action may be taken by the city manager subject to the confirmation by the city council in accordance with the Charter or ordinance. 
(3)  Have the authority to discipline, demote, suspend and/or remove any department head or employee in a manner consistent with the adopted ordinances and personnel policies of the city. The city manager may authorize any director or other administrative officer who is subject to the city manager's direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office or agency. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § II, 1-14-19) 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Taxation, ch. 82. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to enact provisions relative to public protection, etc., F.S. § 166.021(1). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-181-2-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 885, § 2, adopted May 28, 1996, repealed former div. 2, §§ 2-191, 2-192, which pertained to budget procedures. 

Secs. 2-191-2-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PURCHASES 

Sec. 2-201. - Requirements and procedures generally. 
(a)  Clerk to act as purchasing agent. The clerk or his designated agent shall act as purchasing agent of the city, and any purchases made without his express authorization or requisition shall be null and void and not a valid obligation against the city. 
(b)  Available appropriation balance required prior to furnishing supplies. The purchasing agent shall not furnish any supplies to any department unless there is to the credit of such department an available appropriation balance in excess of all unpaid obligations sufficient to pay for such supplies. 
(c)  Purchasing manual; policies and practices. The city council shall adopt by resolution, a purchasing manual to be used by all departments in the purchase and acquisition of goods and services. The manual shall contain policies, procedures and practices that govern all facets of procurement made on behalf of the city. The manual content shall also include disposition of surplus property and other methods of procurement practices. Annually the contents of the manual shall be revised on as needed basis to accommodate changes in state or local law. 
(Code 1983, § 2-176; Ord. No. 846, § 2, 10-10-94; Ord. No. 968, § 2, 11-23-98) 
Secs. 2-202-2-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ADMINISTRATIVE AND RECORDKEEPING PROCEDURES FOR IMPOSITION OF LIENS 

Sec. 2-211. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to establish an administrative and recordkeeping procedure for the imposition of liens by the city. 
(Code 1983, § 2-191) 
Sec. 2-212. - Imposition of lien by council resolution. 
(a)  Generally. Whenever the city has incurred expense that is incidental to privately owned real property for repair or demolition of an unsafe building, removal of litter, or abatement of a nuisance, when authorized in the discretion of the city council, the imposition of a lien therefor and thereon may be imposed, which shall be by the adoption of a resolution by the city council. 
(b)  Resolution content. The resolution imposing a lien shall contain: 
(1)  The authority for the lien imposition; 
(2)  The legal description of the subject real property; 
(3)  The name of each title holder of record as of the date notice of the adoption of the proposed resolution is mailed, according to the records of the property appraiser of the county; and 
(4)  The amount of the lien, itemized as to charges and costs. 
(Code 1983, § 2-192) 
Sec. 2-213. - Notice to title holders of record. 
    Notice of the meeting at which the city council will consider a resolution imposing a lien shall be posted on the subject real property and mailed, certified mail, with a return receipt requested, to each title holder of record according to the records of the property appraiser of the county on the date the notice is mailed. The notice shall be posted and mailed on or before 15 days prior to the date of consideration of the resolution by the city council, and shall have attached thereto a copy of the proposed resolution. 
(Code 1983, § 2-193) 
Sec. 2-214. - Lien book. 
(a)  Generally. The city clerk shall prepare and keep a book for the purpose of recording all liens assessed by the city. The book shall be labeled the "lien book." 
(b)  Content and index. The lien book shall contain a copy of each city council resolution imposing a lien and an alphabetical index thereof shall be maintained showing each title holder of record, as contained in the resolution. 
(Code 1983, § 2-194) 
Sec. 2-215. - Service of notice on title holder of record. 
    Upon entry of the lien into the lien book, a copy of the city council resolution imposing the lien shall be mailed, certified mail, with a return receipt requested, to each title holder of record, as contained in the resolution. 
(Code 1983, § 2-195) 
Sec. 2-216. - Finality and priority of lien. 
    The lien shall be effective and final against the subject real property from the time of its entry into the lien book. Liens in the lien book shall take priority as of the time of the entry therein and shall constitute a special assessment and remain a lien equal in rank and dignity to a lien of the city for ad valorem taxes and superior in rank and dignity to all other liens, encumbrances, titles and claims in, to or against the real property involved. 
(Code 1983, § 2-196) 
Sec. 2-217. - Notice of and recordation of lien in county records. 
    Upon entry of the lien into the lien book, the city clerk shall cause certified copies of the city council resolution imposing the lien to be provided to the county tax collector and recorded in the public records of the county. 
(Code 1983, § 2-197) 
Sec. 2-218. - Imposition of costs. 
    Posting, recording and other costs incurred in any lien action shall also be due upon the lien, and the expense thereof shall be shown in the lien book. 
(Code 1983, § 2-198) 
Sec. 2-219. - Interest on lien. 
    From the date of entry of the lien in the lien book, the amount of the lien, including posting, recording and other costs, shall be due together with interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum. 
(Code 1983, § 2-199) 
Sec. 2-220. - Enforcement of lien. 
    If unsatisfied after the expiration of one year's time from the date of entry of the lien in the lien book, foreclosure proceedings shall be instituted and prosecuted under F.S. ch. 173. The city shall be entitled to recover its costs of such suit and a reasonable attorney's fee, which both shall be included in the judgment. Once the lien process has been satisfied, the city shall exercise administrative procedures for public records purposes as necessary. 
(Code 1983, § 2-200) 
Secs. 2-221-2-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CITY PROPERTY 

Sec. 2-241. - Authority. 
    The authority for enactment of this article is section 2 of the Charter and F.S. § 166.041. 
(Ord. No. 765, § 1, 5-26-92) 
Sec. 2-242. - Exchange of city-owned property. 
    Whenever, in the opinion of the city council, the city holds and possesses any real property not needed for city purposes and such property may be to the best interest of the city exchanged for other real property which the city may desire to acquire for city purposes, the city council is authorized and empowered to make such an exchange. Provided however, before any exchange of such property shall be effected, a notice setting forth the terms and conditions of any such exchange of property shall be first published, once a week for at least two weeks, in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city, before the adoption by the city council of an ordinance authorizing the exchange of properties. 
(Ord. No. 765, § 2, 5-26-92) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; authority to issue orders during a civil emergency, § 22-5; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 54; possession of beer, wine, alcoholic beverages, nonprescription drugs, marijuana, etc., prohibited in, upon or adjacent to public or city parks or recreation areas, § 54-4; restrictions on pets, horses or saddle animals in public parks, § 58-1. 
State Law reference- Alcoholic beverages, F.S. § 561.01 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bona fide restaurant is a premises that holds itself out to be primarily a restaurant, advertises as a full service restaurant, offers a complete menu as opposed to snacks or fast food, and meets all of the requirements of Rule 61A-3.0141, F.A.C., except for the requirement that 51 percent of the gross proceeds come from food and non-alcoholic beverages. 
    Bottle club means a commercial establishment operated for a profit, whether or not a profit is actually made, wherein patrons consume alcoholic beverages which are brought onto the premises and not sold or supplied to the patrons by the establishment, whether the patrons bring in and maintain custody of their own alcoholic beverages or surrender custody to the establishment for dispensing on the premises, and which is located in a building or other enclosed permanent structure. This definition does not apply to: 
(1)  Sporting facilities where events sanctioned by nationally recognized regulatory athletic or sports associations are held; 
(2)  Bona fide restaurants licensed by the division of hotels and restaurants of the department of business regulation, whose primary business is the service of full course meals; or 
(3)  Hotels and motels licensed by the division of hotels and restaurants of the department of business regulation. 
    Consideration means any of the following: 
(1)  The payment of or obligation to pay any cover charge, entrance fee, dues, or commission for the right or privilege to enter or remain upon the premises; 
(2)  The payment or obligation to pay for ice, nonalcoholic mixes or other nonalcoholic liquids used in connection with alcoholic beverage drinks; 
(3)  The payment or obligation to pay for use of glassware or other containers for the consumption of alcoholic beverage drinks; 
(4)  The payment or obligation to pay for food; 
(5)  The payment or obligation to pay for entertainment of any kind, whether live, recorded, taped or on film; or 
(6)  The payment or obligation to pay for any combination of the foregoing. 
    Facility means a place, a structure, a building or a space within a building, that has been designed, created, built, installed, or set aside for a particular function or activity. (i.e. health-care facility; a weight room (a facility) in a sports center (a facility)). The three uses of the word within chapter 6 are defined as follows: 
(1)  Church facility means a place of public assemble, an area, structure(s), building(s) or space within a building, that has been provided for the purpose of worship. 
(2)  School facility means a place of public assemble, an area, structure(s), building(s) or space within a building, for the purpose of instruction, teaching, learning, educating, and training of preschool, primary, middle or secondary school. 
(3)  City-owned facility means a public assemble grounds, structure, a building or a space within a building, that is owned and maintained by the city and provided to public for event purposes. See city Code of Ordinances, chapter 58, Parks and Recreation, section 58-1, Use regulations, (2) Alcoholic beverages for further information. 
    Mainstreet area commercial business district means all parcels of property within phase I of the city community redevelopment area located within the following boundaries: Bounded on the north by Cedar Avenue and bounded on the northeast by East James Lee Blvd.; bounded on the west by Spring Street, bounded on the east by Ferdon Blvd; and bounded on the south by Martin Luther King Jr. Avenue. 
    Non-profit organization means an officially registered non-profit organization with a non-profit identification number. 
    Private club means any place or establishment licensed or required to be licensed pursuant to F.S. § 565.02(4). 
    Sale means any transfer of liquor, wine or beer or other alcoholic beverages for a consideration, and any gift of liquor, wine or beer in connection with or as a part of a transfer of property other than liquor, beer, wine, or other alcoholic beverages for a consideration. 
    Special event means an event use or activities such as art shows, car shows, festivals, galas, reunions, concerts, block parties, parades and fairs. 
    Vendor means any person who keeps for sale, sells or dispenses any alcoholic beverages, in any quantity, in any place of business licensed by the state for the sale of alcoholic beverages, or any person who holds a license from the state for the sale of alcoholic beverages, including the owner, manufacturer, operator, proprietor or licensee, or the servant, agent or the employee of any of the foregoing. 
(Code 1983, § 3-1; Ord. No. 1113, § 2, 5-28-03; Ord. No. 16-11, § II, 11-28-16) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Definitions, F.S. § 561.01. 
Sec. 6-2. - Sale to or consumption by certain persons prohibited. 
    No vendor, bottle club, or private club shall sell, furnish or deliver, or permit any person in his employ to sell, furnish or deliver, or allow the consumption on the premises of, any alcoholic beverages in any quantity to or by any person who is intoxicated or to an habitual drunkard known to him, or of whose intemperate habits such vendor, bottle club, or private club has been notified in writing against the selling, furnishing or allowing consumption of such alcoholic beverages, by the wife, child, father, mother, brother or sister of such habitual drunkard. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2) 
State Law reference- Habitual drunkards, F.S. § 562.50. 
Sec. 6-3. - Certain persons excluded from premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any vendor of alcoholic beverages, bottle club, or private club to allow, suffer or permit any intoxicated person or habitual drunkard to enter or remain in any establishment for which such vendor, private club or bottle club holds a license or certificate of compliance. 
(Code 1983, § 3-3) 
Sec. 6-4. - Illicit or moonshine whiskey-Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or transport any illicit liquor still or stilling apparatus, or any mash, wort, wash, or other fermented liquids capable of being distilled or manufactured into an alcoholic beverage containing more than one percent of alcohol by weight, or any alcoholic beverage, commonly known and referred to as "moonshine whiskey," within the corporate limits of the city, except as provided in F.S. § 562.165, concerning production of beer or wine for personal use. 
(Code 1983, § 3-4) 
Sec. 6-5. - Same-Seizure and forfeiture. 
    Any vehicle, vessel, aircraft or any animal used in the transportation or removal of, or for the deposit or concealment of, any illicit liquor still or stilling apparatus or any mash, wort, wash, or other fermented liquids capable of being distilled or manufactured into an alcoholic beverage containing more than one percent of alcohol by weight, or any alcoholic beverage, commonly known and referred to as "moonshine whiskey," where seized within the city, shall be forfeited to the city, as is authorized and provided for by the general state law in such case, and all sums received therefrom shall go into the general operating fund of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 3-5) 
State Law reference- Contraband forfeiture acts, F.S. §§ 562.27 and 932.701 et seq. 
Sec. 6-6. - Hours of sale. 
    No alcoholic beverages of any kind shall be sold, consumed, served or permitted to be served or consumed in any establishment holding a license under the division of alcoholic beverages and tobacco of the department of business and professional regulation within the corporate limits of the city, except during the time and hours as follows: 
(1)  Monday through Saturday, 7:00 a.m. until 4:00 a.m. the following morning. 
(2)  Sunday, 1:00 p.m. until 4:00 a.m. the following morning, except that in eating places and restaurants that regularly serve full meals 10:00 a.m. until 4:00 a.m. the following morning. 
(Code 1983, § 3-6; Ord. No. 1468, § 1, 8-22-11) 
Sec. 6-7. - Distance restrictions for bottle clubs, etc.; certificates of compliance. 
(a)  Distance from church. It shall be unlawful for any bottle club or private club to operate, or for any vendor to barter, sell, give away, exchange or otherwise dispose of in the nature of a gift or exchange alcoholic and intoxicating liquors for consumption on the premises where sold, bartered, exchanged, given away or disposed of within 500 feet of any church; except a bona fide restaurant may serve alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises providing the owner of the property on which the church is located consents in writing to the issuance of a certificate of compliance. The distance shall be determined by measuring a radius from the main public entrance of the place or establishment. If any portion of a parcel of land in us as a church facility lies within such radius, then the church shall be deemed to be within such distance. The mainstreet area commercial business district is exempt from these provisions. 
(b)  Distance from school. It shall be unlawful for any bottle club or private club to operate, or for any vendor to barter, sell, give away, exchange or otherwise dispose of in the nature of a gift or exchange alcoholic and intoxicating liquors for consumption on the premises where sold, bartered, exchanged, given away or disposed of within 500 feet of any school. The distance shall be determined by measuring a radius from the main public entrance of the place or establishment. If any portion of a parcel of land in use as a school facility lies within such radius, then the school shall be deemed to be within such distance. The mainstreet area commercial business district is exempt from these provisions. 
(c)  Distance from dwelling or residence; exception. It shall be unlawful for any bottle club or private club to operate, or for any vendor to barter, sell, give away, exchange or otherwise dispose of in the nature of a gift or exchange alcoholic and intoxicating liquors for consumption on the premises where sold, bartered, exchanged, given away or disposed of within 300 feet of any parcel of property containing a dwelling or residence; unless two-thirds of the owners of property within such 300 feet consent in writing to the issuance of a certificate of compliance. The distance shall be determined by measuring a radius from the main public entrance of the place or establishment. If any portion of a parcel of land in use as a dwelling or residence lies within such radius, then the dwelling or residence shall be deemed to be within such distance. This subsection shall not apply to those establishments which meet the criteria of F.S. § 561.20(2). The mainstreet area commercial business district is exempt from these provisions. 
(d)  Distance from similar establishments. It shall be unlawful for any bottle club or private club to operate, or for any vendor to barter, sell, give away, exchange or otherwise dispose of in the nature of a gift or exchange alcoholic and intoxicating liquors for consumption on the premises where sold, bartered, exchanged, given away or disposed of within 500 feet of any other such establishment designated unless located in the Mainstreet Area Commercial Business District; however, this subsection shall not apply to those establishments which meet the criteria of F.S. § 561.20(2). This subsection shall also not apply to establishments the primary business of which is selling food for consumption on the premises but which also serve alcoholic and intoxicating liquors for consumption with the food even though these establishments don't meet the criteria of F.S. § 561.20(2). The distance shall be determined by measuring a radius from the main public entrance of the place or establishment. If any portion of a parcel of land proposed for use as a new establishment lies within such radius, then the new establishment shall be deemed to be within such distance. 
(e)  Certificate of compliance-Required. It shall be unlawful to sell, or offer to keep for sale, alcoholic beverages in any place or establishment, including a private club or bottle club, for which a certificate of compliance with the provisions of this chapter has not been issued. It shall also be unlawful for a bottle club to operate at any location for which a certificate of compliance has not been issued. It shall also be unlawful for a private club to serve or receive or keep for consumption on the premises, whether by members, nonresident guests or other persons, alcoholic beverages at any location for which a certificate of compliance has not been issued; provided, however, no certificate of compliance shall be required for any place or establishment lawfully operating prior to the date of this section. Certificates of compliance shall be required for any place or establishment seeking to operate after the date of this section. 
(1)  Special events held within the mainstreet area commercial business district are regulated under section 6-11. 
(f)  Same-Petition; administrative fee; approval procedure; issuance, denial or revocation; appeal; notice; hearing. Each petition for a certification of compliance shall be accompanied by an administrative fee of $50.00, and shall be approved by the growth management director and if the growth management director finds that the petition is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, then the growth management director shall submit the petition to the city council for approval. Notice of each decision of the city council to approve or disapprove a petition shall be filed immediately in the office of the city clerk and shall be announced and entered upon the minutes of the next regular meeting of the city council. The growth management director shall send notice of such decision to the petitioner, which notice shall inform the petitioner of the right of any person aggrieved by the decision of the city council to appeal to the circuit court within 30 days of rendition of the decision in question according the Florida Rules of Appellate Procedure. 
(g)  Reserved. 
(h)  Same-Revocation for noncompliance, public disturbance, public nuisance; penalties for violation. If any establishment operating pursuant to this chapter is determined to be a public nuisance pursuant to section 1-11 of this Code, or creates a public disturbance pursuant to section 30-3 of this Code, or fails to comply in any way with this chapter, the city council may revoke the certificate of compliance and such establishment shall cease to operate. Anyone who continues to operate such establishment and further violates the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 of the Code. 
(i)  Sale of beer or wine for off-premises consumption. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the sale of beer and wine for off-premises consumption as now prescribed by Florida Statutes. 
(j)  Exception. This section shall not apply to businesses already in operation on the effective date of the change in this section when the businesses are in compliance with this section as it existed prior to this amendment. However, if such use is discontinued for a period of 180 days or more, the provisions and prohibitions in this section shall apply. This shall not apply to prevent the continuance of use after the restoration of a building destroyed to the extent of 75 percent of its assessed value by fire, explosion, casualty, or act of God or public enemy. 
(Code 1983, § 3-7; Ord. No. 1034, § 2, 4-23-01; Ord. No. 1109, § 2, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 1113, § 3, 5-28-03; Ord. No. 16-11, § II, 11-28-16) 
Cross reference- Land use regulations, ch. 102. 
Sec. 6-8. - License subject to approval of council. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to barter, sell, give away, or dispose of any beer, wine, alcoholic liquors or beverages under this chapter or any other ordinance without first having made application to the city council on a suitable blank furnished him for such purpose, and such application first having been approved by the council. 
(Code 1983, § 3-8) 
Sec. 6-9. - Sale of untaxed beverages prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession, custody or control in the city any alcoholic or intoxicating liquors or beverages upon which the liquor and beverage tax of the state has not been paid. 
(Code 1983, § 3-9) 
State Law reference- Sale of untaxed beverages prohibited, F.S. § 562.01. 
Sec. 6-10. - Possession of open containers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to consume or possess open containers of beer, wine, alcoholic beverages or intoxicating liquors off the premises of an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages and within 500 feet of the premises which is licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages, or as a bottle club, except within closed buildings or on premises occupied solely by residential structures. The distance set forth herein shall be measured from the shortest route of ordinary pedestrian travel along public thoroughfares from the principal entrance of the establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages or bottle club to the location of the violation of this section. An approved special event held within the mainstreet area commercial business district is exempt from these provisions. 
(b)  Each establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages and each bottle club shall, at all times which such establishment is open to the public or is dispensing or selling alcoholic liquors, have located in the interior as well as the exterior portions of the building licensed for sale of such beverages at a location at which it can be readily seen and read by customers of the establishment a sign prominently displayed of a size at least one foot by two feet containing the following information: 
IT IS UNLAWFUL TO CONSUME OR POSSESS ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES WITHIN 500 FEET OF THIS ESTABLISHMENT AND OFF OF THESE LICENSES PERMITS-CITY ORD. 1023. 
(c)  The city shall prescribe by rule the location of the sign and the size of the lettering, following as its guidelines the criteria set forth above. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages or any bottle club to fail to comply with this section or for any person to sell, dispense or serve alcoholic beverages in any establishment which is not in compliance with this section. The requirements of this section shall then apply to all establishments dealing in alcoholic beverages and bottle clubs whether or not then licensed or licensed in the future. 
(Ord. No. 1023, § 2, 3-13-00; Ord. No. 16-11, § II, 11-28-16) 
Sec. 6-11. - Regulations and procedures regarding consumption of alcoholic beverages within the mainstreet area commercial business district; exemptions for special events; open containers at special events. 
    Subject to review and approval, the mainstreet area commercial business district is approved for special events that may include the consumption or sale of alcohol (subject to state permits and approval): 
(1)  Commercial groups. Shall be prohibited from applying for the use of the Mainstreet Area Commercial Business District that would include the consumption or sale of alcohol. 
(2)  Non-profit organizations. Officially registered non-profit organizations (strictly for private, noncommercial functions) may apply to the mayor's office for the use of the mainstreet area commercial business district for an event that includes the consumption or sale of alcohol. Application for this use shall be made as part of a special event which shall be subject to review and approval by the city council, division of parks and recreation, fire department and the city police department. Users must meet security staff requirements as defined by the city police department. 
(3)  City functions. Officially sponsored city functions are subject to the same terms and conditions as listed for non-profit organizations. 
(4)  A current alcoholic beverage license holder may request to temporarily extend their license premises for a period of up to three days and the dates of the extension must be consecutive. A division of alcohol beverages application for an extension of premises must be provided at time of the request. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have, consume or drink any alcoholic beverage, including but not limited to beer or wine, on any public street, highway, right-of-way or sidewalk, except within a confined and designated area of a city-permitted special event or city-owned facility, in accordance with all restrictions of a permit or written agreement and of this code. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have, consume or drink any alcoholic beverage, including but not limited to beer or wine, within the designated mainstreet area commercial business district, unless a special event permit has been approved and issued by the city. Alcoholic beverages may not be served or consumed in glass containers or bottles. 
(7)  Proof of a valid liquor license or state issued permit and insurance for the event shall be required. Approval is subject to the following requirements: 
a.  An appropriate liquor license which covers the serving of alcohol at the event; 
b.  Insurance for the event, including liquor liability coverage, showing the city as additional insured, and in the minimum amount of $1,000,000.00 in coverage; 
c.  A damage deposit as deemed by the Mayor for proposed use; 
d.  No alcoholic beverages may be served in glass containers or bottles; 
e.  A site plan that depicts the location of vendors, porta potties, trash receptacles, parking etc.; and 
f.  Other restrictions, such as off duty police officers and fire rescue on site, may be required in conjunction with the issuance of a special event permit. 
(8)  All applicants agree to be fully responsible for ensuring that event participants and organizers are not served excessive amounts of alcohol and do not endanger themselves. All applicants must define a method of control for location of sale, quantity of sale to individuals, individuals leaving the event with open containers and from bringing alcoholic beverages into the event. 
(9)  All applicants agree to be fully responsible for ensuring that no person under the legal drinking age can purchase or consume alcohol beverages at the event. Issuance of a wristband for persons legally of age to consume alcohol must be worn at all times during any event being held. 
(Ord. No. 16-11, § II, 11-28-16) 
Secs. 6-12-6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUDITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 820, §§ 3, 4, adopted Jan. 10, 1994, repealed former §§ 6-31, 6-32, which pertained to similar subject matter. Sections 5-7 of Ord. No. 820 added §§ 6-31-6-33 to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 6-31. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations and their derivations shall have the meaning herein given. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely director. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning, or for those so included, the meaning found in section 1-2 of the Code of Ordinances. 
    Establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages means any business establishment operating within the corporate limits of the city which is licensed to serve or sells alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
    Nudity or partial nudity means the showing of male or female genitals, anus, vulva, anal cleft, pubic area or buttocks or any parts thereof with less than opaque covering; the showing of female breasts with less than a full opaque covering of any part of the nipple or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid condition. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 5, 1-10-94) 
Sec. 6-32. - Nudity, sexual conduct prohibited. 
    No person: 
(1)  Shall expose to public view his or her genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage or any simulation thereof in an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages. 
(2)  If female, shall expose to public view any portion of her breast below the top of the areola or any simulation thereof in an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  Maintaining, owning or operating an establishment with a license to serve or sell alcoholic beverages, shall suffer or permit any person to expose to public view his or her genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage or simulation thereof within the establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages. 
(4)  Maintaining, owning or operating an establishment with a license to serve or sell alcoholic beverages, shall suffer or permit any female person to expose to public view any portion of her breasts below the top of the areola or any simulation thereof within the establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages. 
(5)  Shall engage in and no person maintaining, owning or operating an establishment with a license to serve or sell alcoholic beverages shall suffer or permit any sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, any sexual act which is prohibited by law, touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals or the simulation thereof within an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages. 
(6)  No person maintaining, owning or operating any business establishment with a license to serve or sell alcoholic beverages shall suffer or permit any male or female person, either for recreation or entertainment, to engage in dances or conduct involving nude or partially nude exposure as defined above or with sexual movements or expositions or other sexual implications and no person shall engage in, contribute to, or aid or assist in such conduct in any public place. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 6, 1-10-94) 
Sec. 6-33. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall upon conviction thereof be punished as provided by section 1-11 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 7, 1-10-94) 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1061, §§ 2, 3, adopted Aug. 26, 2002, repealed chapter 10, sections 10-1-10-28, 10-51-10-54, in its entirety and replaced it with a new chapter 10, sections 10-1-10-10, 10-12-10-23. Former chapter 10 pertained to similar material and derived from the Code of 1983, §§ 4-1-4-3, 4-5, 4-10-4-16; Ord. No. 759, § 2(4-31-4-50), adopted Feb. 10, 1992; and Ord. No. 969, § 1, adopted Dec. 14, 1998. 
Charter reference- Animals, § 7(g). 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; environment, ch. 30; health and sanitation, ch. 38; use of vehicles or animals without the permission of owner, § 54-2; pets and animals in city parks, § 58-1; solid waste and recycling services, ch. 70; dead animals, § 70-34; streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, ch. 74. 
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals, F.S. ch. 828; authority to enact animal control and animal cruelty ordinances, F.S. § 828.27. 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
    Animal means every living dumb creature. 
    Animal control authority means an entity acting alone or in concert with other local governmental units and authorized by them to enforce the animal control laws of the city, county, or state. 
    Animal control officer means any person duly employed or appointed by the animal control authority, who is authorized to investigate, on public or private property, and to issue citations as provided in this chapter. An animal control officer is not authorized to bear arms or make arrests. 
    Animal enclosure means any pet store, pet shop, animal shelter, kennel, sty, barnyard, impoundment area or other area where animals are housed and kept, whether for retail, breeding purposes or as household pets. 
    Animal shelter means the offices of the animal control authority where an impoundment area for animals is provided. 
    Barnyard animals means all animals of the equine, bovine or swine class and includes goats, sheep, mules, horses, hogs or cattle and domesticated poultry. 
    City council means the elected governing board of Crestview, Florida. 
    Cruelty means any act of neglect, torture or torment that causes unjustifiable pain or suffering of an animal. 
    Dangerous or vicious animal means any animal which shall bite or in any manner attack or attempt to attack or kill any person or domestic animal, shall be deemed a dangerous and vicious animal, except that no animal shall be deemed dangerous or vicious if any person or domestic animal is unlawfully upon the owner's or keeper's premises. Any dog that has been used primarily or in part for the purpose of dog fighting, or is a dog trained for dog fighting shall be deemed as a dangerous or vicious animal. 
    Direct control means immediate, continuous physical control of an animal at all times such as by means of a fence, leash, cord, or chain of such strength to restrain the same. In the case of specifically trained or hunting animals which immediately respond to such commands, direct control shall also include aural and/or oral control, if the controlling person is at all times clearly and fully within unobstructed sight and hearing of the animal. 
    Hobby breeder means any person who owns or breeds purebred dogs or pedigreed cats primarily for personal recreational use. Personal recreational use may include participation in recognized conformation shows, hunting, field or obedience trials, racing, specialized hunting, working or water trials, and may include improving the physical soundness, temperament, and conformation of a given breed to standard or for the purpose of guarding or protecting the owner's property. 
    Livestock means all domestic animals kept for use on a farm or raised for sale and profit. 
    Owner means any person, firm, corporation or organization possessing, harboring, keeping, or having control or custody of an animal or, if the animal is owned by a person under the age of 18, that person's parent or guardian. 
    Pet shop means any place or premises at which the primary purpose is the keeping of pet animals, exclusive of those animals regulated and controlled by the state fresh water fish and game commission, for retail or wholesale purchase. 
    Proper enclosure of a dangerous dog means while on the owner's property, a dangerous dog is securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure, suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the animal from escaping together with visible signage warning persons of the presence of a "bad dog." Such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top to prevent the dog from escaping over, under, or through the structure, and shall also provide protection from the elements. 
    Public road means any streets, sidewalk, alley, highway, or other way open to travel by the public including rights-of-way, bridges and tunnels. 
    Residential area means any area in the city so designated by current zoning or area developed with residential structures within the commercial or industrial zoning district having residential use only. 
    Stable means those premises at which horses or equines are kept commercially for boarding, riding, breeding, training, or resale purposes. 
    Sterilization means dogs and cats rendered permanently incapable of reproduction by surgical alteration, implantation of a device, or other physical means, or permanently incapable of reproduction because of physiological sterility, but only where the neutered or spayed condition has been certified by a veterinarian licensed in any state. 
    Unaltered animal means a dog or cat, which has not been neutered, spayed or is otherwise not sterilized. 
    Wild animal means any living member of the kingdom Animalia, including those born or raised in captivity, except the following: 
(1)  The species Homo sapiens (human beings). 
(2)  The species Canis familiaris (domestic dogs, including hybrids with wolves, coyotes, or jackals). 
(3)  The species Felis catus (domestic cats, excluding hybrids with ocelots or margays). 
(4)  The species Equus caballus (domestic horses). 
(5)  The species Equus asinus (asses/donkeys). 
(6)  The species Bos taurus (cattle). 
(7)  The subspecies Ovis ammon aries (sheep). 
(8)  The species Capra hircus (goats). 
(9)  The subspecies Sus scrofa domestica (swine). 
(10)  Domesticated races of the species Gallus gallus or Meleagris gallopavo (poultry). 
(11)  Domesticated races of the species Mesocricetus auratus (golden hamsters). 
(12)  Domesticated races of the subspecies Cavia aperea procellus (guinea pigs). 
(13)  Domesticated races of rats or mice (white or albino, trained, laboratory-reared). 
(14)  Domesticated races of the species Oryctolagus cuniculus (rabbits). 
(15)  All captive-bred members of the species of the families Psittacidae (parrots, parakeets), Anatidae (ducks), Fringillidae (finches), and Columbidae (doves and pigeons). 
(16)  All captive-bred members of the species Serinius canaria of the class Aves (canaries). 
(17)  Domesticated races of the species Carassius auratus (goldfish). 
(18)  Captive-bred members of the superorder Teleostei of the class Osteichthyes (common aquarium fish). 
(Ord. No. 1061, §§ 2, 3, 8-26-02; Ord. No. 1519, § 2, 5-12-14) 
Sec. 10-2. - City designated as bird sanctuary. 
(a)  The entire area now embraced by the city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(b)  Adequate signs shall be erected and maintained at entrance to the city, within the discretion of the council, signifying the designation of the area within the corporate limits of the city as a bird sanctuary. 
(Ord. No. 1061, §§ 2, 3, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 10-3. - Animal control authority. 
    The city animal control authority means an entity acting alone or in concert with other local governmental units and authorized by them to enforce the animal control laws of the city, county, or state. Said authority will maintain an establishment (hereafter know as "animal shelter") with adequate food, shelter and emergency care for all impounded animals apprehended in the field or surrendered to the authority. 
(Ord. No. 1519, § 3, 5-12-14) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1519, § 3, adopted May 12, 2014, in effect repealed former § 10-3, and enacted a new section. Former § 10-3 pertained to the animal shelter and derived from Ord. No. 1061, adopted August 26, 2002. 
Sec. 10-4. - Impounding officer. 
(a)  The animal control officers shall have full and complete authority in the enforcement of this chapter and may pick up, catch, or procure any animal under any circumstance which is a violation of this chapter and cause the animal to be impounded in the animal shelter. An animal shall be subject to pick up and impounding, if the animal is cruelly treated, unlicensed, roaming at large, or stray, or any animal infected with rabies or believed to be so infected; infected with any other contagious or infectious disease, or believed to be so infected, or has been classified as a dangerous or vicious animal. 
(b)  Animal control officers may carry a device to chemically subdue and tranquilize an animal. 
(c)  The animal control officer shall have authority and be required to impound all unlicensed animals, except for animals confined or fenced in on the owner's premises or under direct control while participating in an organized match, show, trial, or undergoing obedience training. The animal control officer shall also be required to pick up and make humane disposition of any diseased or injured animal in the city. If an owner refuses entrance to his premises to an animal control officer attempting to enforce this chapter, such officer shall contact the police department and proceed on the owner's premises in the company of the officer with such legal authority as is necessary to lawfully enter the owner's premises for the purpose of enforcing this chapter. The animal control officers are hereby authorized to issue citations and notices to appear for the violation of this chapter when based upon personal investigation and the officer has reasonable and probable grounds to believe that a violation has occurred. 
(Ord. No. 1061, §§ 2, 3, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 10-5. - Fees. 
(a)  The impound and other fees collected by the animal control authority shall be retained by the authority to assist in offsetting the costs to the city for animal control. Other disposition of fees collected by the animal control authority will be determined under contract agreement between the city and the animal control authority. 
(b)  The animal control authority is authorized to establish rules and regulations relating to the care, custody, control and disposal of animals, which, in the opinion of the impounding officer, will further guarantee and protect the health and safety of the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1061, §§ 2, 3, 8-26-02; Ord. No. 1519, § 4, 5-12-14) 
Sec. 10-6. - Citations. 
(a)  Format. A citation and notice to appear shall be in the form prescribed by the animal control authority, and when issued, shall constitute notice that an officer has probable cause to believe an infraction of this chapter has been committed and that the cause will be heard in the county court in and for the city. Exclusive jurisdiction and authority shall be in the county court to dispose of or make adjudication based upon a citation once it has been issued. A citation shall include the following: 
(1)  The date and time of issuance. 
(2)  The name and address of the person. 
(3)  The date and time the civil infraction was committed. 
(4)  The facts constituting probable cause. 
(5)  The ordinance violated. 
(6)  The name and authority of the officer. 
(7)  The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay the civil penalty, to contest the citation, or to appear in court as required by subsection (c) of this section. 
(8)  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects to contest the citation. 
(9)  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects not to contest the citation. 
(10)  A conspicuous statement that if the person fails to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed, or fails to appear in court to contest the citation, then he shall be deemed to have waived his right to contest the citation and that in such case, judgment may be entered against the person for an amount up to the maximum civil penalty. 
(11)  A conspicuous statement that if the person is required to appear in court as mandated by subsection (c) of this section, he does not have the option of paying a fine in lieu of appearing in court. 
(b)  Issuance. For violation of any of the provisions of sections 10-7, 10-8 and 10-10, the animal control officer shall have the discretion to either issue a warning with no civil penalty, issue a citation for a fine in the amount specified in the animal control fee resolution as approved by the city council, or a notice to appear in court as required by this section. Any person cited for violation of this chapter under this section shall be deemed to be charged with a civil infraction and cited to appear in court. Any person cited for an infraction under this chapter shall sign and accept a citation acknowledging receipt of the citation and indicating a promise to appear in county court if such person wishes to contest the charge, or if mandated to appear in court as required by this subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Mandatory court appearance. Court appearance shall be mandatory for violations of this chapter involving the unprovoked biting, attacking or wounding of a domestic animals or human being; the destruction or loss of personal property; second or subsequent violations of animal cruelty laws; and/or violations resulting in the issuance of a third or subsequent citation to a person or persons within the same household. In the event mandatory court appearance is required, the citation must clearly inform the person of such mandatory appearance, and records shall be maintained by animal control regarding such cases. Persons required to appear in court do not have the option of paying the fine instead of appearing in court. 
(d)  Payment of civil penalty. Any person cited with a violation of this section may pay the civil penalty within ten days of the date of receiving the citation. If the person cited follows the above procedure, he shall be deemed to have admitted the civil infraction and to have waived his right to a trial on the issue of commission of the violation. 
(1)  If a person fails to pay the civil penalty within ten days of receipt of the citation, the clerk of the court shall issue a notice to appear. An additional amount shall be assessed as a late fee for each penalty paid after the initial ten-day period in accordance with the fee resolution as established by the board of county commissioners. 
(2)  If a person fails to pay the civil penalty, fails to appear in court to contest the citation, or fails to appear in court as required by subsection (c) of this section, the court may issue an order to show cause upon the request of the governing body of the county or municipality. This order shall require such persons to appear before the court to explain why actions on the citation have not been taken. If any person who is issued such order fails to appear in response to the court's directive, that person shall be held in contempt of court. 
(e)  Liability for penalty. In the event an animal is impounded for violation of this chapter and the owner of the animal abandons the animal to the animal control authority, the owner shall remain liable for the civil penalties and any other actions imposed for violation of this chapter. 
(f)  Refusal to sign or accept citation. Any person refusing to sign and accept a citation shall be in violation of this chapter, and shall be punished as provided for in section 10-20. 
(Ord. No. 1061, §§ 2, 3, 8-26-02; Ord. No. 1519, § 5, 5-12-14) 
Sec. 10-7. - Vaccination of animals required. 
    Unvaccinated animals . The animal control officer shall impound wherever found any dog or cat not vaccinated as required by general law. An animal impounded under this section shall be vaccinated by the county veterinarian and licensed prior to redemption provided the owner pays any impounding fee and charges established pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1061, §§ 2, 3, 8-26-02; Ord. No. 1519, § 6, 5-12-14; Ord. No. 1529, § 2, 7-14-14) 
Sec. 10-8. - Unlicensed animals prohibited. 
    Any person who shall own, keep or harbor any dog or cat within the city that is not licensed may be cited for a civil infraction and punished as provided in this chapter. The lack of a license tag on the collar or harness of a dog or cat or the lack of approved license marking shall be deemed prima facie evidence of the violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1061, §§ 2, 3, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 10-9. - Barnyard animals. 
    No person shall keep or permit to run at large in the city any animals of the equine or swine class and includes goats, sheep, mules, horses, hogs or cattle and domesticated poultry. 
(Ord. No. 1061, §§ 2, 3, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 10-10. - Animal control. 
(a)  Generally. Animals are prohibited from roaming freely among the public within the city unless such animal is specifically excepted as further set out in this section. 
(b)  Public places. Animals are prohibited from public places in the city such as airports, hotels, restaurants, theaters, public conveyances, grocery stores, or other establishments serving food, beverages or staple foods, and at public gatherings such as outdoor festivals, fairs, etc. Animals so found, whether roaming or on direct control by the owner, may be impounded. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of an animal to allow his animal in public places of the city such as school grounds, school bus stops, public parks, beaches, and playgrounds. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of an animal to allow his animal, whether roaming at large or on a leash or otherwise under his control on recreational areas. 
(3)  Provided, however, no animal owner shall be prohibited from permitting his animal within 50 feet of a building which the animal owner owns or leases. 
(c)  Exceptions. These restrictions relating to public places, schools, parks, beaches and recreational areas shall not apply to: 
(1)  Animals utilized by law enforcement agencies, while engaged in law enforcement activity. 
(2)  Animals trained to assist the persons with disabilities, provided such animal is in the company of such person. 
(3)  The showing and training of dogs and the use of animals in educational presentations in appropriate locations of auditoriums, schools, parks, parking lots, armories, theaters, and similar public or privately owned areas. 
(4)  The transportation of animals by airlines at the airport in the county. 
(d)  Female animals in season. The owner of any female animal in heat shall keep such animal confined in a building or secure enclosure, veterinary hospital, or boarding kennel in such a manner that such female animal cannot come in contact with another animal, except for intentional breeding purposes. An owner who does not keep the female animal confined while in season shall be guilty of a civil infraction and punished as provided in section 10-20. This section shall not apply to female animals entered in organized shows. 
(e)  Animal nuisances prohibited. Any animal or animals that habitually or continuously bark, howl, or otherwise disturb the peace and quiet of the inhabitants of the city or are permitted to cause damage to personal property or defecate upon the property of others or are kept or maintained in such a manner as to disturb by noxious or offensive odors or otherwise endanger the health and welfare of the inhabitants of the city are declared to be an animal nuisance. Any person who keeps, harbors, or maintains an animal nuisance as defined above, shall be guilty of a civil infraction and punishable as provided in section 10-20. 
(f)  Removal of canine waste and requirement for possession of device for removal in the city. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of each person who is in the company of or responsible for a dog on areas other than the property of such person to remove any feces left by his dog on any yard, sidewalk, gutter, street, right-of-way, or other public or private place. 
(2)  It shall further be the duty of any person while in direct control of a dog to have in his possession a plastic bag or "pooper scooper" or other such device sufficient for his use in the removal of canine waste. 
(3)  Violators of this section shall be guilty of a civil infraction and punishable pursuant to section 10-20. 
(g)  Animal enclosures. 
(1)  The owner or keeper of an animal enclosure shall not sell, trade or give away any dog or cat, over four months of age, unless the dog or cat has been vaccinated. Appropriate records shall be maintained in accordance with F.S. § 828.30, as it may be amended. 
(2)  The animal control authority shall be permitted to inspect any animal enclosure, animal records, and all animals and the premises where such animals are kept at any reasonable time during normal business hours where the officer has probable cause to believe a violation of this chapter exists to ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter. 
(h)  Animals not under owner control. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any animal to be off the premises of its owner or person responsible for the animal, without it being under the direct control of its owner, person responsible therefor, or other person. Animals not under direct control shall be considered unlicensed animals and private nuisances and may be seized, restrained, impounded, and disposed of as provided by this chapter for any unlicensed animal. 
(i)  Domesticated animals. Domesticated animals shall not be chained, tied, fastened or otherwise tethered to dog houses, trees, fences, or other stationary objects as a means of confinement to property. 
(Ord. No. 1061, §§ 2, 3, 8-26-02; Ord. No. 1519, § 7, 5-12-14; Ord. No. 1529, § 3, 7-14-14) 
Sec. 10-11. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-12. - Disposition of animals. 
(a)  Generally. Animals, which are picked up, caught or procured because of a violation of this chapter, shall be impounded in a shelter maintained by the animal control authority, disposition will be in accordance with all city and county ordinances, and state statutes, relating to animal control. An animal suspected or displaying symptoms of rabies shall be quarantined for the required period and animals having infectious or contagious diseases shall be segregated from other animals. It is unlawful for an animal control officer to dispose of animals by destroying them unless such animals are put to death in a humane manner. 
(b)  Redemption of impounded animals. 
(1)  If any animal is impounded and such animal is not redeemed within five consecutive business days of impoundment of such animal excluding the day of impoundment, the animal control officer, without notice to the owner of such animal, if any, may dispose of the animal. However, if the owner of the animal is known to, or can be identified by, the animal control officer by reason of some marking or collar attachment on the animal, the animal control officer shall notify the owner of the fact that his animal has been impounded and that he may redeem his animal within five business days of notification. The final day of the five-day period shall only occur on a day in which the facility in which the animal is impounded is open for normal operating activities. 
(2)  The owner or owner's agent shall be entitled to resume possession of any impounded animal upon compliance, if applicable, of the licensing provisions in this chapter and the payment of impoundment fees, service fees, and board fees established pursuant to this chapter. Proof of ownership shall be established by way of a license and rabies vaccination certificate, bill of sale, photograph, affidavits from neighbors, or other reliable documentary evidence. The animal regulation division may also require a sworn statement of ownership. 
(3)  These provisions requiring notice and redemption shall not apply in those circumstances where the animal has been impounded because of animal cruelty. No animal suspected of rabies shall be released before the expiration of the required quarantine period. 
(c)  Failure to claim. In the event the owner of any animal impounded under any section of this chapter fails to reclaim it within the time period established by the animal control authority, the animal control authority may make such disposition as provided in their rules and regulations. 
(1)  It is lawful for the animal control officer to release suitable, unclaimed animals to new owners on payment of required fees and provided that any animal, so released, is vaccinated and licensed as required by section 10-7. New owners shall enter into a written agreement with the animal control authority, guaranteeing that the animal will be sterilized within 30 days of the release to the new owner or upon the animal's sexual maturity. 
(2)  In the event an owner of an unaltered animal impounded for the third time (recurring impoundment) wishes to reclaim it within the appropriate time, animal control shall require the owner to spay or neuter such animal as a condition of reclaiming it, unless a veterinarian certifies to animal control that the animal should not be spayed or neutered due to the health or a condition of the animal. 
(3)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any new owner who has entered into such an agreement; not to have the animal sterilized as required by this section. 
(d)  Diseased or injured animals. In the event any animal is impounded because of any infectious or contagious disease or injury, the animal control authority shall have full and complete authority to procure the services of a trained veterinary surgeon, in order to treat such disease or injury, if in the opinion of such persons if can be successfully treated. Further, in the event the veterinarian and such animal control officer is of the opinion that the health and safety of the citizenry of county would be jeopardized by the continued existence of such infected animal or injured animal, then such animal may be destroyed and the remains disposed of without compensation being paid to the owner. 
(e)  Disposition of animal remains. 
(1)  Any animal as defined in this chapter killed or found dead on public property, shall be disposed of by the person or agency agreed upon in the contract with the animal control authority. 
(2)  Any person may, on his own real property, bury or dispose of any dead animal; provided such person places not less than three feet of earth over the carcass of the animal. 
(3)  The owner of any dead animal may request the animal control authority to pick up and dispose of such animal. The animal control officer shall charge and collect from the owner, for the disposition of such dead animal, a fee established by the animal control authority. 
(Ord. No. 1061, §§ 2, 3, 8-26-02; Ord. No. 1519, § 8, 5-12-14) 
Sec. 10-13. - Dangerous or vicious animals. 
(a)  The owner of any dangerous or vicious animal shall confine the animal in a secure or proper enclosure. The owner and/or any person who shall release, either willfully or through a failure to exercise due care or control, or take such animal out of such secure or proper enclosure in such a manner which is likely to cause injury to another person or damage to the property of another person shall be in violation of this chapter and punished as a civil infraction as provided for in section 10-20. 
(b)  Further, in accordance with the provisions of F.S. ch. 767, individuals may provide duly sworn formal complaints to the animal control authority, requesting that a dog be classified as "dangerous." 
(1)  Such formal complaints shall be executed by a minimum of two individuals who reside in separate households who have witnessed the dangerous actions of the dog. An animal control authority shall investigate reported incidents involving dogs that may be dangerous and shall require sworn formal complaints from individuals desiring to have a dog classified as dangerous. The animal control authority shall determine if a dog is to be classified as dangerous and shall immediately provide written notification by registered mail or certified hand delivery to the owner of a dog that has been classified as dangerous. 
(2)  A dog shall not be declared dangerous if the threat, injury, or damage was sustained by a person who, at the time, was unlawfully on the property, or while lawfully on the property was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or its owner. 
(c)  Within 30 days after a dog has been classified as dangerous, the owner of the dog must obtain a certificate of registration for the dog from the animal control authority serving the area in which he resides, and the certificate shall be renewed annually. The animal control authority is authorized to issue such certificates of registration and renewals only to persons who are at least 18 years of age and who present to the animal control authority sufficient evidence of: 
(1)  A current certificate of rabies vaccination for the dog; 
(2)  A proper enclosure to confine a dangerous dog and the posting of the premises with a clearly visible warning sign at all entry points that informs both children and adults of the presence of a dangerous dog on the property; 
(3)  Permanent identification of the dog, such as a tattoo on the inside thigh or electronic implantation; and 
(4)  Payment of annual registration fee to animal control authority. The appropriate governmental unit may impose an annual fee for the issuance of certificates of registration required by this section. 
(d)  The owner shall immediately notify the appropriate animal control authority when a dog that has been classified as dangerous: 
(1)  Is loose or unconfined; 
(2)  Has bitten a human being or attacked another animal; 
(3)  Is sold or given away, or dies; or 
(4)  Is moved to another address. 
(e)  Prior to a dangerous dog being sold or given away, the owner shall provide the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner to the animal control authority. The new owner must comply with all of the requirements of this chapter, even if the animal is moved from one local jurisdiction to another within the state. The animal control officer or appropriate agency of another jurisdiction must be notified by the owner of a dog classified as dangerous that the dog is in his jurisdiction. 
(f)  It is unlawful for the owner of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and under control of a competent person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration, but shall prevent it from biting any person or animal. When being transported, such dogs shall be safely and securely restrained within a vehicle. 
(g)  Any dog deemed dangerous or vicious as a result of the dog aggressively attacking and causing severe injury to a human or a domestic animal shall be impounded by the animal control authority as provided for in section 10-5, and the dog shall be held at the city animal shelter for ten business days including the day of impoundment and thereafter destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(h)  Hunting dogs are exempt from the provisions of this section when engaged in any legal hunt or training procedure. Dogs engaged in training or exhibiting in legal sports such as obedience trials, conformation shows, field trials, hunting/retrieving trials, and herding trials, are exempt from the provisions of this chapter when engaged in any legal procedures. However, such dogs at all times in all respects shall be subject to this chapter. Dogs that have been classified as dangerous shall not be used for hunting purposes. 
(i)  This section does not apply to dogs used by law enforcement officials for law enforcement work. 
(j)  A violation of any provision of this section shall be a civil infraction punishable pursuant to section 10-20. Notwithstanding the preceding, the amount of the civil penalty for a violation of subsections (c), (d) and (e) of this section, shall be the amount established by resolution of the city council, which, from time to time, may be amended, and which is by reference made a part hereof. 
(Ord. No. 1061, §§ 2, 3, 8-26-02; Ord. No. 1519, § 9, 5-12-14) 
Sec. 10-14. - Poisoning animals prohibited. 
    Any person who shall poison, or aid, abet or assist in the poisoning, or putting out or placing of poison at any point or place outside of buildings where animals may secure the such poison shall be in violation of this chapter and punished as provided for in section 10-20. 
(Ord. No. 1061, §§ 2, 3, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 10-15. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or person to be cruel to an animal by cruelly beating, torturing, mutilating, clearly failing to provide food, drink or shelter, ventilation, exercise, necessary veterinary care or to abandon animals. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or person in possession of an animal or who has charge or custody of an animal to suffer injury or malnutrition or to abandon any animal in a street, road, or public place without providing for the care, sustenance, protection and shelter of such animal, or to impound or confine any animal in a place or enclosure without supplying such animal with a sufficient quantity of good and wholesome food and water and air, during such period of confinement, or to abandon any animal that is maimed, sick, infirmed, or diseased. In addition, the provisions of F.S. § 828.13, as may be amended, are hereby adopted and such prohibitions as contained therein are incorporated by reference. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person who shall have knowledge that an animal was struck by a vehicle under the person's control, to fail to render first aid to such animal by taking it to a veterinarian or by notifying either the owner, the animal control authority, the police or the sheriff. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to transport any dog or other animal in a motor vehicle on any public street, when such animal is not fully enclosed within the vehicle or confined in a container, cage or like enclosure, or temporarily secured or tethered in a manner that will prevent the animal from falling or jumping from the vehicle. 
(e)  Any person cruel to an animal as provided in this section shall be in violation of this chapter and punished as provided in section 10-20. 
(Ord. No. 1061, §§ 2, 3, 8-26-02; Ord. No. 1519, § 10, 5-12-14) 
Sec. 10-16. - Animals killed or injured by motor vehicles. 
    The driver of an automobile, which strikes and accidentally kills or injures an animal roaming at large in violation of this chapter, shall not be subject to liability to the owner of such animal. 
(Ord. No. 1061, §§ 2, 3, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 10-17. - Animals trained to assist persons with disabilities, allowed in public places. 
    It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person owning, operating, or maintaining any public place of business or conveyance into which the general public is invited for any business purpose to exclude therefrom any animal which has been trained to assist persons with disabilities, provided that such animal is in the company of the person it is assisting. Violation of this section shall be a civil infraction punishable pursuant to section 10-20. 
(Ord. No. 1061, §§ 2, 3, 8-26-02; Ord. No. 1519, § 11, 5-12-14; Ord. No. 1529, § 4, 7-14-14) 
Sec. 10-18. - Interfering with animal control officer, or injuring animal control authority shelter, or releasing animals prohibited. 
    Any person who shall in any manner interfere with, hinder, resist, obstruct, or molest the animal control officer in the performance of his duty, or without authority of a court having jurisdiction to try violations of this chapter seek to release or remove any animal from the custody of the animal control officer, or tear down, burn, deface, destroy, or otherwise injure any animal control authority shelter, animal control vehicle or equipment, or enclosure thereof shall be in violation of this chapter and punished as provided for in section 10-20. 
(Ord. No. 1061, §§ 2, 3, 8-26-02; Ord. No. 1519, § 12, 5-12-14) 
Sec. 10-19. - Concealment of animals, scientific experimentation and related acts prohibited. 
(a)  Any person who shall hold, hide, or conceal any animal to which he does not have legal title shall be in violation of this chapter and punished as provided for in section 10-20; provided, however, that no person shall be in violation of this section if he shall have reported his possession of such animal to the animal control authority within 24 hours after acquiring possession of such animal. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, organization or corporation to deliver, sell, offer or give any animal to any person, firm, organization or corporation for scientific experimentation which involves any cruel or inhumane treatment. 
(c)  No traveling animal exhibit shall be allowed within the city such as roadside zoos, menageries, petting zoos, etc., unless it is a special event where all applicable state and local permits have been obtained. 
(d)  No person may sponsor, promote or train a wild animal to participate in, contribute to the involvement of a wild animal in, or attend as a spectator any activity or event in which any wild animal engages in unnatural behavior or is wrestled, fought, mentally or physically harassed, or displayed in such a way that the animal is abused or stressed mentally or physically. This prohibition applies to events and activities taking place in either public or private facilities or property, and applies regardless of the purpose of the event or activities, irrespective of whether or not a fee is charged to spectators and regardless of whether or not a permit to own, possess or have custody of a wild animal has been issued as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1061, §§ 2, 3, 8-26-02; Ord. No. 1519, § 13, 5-12-14) 
Sec. 10-20. - Exemption from provisions of chapter. 
(a)  Hospitals, clinics, and other premises operated by a licensed veterinarian for the care and treatment of animals are exempt from the provisions of this chapter, except where expressly stated. 
(b)  The licensing requirements of sections 10-7 and 10-8 shall not apply to any animal belonging to a nonresident of the city and kept within the city for not longer than 30 days; provided the animal has been vaccinated against rabies and the owner shall at all times comply with all other provisions of this chapter; or to any animal welfare organization, corporation not-for-profit and tax exempt from the state, or any greyhound breeder who holds an occupational license or state, issued "greyhound owner's license" provided all other provisions of this chapter have been complied with and such animal enclosures shall continue to be subject to periodic inspection upon probable cause. 
(Ord. No. 1061, §§ 2, 3, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 10-21. - Penalties. 
(a)  A violation of this chapter is a civil infraction, except as provided for in subsection (f) and subsections (g)(1), (2) and (3) of this section. 
(b)  The maximum civil penalty for a civil infraction shall not exceed $500.00. 
(c)  By resolution, the city council shall establish the amount of any civil penalty for a civil infraction. Such resolution may be amended from time to time and is incorporated by reference and made a part hereof. In addition to each civil penalty, there is hereby imposed a surcharge of $5.00 for violations involving animal control or animal cruelty. Funds received shall be used for animal control expenses. 
(d)  Any person paying a penalty pursuant to a civil infraction violation of this chapter shall be deemed to have admitted the violation. In no event shall a penalty amount, when a person admits without contesting the violation, exceed the limits specified in the animal control fee resolution as approved by the board of city council. 
(e)  An individual who contests the violation and after trial is found in violation of the provisions of this chapter, except as provided below, shall be guilty of a civil infraction and punished by a fine of not less than $50.00 and not more than $500.00. 
(f)  Any person who willfully refuses to accept and sign a citation or notice to appear shall be in violation of this chapter and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable as provided in F.S. § 828.27, as it may be amended. 
(g)  Any person who owns a dog which aggressively attacks or injures or attempts to attack or injure a person or another animal shall be in violation of this chapter, and the citation issued to such person shall not permit payment of a civil penalty in lieu of court appearance and the owner shall be prosecuted as follows: 
(1)  The owner of a dog which has not been previously declared dangerous under the provisions of section 10-14 and which aggressively attacks and causes severe injury to or death of any person or domestic animal without provocation, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a second degree misdemeanor punishable as provided in F.S. § 775.082 or 775.083, as it may be amended. 
(2)  The owner of a dog which has previously been declared dangerous in accordance with section 10-14 and which aggressively attacks or bites a person or a domestic animal without provocation, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a first degree misdemeanor punishable as provided in F.S. § 775.082 or 775.083, as it may be amended. 
(3)  The owner of a dog which has been previously declared dangerous in accordance with section 10-14, which aggressively attacks or bites and causes severe injury to or the death of any person, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a third degree felony, punishable as provided in F.S. § 775.082, 775.083 or 775.084, as it may be amended. 
(Ord. No. 1061, §§ 2, 3, 8-26-02; Ord. No. 1519, § 14, 5-12-14 ) 
Sec. 10-22. - Complaints for violations. 
(a)  Individuals may present formal complaints to the animal control authority, in the form of an "affidavit of complaint," signed by two or more residents of the city, where each complainant resides in a separate dwelling in the vicinity of the claimed violation, and when such affidavit has been made under oath before an individual authorized by law to take acknowledgments. Such affidavit must set forth the nature of and the date of the act claimed to violate this chapter. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a proper affidavit, the animal control authority shall investigate the complaint to determine whether a violation of this chapter has been committed. In the event the act complained of constitutes a violation of this chapter, the animal control authority shall enforce this chapter pursuant to the provisions of section 10-20 and as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1061, §§ 2, 3, 8-26-02; Ord. No. 1519, § 15, 5-12-14 ) 
Sec. 10-23. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1519, § 16, adopted May 12, 2014, repealed § 10-23, which pertained to the permits for commercial animal establishments and derived from Ord. No. 1061, adopted August 26, 2002. 
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1513, §§ 1, 2, adopted October 28, 2013, amended the Code by repealing former ch. 14, §§ 14-1-14-9, 14-31-14-37, 14-51-14-53, 14-66-14-75, 14-96, 14-97, 14-111-14-115, 14-126-14-131, 14-141-14155, and 14-166-14-185, and adding a new ch. 14. Former ch. 14 pertained to similar subject matter. For ordinances from which this chapter derived, please see the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; limitation on number of animals permitted in one house or building, § 10-22; environment, ch. 30; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 38; solid waste and recycling services, ch. 70; building construction wastes, § 70-35; streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 90; land use regulations, ch. 102; subdivisions, § 102-481 et seq. 
State Law reference- Building construction standards, F.S. ch. 553. 

ARTICLE I. - BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 14-1. - Florida Building Code incorporated by reference. 
    The current Florida Building Code, as adopted by rule of the Florida Building Commission as required by state statute, with its eight main volumes of Building, Existing Building, Residential, Plumbing, Mechanical, Fuel Gas, Energy Conservation, and Accessibility as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated into this chapter and Code of Ordinances by reference. The Florida Building Code is remedial and shall be construed to secure the public safety, health and general welfare through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment, including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § 2, 10-28-13) 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 14-2. - Building code administration. 
    The city council hereby adopts, in lieu of chapter 1 of the Florida Building Code, the "Model Administrative Code for the Florida Building Code," as promulgated by the Building Officials Association of Florida, with amendments, as attached hereto as exhibit "A" and incorporated herein as if fully set from herein verbatim. Exhibit "A" to Ord. No. 1513 is not set out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § 2, 10-28-13) 
ARTICLE III. - CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION 

Sec. 14-3. - Purpose of this article. 
    The purpose of contractor registration is to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Crestview through a contractor registration system; to ensure compliance with the state and county construction licensing regulations; and to minimize losses to the public due to unlawful conduct of unlicensed contractors. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § 2, 10-28-13) 
Sec. 14-4. - Certification or registration required. 
    Certification or registration by the Florida Construction Industry Licensing Board shall be required for general contractors, building contractors, residential building contractors, electrical contractors, plumbing contractors, mechanical contractors, swimming pool contractors, sheet metal contractors, roofing contractors, and certain specialty contractors as mandated by state law. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § 2, 10-28-13) 
Sec. 14-5. - Business tax receipt 
    All service contractors, specialty contractors and construction industry contractors who are operating a place of business within the city boundary shall obtain a city business tax receipt prior to commencement of any work in the city as established by section 18-26 of the Crestview Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § 2, 10-28-13) 
Sec. 14-6. - Registration and license required. 
    All service contractors, specialty contractors and construction industry contractors who wish to work within the city shall register their license with the building permit division prior to issuance of any building permit. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § 2, 10-28-13) 
Sec. 14-7. - Registration processing fee. 
    The city may charge a reasonable fee for registration of all contractor's licenses. The proceeds of the registration fee shall only be utilized to cover the costs of processing the registration; any excess revenue generated by license registration fees shall be utilized only for enforcement of regulating unlicensed contracting, or for enforcement of the Florida Building Code pursuant to F.S. § 553.80. The processing fee assessed for registration of a contractor's license shall be $25.00 for each license. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § 2, 10-28-13) 
Sec. 14-8. - Conditions of issuance. 
    Upon presentation of a valid copy of his or her liability insurance policy, proof of worker's compensation insurance or worker's compensation exemption, payment of the applicable registration fee, and evidence of county competency card and/or state license, the city shall issue such contractor a registration in such form as is prescribed, to be valid from the date of purchase through September 30 of the current fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § 2, 10-28-13) 
Sec. 14-9. - Hold harmless. 
    Prior to the registration of license, each contractor shall execute a hold harmless agreement holding the city and its officers, agents, employees or assigns, both individually and collectively, harmless from any liability caused by the contractor or his or her agents, employees or assigns. This hold harmless agreement will be on a form provided by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § 2, 10-28-13) 
Sec. 14-10. - Liability insurance required. 
    Contractors doing business in the city shall be required to carry bodily injury and property damage insurance in the amounts specified in Rule 61G4-15.003, Florida Administrative Code. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § 2, 10-28-13) 
Sec. 14-11. - Liability insurance policy requirements; additional insured. 
    Such liability insurance shall be issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, shall name the city as an additional insured by endorsement (on the appropriate insurance form or equivalent) and shall provide for a ten-day notice of cancellation or reduction in coverage to the tax department of the city. Evidence of insurance complying with this section shall be provided by a copy of the policy or by a certificate of insurance stating the company name; agent or agency name; policy number; inception and expiration date; limits of liability; that coverage is provided for the hold harmless agreement executed by the contractor; that the city is named as an additional insured by endorsement; and that the ten-day notice of cancellation or reduction in coverage will be provided. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § 2, 10-28-13) 
Sec. 14-12. - Reciprocity of insurance. 
    Any contractor subject to these requirements who presently carries liability insurance in the amounts stated for work performed in the county or the state is not required to carry additional amounts of insurance required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § 2, 10-28-13) 
Sec. 14-13. - Insurance required to issue permit. 
    Persons engaged in occupations relating to repair, modification or other services in connection with construction, maintenance, and upkeep of buildings, equipment and facilities in the city are required to provide proof of insurance prior to issuance of necessary permits to proceed with work. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § 2, 10-28-13) 
Sec. 14-14. - Master certificate, prerequisite. 
    The city shall not issue a business tax receipt to, or register any person to engage in the business of electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas construction and installation, unless such person holds a valid, unrevoked and unsuspended master's certificate of competency, or has in his or her regular employ a person who holds such master's certificate. The city shall also refuse to issue to any partnership a registration to engage in such business, unless such partnership has in it's regular employ, or as a member, a person who holds such master's certificate. The city shall also refuse a registration to any corporation, which does not have in its regular employ a person who holds a master's certificate. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § 2, 10-28-13) 
Sec. 14-15. - Use of name or license by another prohibited. 
    No person engaged in the electrical, mechanical, plumbing, fuel-gas or construction business in the city shall allow his or her name to be used by any other person, directly or indirectly, either to obtain a permit, or for the construction of any work under his or her license. No person shall make any misrepresentation or omission in his or her application. Anyone violating this section shall have his or her license revoked for one year, or as otherwise punishable by law. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § 2, 10-28-13) 
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; sales or permitting exposure of animals with, or having been exposed to, infectious disease, § 10-10; contractors, § 14-31 et seq.; display of wares, § 74-2; peddling from a vehicle, § 74-3; wrecker qualifications and allocation system, § 86-71 et seq.; vehicles for hire, ch. 94; taxicabs, § 94-26 et seq.; land use regulations, ch. 102. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Occupational license tax, F.S. ch. 205. 

Sec. 18-26. - Required. 
    The license taxes as set forth in this article are hereby declared to be and are adopted as the schedule of licenses for the privilege of engaging in or managing any business, profession or occupation within the city. Such occupational license tax is levied on: 
(1)  Any person who maintains a permanent business location or branch office within the city for the privilege of engaging in or managing any business within its jurisdiction. 
(2)  Any person who maintains a permanent business location or branch office within the city for the privilege of engaging in or managing any profession or occupation within its jurisdiction. 
(3)  Any person who does not qualify under the provisions of subsection (1) or subsection (2) and who transacts any business or engages in any occupation or profession in interstate commerce, if such license tax is not prohibited by section 8 of article I of the United States Constitution. 
(Code 1983, § 10-1) 
Sec. 18-27. - Term; transfer. 
(a)  All licenses issued under this article shall expire on September 30 of each year. No license shall be issued for more than one year. For each license obtained between October 1 and April 1, the full tax for one year shall be paid, except as otherwise provided in this article, and for each license obtained from April 1 to September 30, one-half the full tax for one year shall be paid, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(b)  Any license shall be transferable upon payment of a fee of $3.00 when there is a bona fide sale and transfer of the property used and employed in the business as stock and trade. 
(Code 1983, § 10-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.053. 
Sec. 18-28. - Sworn statement. 
(a)  In all cases where the amount required to be paid for a license depends upon the amount of capital invested, or prior year's production, or value of goods or stocks, or property used in the business, it shall be the duty of the person applying for such license to render to the city clerk a sworn statement of the amount of such capital, or value of such stock, goods or other property, and such other proof, including insurance carried. As a condition for the issuance of any such license, the applicant shall be bound to submit for inspection and estimation by the city clerk, either before or after the license is issued, inventories last taken, or stock books, to show the amount of capital invested, or the value of the stock of goods, wares or merchandise or other property carried or used in such business. 
(b)  The city clerk may refuse to issue the license until such time as such statement is filed and such inspection and examination is permitted. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to refuse to allow such inspection and examination by the city clerk. 
(Code 1983, § 10-3) 
Sec. 18-29. - Location. 
    Any person desiring to engage in any exhibition, trade, business, vocation, occupation or profession for which a license is required shall designate in the application for license the place where the exhibition, trade, business, vocation, occupation, calling or profession is located. A separate license shall be required for each place at which any exhibition, trade, business, vocation, occupation, calling or profession is carried on. 
(Code 1983, § 10-4) 
Sec. 18-30. - Separate licenses for each classification. 
    Any person dealing in more than one of the items or carrying on or engaging in more than one of the exhibitions, trades, businesses, vocations, occupations, callings or professions enumerated in this article and for each of which a license is required, shall be required to take out and pay for a separate license for each such exhibition, trade, business, vocation, occupation, calling or profession engaged in or carried on by such person. 
(Code 1983, § 10-5) 
Sec. 18-31. - Posting. 
    It is hereby made the duty of any person exercising the privilege or conducting a business, exhibition, trade, vocation, occupation, calling or profession for which a license is hereby required, to post his license in a conspicuous place in or about his place of business where it may be seen upon inspection by any official of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 10-6) 
Sec. 18-32. - Separate licenses required for each business; duration of license. 
(a)  Whenever an occupational license is levied against any profession, trade, shop or business classified in this article, such occupational tax shall be required to be paid to carry on such business, whether it be connected or operated in conjunction with any other business or not, unless the contrary intention appears. 
(b)  The occupational licenses levied against any trade, shop or business described in this article shall be paid by each person engaged in such trade, running or operating such shop or business, unless the contrary shall appear. 
(c)  The occupational licenses levied against the various professions, exhibitions, trades, businesses, vocations, callings or occupations described in this article shall be for a yearly privilege unless the contrary shall appear. 
(Code 1983, § 10-7) 
Sec. 18-33. - Merchants. 
    Any person engaged in selling goods, wares and merchandise which is specially classified shall pay the specially classified occupational license tax and not the merchants' occupational license tax; but any business not specially licensed and engaged in such business shall pay the merchants' occupational license tax. 
(Code 1983, § 10-8) 
Sec. 18-34. - Public utilities. 
    The tax imposed by this article on express companies, railroad companies, telephone companies, telegraph companies and other companies engaged in interstate commerce is imposed upon the business actually done by such companies within the city and to and from points within the state and is not imposed upon any business done for the United States government or upon interstate business. 
(Code 1983, § 10-9) 
Cross reference- Public service tax, § 82-26 et seq.; utilities, ch. 90. 
Sec. 18-35. - Penalty for delinquent payment. 
(a)  Those licenses not renewed by October 1 shall be considered delinquent and subject to a delinquency penalty of ten percent for the month of October, plus an additional five percent penalty for each month of delinquency thereafter until paid. However, the total delinquency penalty shall not exceed 25 percent of the occupational license fee for the delinquent establishment. 
(b)  Any person engaging in or managing any business, occupation or profession without first obtaining a local occupational license, if required under this article, shall be subject to a penalty of 25 percent of the license determined to be due, in addition to any other penalty provided by law or ordinance. 
(c)  Any person who engages in any business, occupation, or profession covered by this chapter of the code, who does not pay the occupational license tax within 150 days after the initial notice of tax due, and who does not obtain the required occupational license is subject to criminal actions and penalties, including court costs, reasonable attorney's fees, additional administrative costs incurred as a result of collection efforts, and a penalty of up to $250.00. 
(d)  The penalties imposed by this section shall be collected in addition to the amount of the license tax, and the payment of such penalty shall not be pleaded in bar in any proceedings charging the offense of doing business without a license under this article. 
(Code 1983, § 10-10; Ord. No. 932, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 18-36. - Rebate of fees. 
    No portion of any occupational license tax assessed in this article shall be rebated unless it clearly appears that such license tax was collected by mistake or error. Before making such rebate to a licensee, all accounts payable under a proper license shall be paid by such licensee. 
(Code 1983, § 10-11) 
Sec. 18-37. - Disposition of funds. 
    All revenue derived from license taxes imposed by this article shall be paid into the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 10-12) 
Sec. 18-38. - Exemption allowed disabled persons, the aged, and widows with minor dependents. 
(a)  All disabled persons physically incapable of manual labor, widows with minor dependents, and persons 65 years of age or older, with not more than one employee or helper, and who use their own capital only, not in excess of $1,000.00, shall be allowed to engage in any business or occupation in counties in which they live without being required to pay for a license. 
(b)  The exemption provided by this section shall be allowed only upon the certificate of the county physician, or other reputable physician, that the applicant claiming the exemption is disabled, the nature and extent of the disability being specified therein, and in case the exemption is claimed by a widow with minor dependents, or a person over 65 years of age, proof of the right to the exemption shall be made. Any person entitled to the exemption provided by this section shall, upon application and furnishing of the necessary proof as aforesaid, be issued a license which shall have plainly stamped or written across the face thereof the fact that it is issued under this section, and the reason for the exemption shall be written thereon. 
(c)  In no event under this or any other law shall any person, veteran or otherwise, be allowed any exemption whatsoever from the payment of any amount required by law for the issuance of a license to sell intoxicating liquors, malt and vinous beverages. 
(Code 1983, § 10-13) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.162. 
Sec. 18-39. - Appointment of license inspector; duties. 
(a)  It is hereby made the duty of the city clerk to appoint a license inspector of the city. 
(b)  The license inspector shall have the authority to investigate all businesses, occupations and professions in the city, and to make such inquiry as shall be necessary to determine whether or not a license has been procured for such business, occupation or profession, and shall report to the city clerk the names of all persons engaged in business without a license. 
(Code 1983, § 10-14) 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-136 et seq. 
Sec. 18-40. - Circuses, carnivals and outdoor shows-Information to be filed prior to issuance of license. 
    Any applicant applying for an occupational license for the holding of a circus, carnival, show or outdoor exhibition in the city shall at the time of securing such license be required to file with the city license inspector or the city clerk the following: 
(1)  An affidavit that permission has been secured from the owner of the land upon which the circus, carnival or show is intended to be held. 
(2)  A bond, collateral agreement or other security conditioned to clean the premises of all rubbish and debris after use by such applicant. 
(3)  A written statement from the building inspector that the site upon which the circus, carnival, outdoor show or other public gathering or exhibition is intended to be held is not within an area prohibited for such use. 
(4)  A written statement of the fire department that the tents or temporary buildings or structures under which the operations are to be held are of fireproof material and will not constitute a fire hazard. 
(Code 1983, § 10-15) 
State Law reference- Licenses upon certain shows, etc., F.S. § 616.12. 
Sec. 18-41. - Same-Payment of tax prior to erection of tents. 
(a)  No circus, carnival, show or public exhibition shall be permitted to begin erecting its tents, booths or other installations in a permitted area in the city without the payment of the full amount of the occupational license tax as prescribed in this article unless authorization for such circus, carnival, show or exhibition is specifically given by the council. 
(b)  The occupational license tax as required shall be paid in full before any equipment is brought upon the location where such circus, carnival, show, etc., intends to operate. 
(Code 1983, § 10-16) 
Sec. 18-42. - Same-Parades. 
    A parade through the streets of the city in connection with any circus, carnival, show or other outdoor amusement shall not be permitted unless permission is secured from the mayor in writing prior to the beginning of such parade and until the occupational license tax for staging the parade as provided in this article has been paid. 
(Code 1983, § 10-17) 
Sec. 18-43. - Private detectives-Prerequisites for issuing license. 
    Before any occupational license for a private detective may be issued, the applicant must first present to the city clerk a certificate from the police department of the city showing that the applicant has been fingerprinted and that he has no past record of a felony conviction. 
(Code 1983, § 10-18) 
State Law reference- Investigative patrol services licensing, F.S. § 493.325. 
Sec. 18-44. - Same-Registration of unlicensed detectives. 
    All private detectives or criminal investigators not licensed by the city are required to register with the police department before conducting any operation within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 10-19) 
Sec. 18-45. - Clairvoyance, fortunetelling, etc. 
    Any person applying for a license to practice clairvoyance, fortunetelling, mind reading, faith healing, divine healing, astrology or phrenology, and mediums, must present to the city clerk a sworn application which will include the type of license applied for, fee as prescribed in this article for such license, term of residency in the city, prior residency, certification as to character of applicant, and fees to be charged by applicant. 
(Code 1983, § 10-20) 
Sec. 18-46. - Investigation of applications. 
(a)  All applications for occupational licenses within the meaning of sections 18-43, 18-44 and 18-45 shall be submitted to the police department for investigation for a report as to the truth of the statements contained in the application. 
(b)  The police department shall institute an investigation as to the statements contained in the application and report to the city clerk the result thereof along with the recommendations of the chief of police as to the granting or refusal of the license applied for. 
(Code 1983, § 10-22) 
Sec. 18-47. - Trade, gift or merchandise stamps. 
    Any person selling and/or soliciting the sale of trade, gift or merchandise stamps or any such stamps shall procure an agent's occupational license which is hereby fixed at the sum of $100.00 per annum for such agent to operate within the city. 
(Code 1983, § 10-21) 
Sec. 18-48. - General contractor held responsible for subcontractor license. 
    A general contractor who operates as prime contractor on any project within the city shall be held responsible to assure that any subcontractor who performs a subcontract under his general contract has in his possession a valid occupational license issued by the city for the performance of such subcontracting. 
(Code 1983, § 10-24) 
Cross reference- Contractors, § 14-31 et seq. 
Sec. 18-49. - Trucks and vehicles-Selling merchandise; license and registration required. 
(a)  Operators of trucks or moving vehicles from which vegetables and farm and grove products, not raised and produced by the owner of the truck, are offered for sale at wholesale in the city shall be required to pay an occupational license tax of $50.00, unless otherwise specified, and to register each truck with the police department before receiving free of charge an identification sticker to be attached to such truck or moving vehicle. 
(b)  Operators of trucks or moving vehicles from which goods, wares and merchandise (except vegetables or farm and grove products) are offered for sale at wholesale in the city shall be required to pay an occupational license tax as set forth in this article and to register each truck with the police department before receiving free of charge an identifying sticker to be attached to such truck or moving vehicle. 
(c)  Operators of trucks or moving vehicles rendering services for which a charge is made, such as sharpening knives, repairing, towel or linen service, etc., in the city, shall be required to pay an occupational license tax as set forth in this article and to register with the police department before receiving free of charge an identifying sticker to be attached to such truck or moving vehicle. 
(Code 1983, § 10-25) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 86. 
State Law reference- Exemptions for certain motor vehicles, F.S. § 205.063. 
Sec. 18-50. - Same-Certain trucks to have growers' certificate. 
    Operators of trucks and moving vehicles from which vegetables and farm and grove products, raised and produced by the owner of the truck, are offered for sale at wholesale or retail in the city shall be required to produce a growers' certificate of the state in which the farm or grove is located and register the description of the vehicle and the name and address of the owner with the police department, and upon doing so shall be entitled to secure free of charge an identifying sticker to be attached to such truck or moving vehicle. 
(Code 1983, § 10-26) 
Sec. 18-51. - Same-Certain trucks or vehicles to secure sanitation department approval. 
    All trucks or moving vehicles selling dairy products, bakery products, meat products, farm or grove products, or any other items intended for human consumption shall be inspected and approved by the city sanitation officer prior to issuance of an identifying sticker by the police department. Such inspection by the sanitation officer shall be made thereafter as often as is required to protect the health and welfare of the residents of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 10-27) 
Sec. 18-52. - Licenses subject to this article. 
    No license shall be issued or granted to any applicant to engage in the business of selling or disposing of merchandise of any kind, at retail or wholesale, or the practice or pursuit of any profession or occupation in the city, except upon the terms and conditions and subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 10-28) 
Sec. 18-53. - Unclassified occupations. 
    Every business, occupation, profession or exhibition, substantial, fixed or temporary, engaged in by any person, whether in a building, tent, or upon the street, vacant lot or anywhere in the open air, within the city and not specifically designated in this article, shall pay a license fee of $52.50. 
(Code 1983, § 10-29; Ord. No. 932, § 3, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 18-54. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)  Any person or the members of any firm or corporation who shall carry on or conduct or manage any business or profession, or who shall keep and use upon the streets of the city any vehicle for which a license is required, without first having obtained a license, or otherwise violate this article (except as provided in this article), shall be subject, upon conviction, to the penalties provided by section 1-11; and each day's violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
(b)  The conviction and punishment of any person for transacting any business without a license shall not excuse or exempt such person from the payment of any license tax due or unpaid at the time of such conviction. 
(Code 1983, § 10-30) 
Sec. 18-55. - Enforcement. 
    This article shall be enforced as is provided for in this article. The administration of this article shall be the responsibility of the city clerk. 
(Code 1983, § 10-31) 
Sec. 18-56. - License tax schedule. 
    Each person, firm, company, association, partnership, agency or corporation wherever located, engaging in or carrying on or doing any act or thing specified in this article, in or from the city shall pay to the city, unless otherwise specified, an annual license therefor which schedule is adopted by reference shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1983, § 10-32; Ord. No. 932, § 4, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 18-57. - Conduct of bingo games. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, words shall be defined as provided in F.S. 849.093(1) et seq., as from time to time amended. 
(b)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any charitable, nonprofit or veterans' organization to conduct any bingo game without first obtaining a permit therefore in accordance with this section. No charitable, nonprofit or veterans' organization shall conduct any bingo game at any location other than the premises described in the permit. No permit shall be required for a condominium association, mobile home owners' association, or group of residents of a mobile home park, as defined in F.S. ch. 723, to conduct bingo games pursuant to the provisions of F.S. § 849.093(1), provided that no rent is paid for the premises where the game is played. 
(c)  Application fee, accompanying documents and information. Application for permit required by this section shall be made to the office of city clerk along with the fee as established by ordinance or resolution and shall include the following information and documentation: 
(1)  The name, address and employer identification number of the organization(s); 
(2)  A current list of the officers and directors of the organization(s) and their addresses; 
(3)  A copy of the exemption letter issued under the provisions of Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 or Section 528 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 as amended; 
(4)  A certification of the period or periods during which the organization(s) has been in existence and active, commencing three calendar years prior to the application filing date; 
(5)  The names, addresses, and dates of membership of all members of the organization who will be involved in the conduct of any bingo game and a certification that each of them is a bona fide member who is a resident of the community where the organization is located; 
(6)  The street address and property description of the premises where any bingo game will be conducted by the organization(s); 
(7)  Copies of all leases and subleases in effect relating to the property where the organization(s) will conduct any bingo game; 
(8)  The certification of the owner of the property and every lessee and sub-lessee that there are not leases in effect other than those submitted with the application and that the rental rate charged for the premises does not exceed the rental rates charged for similar premises in the same locale; and 
(9)  Certification by the organization(s) that it will comply with all provisions of F.S. § 849.093(1) et seq., this section, and the permit issued pursuant to this section. 
(d)  Issuance of permit. Within seven days of submission of a completed application providing all information and documents and the fee required by this section have been met, the city shall issue the permit allowing the charitable, nonprofit or veterans' organization to conduct bingo games at the premises listed in the permit subject to the provisions of federal, state and local laws, ordinances and regulations. Each permit issued shall expire on September 30 following the month of purchase. 
(e)  Revocation of permit. Violation of any of the provisions of F.S. § 849.093(1) et seq., the City Code, or the permit issued pursuant to this section shall constitute grounds for revocation of that permit. 
(f)  Right of entry. Representatives of the law enforcement, code and fire inspector and any other official having official business pertaining to the enforcement of this section shall, upon identification of this person, be admitted to the premises without charge to conduct inspections. 
(Ord. No. 818, § 2, 12-13-93; Ord. No. 1422, § 1, 5-26-09) 
Sec. 18-58. - C and D landfills. 
    Any person who obtains a state department of environmental protection construction and demolition (C and D) landfill permit to operate and assess fees for authorized disposal within the city shall obtain an occupational license annually from the office of the city clerk. The type of license shall be an unclassified license (see section 18-53) and as a precedent to issuance of the license must provide the city clerk, or designee, a copy of the Florida DEP C and D landfill permit, the board of adjustment order confirming approval of a special exception allowing the land to be used for a C and D landfill and a copy of the C and D permit issued by the administrative services department of the city. License renewals require authorization of the same administrative steps enumerated in this section. 
(Ord. No. 842, § 6, 9-26-94) 
Cross reference- Construction and demolition landfill, § 70-46 et seq. 
Secs. 18-59-18-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CANNABIS RELATED ACTIVITIES 

Sec. 18-76. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Derivative product means any form of cannabis suitable for administration to or consumption or use by a qualified patient, eligible patient, or any other similarly situated individual. 
    Dispensing facility means any facility, whether in a fixed location or mobile, where derivative product, low-THC cannabis or medical cannabis, is dispensed. 
    Low-THC cannabis means a plant of the genus cannabis, the dried flowers of which contain 0.8 percent or less of tetrahydrocannabinol and more than ten percent of cannabidiol weight for weight; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of such plant; or any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant or its seed or resin. 
    Medical cannabis means all parts of any plant of the genus cannabis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant or its seeds or resin. 
    Medical cannabis activities means, without limitation, the growing, cultivation, processing, manufacturing, dispensing, distribution, and wholesale and retail sale of medical cannabis, low-THC cannabis, and derivative products, or any subset of such activities, or any related activities. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § II, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 18-77. - Temporary moratorium. 
    Beginning on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and continuing through December 1, 2017, or sooner if provided by an ordinance of the city council, a moratorium is hereby imposed on the opening, relocation, or expansion of any dispensing facility within the corporate limits of the City of Crestview, including but not limited to dispensing facilities owned or operated by an approved dispensing organization under F.S. § 381.986. The city shall not issue any business tax receipts, or licenses of any kind, permitting any dispensing facility to do business in the city during the period of the moratorium; nor shall the city accept any applications for any business tax receipts, or licenses of any kind, for any dispensing facility to do business in the city during the period of the moratorium. In addition, the moratorium is hereby imposed upon all medical cannabis activities by any person or entity that is not an approved dispensing organization under F.S. § 381.986, except where inconsistent with Florida law. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § II, 2-13-17; Ord. No. 1625, § II, 8-14-17) 
Sec. 18-78. - Study and recommendations. 
    During the moratorium period described in section 18-77 of this article, city staff is hereby directed to study medical cannabis activities and their impact on the health, safety, and welfare of residents and businesses located within the city, and to develop and recommend regulations for medical cannabis activities in the city, and any other relevant regulations and recommendations. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § II, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 18-79. - Penalties. 
    Any person or entity who violates any provision of this ordinance, or who fails to comply therewith, shall be subject to the penalties as prescribed in chapter 1, section 1-11 of the city's Code of Ordinances, and shall be subject to criminal penalties for violating F.S. ch. 893. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § II, 2-13-17) 
Chapter 22 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Emergency measures by local authorities, F.S. § 870.041 et seq. 

Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Civil emergency means: 
(1)  A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of force or violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate power to execute by three or more persons acting together without authority of law; or 
(2)  Any natural disaster or manmade calamity, including flood, conflagration, tornado, hurricane, earthquake or explosion resulting in the actual destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
    Curfew means a prohibition against any person walking, running, loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or vacant premises except persons officially designated to duty with reference to a civil emergency. 
(Code 1983, § 5.5-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-2. - Power to proclaim emergency and enact protective measures. 
    Whenever, in the judgment of the mayor, or in his absence the president of the city council or in their absence any city councilmember, it appears that a civil emergency exists, he may declare that such a civil emergency exists, specify the reason for the belief, and designate the boundaries of the areas affected by the civil emergency, declare a curfew, specify the hours of the curfew, how long the curfew is to remain in effect, and promulgate a course of action to handle such an emergency. 
(Code 1983, § 5.5-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 870.042(2). 
Sec. 22-3. - Publication. 
    Immediately upon the declaration of a civil emergency, the contents of such declaration will be published, announced or broadcast at regular intervals throughout the area or areas affected and the areas adjacent thereto and shall be filed in the office of the city clerk or the clerk of the circuit court. A copy of the declaration shall be provided to appropriate city agencies, the county sheriff's office, the board of county commissioners, and local news media. 
(Code 1983, § 5.5-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 870.046. 
Sec. 22-4. - Curfew violation; exceptions. 
    When a curfew is in effect it shall be unlawful for any person to walk, run, loiter, stand or motor on any alley, street, highway, public property or vacant premises, or sidewalk or any public place. Excepted therefrom are law enforcement officers, designated deputies, firefighters, ambulance and utility crews, and authorized personnel of the news media and certain others who by the nature of their profession require travel in those areas subject to the curfew. Those excepted persons will obey the lawful order of police officials and their deputies, or persons charged with the responsibility of enforcement of this chapter. 
(Code 1983, § 5.5-4) 
Sec. 22-5. - Authority to issue orders. 
    After proclamation of a civil emergency, the mayor, or in his absence the president of the city council or in his absence any city councilmember, may also, in the interest of public safety and welfare, make any or all of the following orders: 
(1)  Order the closing of all retail liquor stores. 
(2)  Order the closing of all establishments or portions thereof serving intoxicating liquor, beer or wine. 
(3)  Order the closing of all private clubs or portions thereof wherein the consumption of intoxicating liquor, beer or wine is permitted. 
(4)  Order the discontinuance of the sale of beer or wine. 
(5)  Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle. 
(6)  Order the closing of gasoline stations and other establishments, the chief activity of which is the sale, distribution or dispensing of liquid flammable or combustible products. 
(6)  Order the closing of gasoline stations and other establishments, the chief activity of which is the sale, distribution or dispensing of liquid flammable or combustible products. 
(7)  Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection of life and property. 
(Code 1983, § 5.5-5; Ord. No. 1482, § 2, 9-10-12) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 870.045. 
Sec. 22-6. - Curfew termination; extension. 
    A state of emergency shall terminate at the end of a period of 72 consecutive hours thereafter unless, prior to the end of such 72-hour period, the public official, the governor, county commission, or city council shall have terminated such emergency. Any extension of the 72-hour time limit must be accomplished by a request from the public official and the concurrence of the county commission or city council by duly enacted ordinance or resolution in regular or special session. 
(Code 1983, § 5.5-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 870.047. 
Sec. 22-7. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Any person violating provisions of this chapter or executive order issued pursuant thereto or any person who willfully refuses to comply with the order of any designated authority, law officer or person charged with the responsibility of enforcement of this article or such executive order is guilty of an offense punishable pursuant to section 1-11(a). 
(Code 1983, § 5.5-7) 
Chapter 24 - CODE ENFORCEMENT CITATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1247, § 2, adopted March 27, 2006, amended the Code by adding a new ch. 54, §§ 54-1-54-12. In order to prevent duplication of chapter and section numbers, the provisions have been redesignated as ch. 24, §§ 24-1-24-12. Subsequently, Ord. No. 1312, § 2, adopted November 13, 2006, specifically amended the provisions of Ord. No. 1247 to change all references therein from ch. 54 to ch. 24. 
Cross reference- Code enforcement board, § 2-111 et seq. 

Sec. 24-1. - Issuance of citation. 
    An employee of the city who is duly authorized by the city council and responsible for the enforcement of such ordinances, hereinafter referred to as a "code enforcement officer", may issue a citation to a person to appear in county court of Okaloosa County, Florida when the code enforcement officer upon personal investigation has reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed a civil infraction in violation of a city ordinance. Employees whom may be designated as code enforcement officers may include but are not limited to, code inspectors, law enforcement officers, public works inspectors, fire safety inspectors and zoning inspectors. 
(Ord. No. 1247, § 2, 3-27-06) 
Sec. 24-2. - Notice of violation. 
    Prior to issuing a citation, the code enforcement officer shall provide notice to the person that the person has committed a violation of a city ordinance and shall establish a reasonable period, not to exceed 30 days, within which the person must correct the violation. If, upon personal investigation, the code enforcement officer finds that the person has not corrected the violation within the time period, the code enforcement officer may issue a citation to the person who has committed the violation. A code enforcement officer does not have to provide the person with a reasonable time period to correct the violation prior to issuing a citation and may immediately issue a citation if a repeat violation is found. If the code enforcement officer has reason to believe the violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety, or welfare or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible, the code enforcement officer does not have to provide a reasonable time period to correct the violation prior to issuing a citation. 
(Ord. No. 1247, § 2, 3-27-06) 
Sec. 24-3. - Form of citation. 
    A citation and notice to appear shall be in the form prescribed by the city council and when issued, shall constitute notice than an officer has probable cause to believe an infraction of the Code has been committed and that the cause will be heard in the county court in and for the county. Exclusive jurisdiction and authority shall be in the county court to dispose of or make adjudication based upon a citation once it has been issued. A citation shall include the following: 
(1)  The date and time of issuance. 
(2)  The name and address of the person to whom the citation is issued. 
(3)  The date and time the civil infraction was committed. 
(4)  The facts constituting reasonable cause. 
(5)  The number or section of the Code or ordinance violated. 
(6)  The name and authority of the code enforcement officer. 
(7)  The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay the civil penalty or to contest the citation. 
(8)  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects to contest the citation. 
(9)  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects not to contest the citation. 
(10)  A conspicuous statement that if the person fails to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed, or fails to appear in court to contest the citation, the person shall be deemed to have waived his or her right to contest the citation and that in such case, judgment may be entered against the person for an amount up to the maximum civil penalty. 
(Ord. No. 1247, § 2, 3-27-06) 
Sec. 24-4. - Issuance of citation. 
    For violation of any of the provisions of the Code, the code enforcement office shall have the discretion to either issue a warning with no civil penalty, issue a citation for a fine in the amount as approved by the city council, or a notice to appear in court. Any person cited for violation of the Code shall be deemed to be charged with a civil infraction and/or cited to appear in court. 
(Ord. No. 1247, § 2, 3-27-06) 
Sec. 24-5. - Payment of civil penalty. 
    Any person cited with a violation of the Code may pay the civil penalty within ten days of the date of receiving the citation. If the person cited follows the above procedure, he shall be deemed to have admitted the civil infraction and to have waived his right to a trial on the issue of commission of the violation. 
(1)  If a person fails to pay the civil penalty within ten days of receipt of the citation, the clerk of the court shall issue a notice to appear. An additional amount shall be assessed as a late fee for each penalty paid after the initial ten-day period in accordance with the fee resolution as established by the city council. 
(2)  If a person fails to pay the civil penalty or fails to appear in court to contest the citation, the court may issue an order to show cause upon the request of the municipality. This order shall require such person to appear before the court to explain why actions on the citation have not been taken. If any person who is issued such order fails to appear in response to the court's directive, that person shall be held in contempt of court. 
(3)  Any person who willfully refuses to sign and accept a citation issued by a code enforcement officer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable as provided in F.S. § 775.082 or 775.083. 
(Ord. No. 1247, § 2, 3-27-06) 
Sec. 24-6. - Filing of citation with county court. 
    After issuing a citation to an alleged violator, a code enforcement officer shall deposit the original and one copy of the citation with the county court. Any person who willfully refuses to sign and accept a citation issued by a code enforcement officer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree punishable as provided in F.S. § 775.082 or 775.083. 
(Ord. No. 1247, § 2, 3-27-06) 
Sec. 24-7. - Schedule of civil penalties. 
    A person who receives a citation from a code enforcement officer for a violation of a city ordinance and who elects not to contest the citation shall be subject to a civil penalty in accordance with the following schedule: 
1st offense: Written citation; 
2nd offense: $75.00 fine; 
3rd offense: $150.00 fine. 
(Ord. No. 1247, § 2, 3-27-06) 
Sec. 24-8. - Judgment upon failure to contest citation. 
    Any person who fails to pay the appropriate civil penalty with the time period allowed, or who fails to appear in county court to contest the citation, shall be deemed to have waived his right to contest the citation, and judgment may be entered against the person in an amount not to exceed $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 1247, § 2, 3-27-06) 
Sec. 24-9. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this section shall not apply to the enforcement, pursuant to F.S. §§ 553.79 and 553.80, of building codes adopted pursuant to F.S. § 553.73, as they apply to construction, provided that a building permit is either not required or has been issued by the city. For purposes of this section, the term "building codes" means only those codes adopted pursuant to F.S. § 553.73. 
(Ord. No. 1247, § 2, 3-27-06) 
Sec. 24-10. - Provisions supplemental. 
    The provisions of this article are additional and supplemental means of enforcing city codes or ordinances. Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the city from enforcing its codes or ordinances by any other means. 
(Ord. No. 1247, § 2, 3-27-06) 
Sec. 24-11. - Separate offenses. 
    In addition to the penalties provided in this article, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any ordinance shall be deemed a public nuisances and may be, by the city, abated as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1247, § 2, 3-27-06) 
Sec. 24-12. - Notice to appear. 
(a)  Notwithstanding F.S. § 34.07, a code enforcement office, designated pursuant to this article, may issue a notice to appear at any hearing conducted by a county court if the officer, based upon person investigation, has reasonable cause to believe that the person has violated a code or ordinance. A notice to appear means a written order issued by a code enforcement officer in lieu of physical arrest requiring a person accused of violating the law to appear in a designated court or governmental office at a specified date and time. If a person issued a notice to appear under this section refuses to sign such notice, the code enforcement officer has no authority to arrest such person. 
(b)  Prior to issuing a notice to appear, a code enforcement officer shall provide written notice to the person that the person has committed a violation of a code or ordinance and shall establish a reasonable time period within which the person must correct the violation. Such time period shall be no fewer than five days and no more than 30 days. If, upon personal investigation, a code enforcement officer finds that the person has not corrected the violation within the prescribed time period, a code enforcement officer may issue a notice to appear to the person who has committed the violation. A code enforcement officer is not required to provide the person with a reasonable time period to correct the violation prior to issuing a notice to appear and may immediately issue a notice to appear if a repeat violation is found, or if the code enforcement officer has reason to believe that the violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety, or welfare or that the violator is engaged in violations of an itinerant or transient nature, as defined by local code or ordinance within the city, or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible. 
(Ord. No. 1247, § 2, 3-27-06) 
Chapter 26 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- The Florida Election Code, F.S. ch. 97 et seq. 

Sec. 26-1. - Qualifying fees of candidates. 
    The qualifying fees of candidates for city office, as required by the Charter, shall be as follows: 
(1)  For member of the city council ..... $ 10.00 
(2)  For mayor ..... 25.00 
(3)  For city clerk ..... 50.00 
(Code 1983, § 6-3) 
Sec. 26-2. - Effective date of municipal offices. 
    Duly elected municipal officers shall take office on the first Monday in April next after the election. 
(Ord. No. 777, § 4, 8-10-92; Ord. No. 847, § 1, 10-10-94) 
Sec. 26-3. - Eliminating runoff elections and breaking tie votes. 
    In case two or more persons receive an equal and highest number of votes for the same office, such persons shall draw lots to determine who shall be elected to the office. 
(Ord. No. 777, § 5, 8-10-92; Ord. No. 791, 3-8-93; Ord. No. 847, § 2, 10-10-94) 
Chapter 30 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; animals, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 38; landscape development, ch. 42; parks and recreation, ch. 58; solid waste and recycling services, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 90; land use regulations, ch. 102. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Regulation of noise-Generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud and raucous noise, which term shall mean any sound which, because of its volume level, duration and character, annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities within the limits of the city. 
(b)  The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud and raucous noises in violation of this section, which enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Horns and signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on a street or public place of the city, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; the use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up. The use of sirens, except by authorized emergency vehicles, is prohibited. 
(2)  Radios, phonographs and similar devices. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, television set, boom box set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which the machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection. 
(3)  Loud vocal noises. Vocal noises made in a loud and raucous manner between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office or other place of business, or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence. 
(4)  Construction or repairing of buildings. The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair, of any building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in the case of urgent necessity in the interest of the public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the building inspector should he determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and if he shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, he may grant permission for such work to be done within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the work. 
(5)  Schools, courts, churches, hospitals, medical facilities. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, medical facility, church or court, while the same is in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of the institution or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in a hospital; provided, that conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that such street is a school, medical facility, hospital, or court street. 
(6)  Construction equipment. The operation between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. and at any time on Sundays of any pile driver, steam or power shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise. 
(7)  Electronic sound amplification. The use of electronic sound amplification equipment in such a manner as to produce a sound which is capable of being heard at a point in excess of 50 feet from the source thereof between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. is prohibited in the following zones: agriculture district, one (single) family district, multiple-family district and commercial district. 
(c)  The provisions of subsections (b)(1) through (7) are intended to be construed to secure for the people freedom from unwanted loud and raucous noise as described in this section without violating any of the rights secured by the Constitution to the people, and are not intended, nor shall they be construed, to regulate the usual and customary noise incidental to urban life. 
(Code 1983, § 11-8) 
Sec. 30-2. - Same-Penalty. 
    Any person violating the provisions of section 30-1 shall be subject to the penalty provided by section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 11-9) 
Sec. 30-3. - Same-Additional remedy; injunction. 
    As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle or machinery in violation of any provision of section 30-1 and which causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitivity or which endangers the comfort, repose, health or peace of residents in an area shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1983, § 11-10) 
Sec. 30-4. - Sanitary nuisances. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any property within the city to allow any sanitary nuisance, as defined by F.S. ch. 386, which chapter of the Florida Statutes is incorporated in this section and adopted by reference, to exist on his property. Anyone violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1983, § 11-11) 
Secs. 30-5-30-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - JUNKYARDS AND LITTERING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Solid waste and recycling services, ch. 70; littering, § 74-1. 
State Law reference- Littering, F.S. § 403.41; junkyards, F.S. § 339.241. 

Sec. 30-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Junkyard means an establishment or place of business which is maintained or operated for the use of storing, keeping, buying or selling wrecked, scrapped, ruined or dismantled motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts. This definition shall not apply so long as no more than two vehicles are present on any one owner's property, and provided the vehicles are supported by four properly mounted tires, or the axles supported by blocks, jack stands, or other safe secure supports. 
    Litter means any solid waste as defined in chapter 70 of the Code. 
(Code 1983, § 11-16(a)) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-27. - Littering. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to place, cause to be placed or allow to be placed any litter on public or private lands or waters and waterways, within the city, except in authorized city dumping areas. 
(b)  The accumulation of litter on business, residential or undeveloped property that does not constitute a sanitary nuisance as defined in section 30-4, but that does create an eyesore or detracts from the aesthetic quality of the environment, is prohibited by this section. 
(Code 1983, § 11-16(b), (c)) 
Sec. 30-28. - Restriction on location of junkyards. 
    No junkyard shall be operated or maintained within 1,000 feet of any highway right-of-way; provided, however, that a person who was operating or maintaining a junkyard less than 1,000 feet from any highway prior to July 1, 1965, may be permitted to continue to operate and maintain the junkyard, if the view of the junkyard from such highway is obscured by natural objects, plantings, or concealment fencing on his property line; provided further, that the provisions in this section shall not be construed to prohibit any person who operates or maintains a junkyard less than 1,000 feet from any highway prior to July 1, 1965, to enlarge, expand or increase the size of the junkyard. 
(Code 1983, § 11-16(d); Ord. No. 782, § 4, 10-12-92) 
Sec. 30-29. - Corrective notices. 
(a)  The public services director or his designee is hereby empowered to issue written corrective notices to any person violating any provision of this article. The notice, if issued, shall state the date and time issued, nature of the offense committed, corrective measures to be taken, and the date and time such corrections shall be made. The time period allowed for taking corrective measures shall not exceed 72 hours, exclusive of weekends and holidays. Notices mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the violator's last known place of residence, hand-delivered to the violator, or posted on the property where the offense exists, in a conspicuous place shall be deemed personal service upon the person for the purposes of this article. 
(b)  No person shall fail to fully comply with a written corrective notice and failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 782, § 5, 10-12-92) 
Secs. 30-30-30-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Land use regulations, ch. 102; subdivisions, § 102-481 et seq. 
State Law reference- Management and storage of surface waters, F.S. § 373.403 et seq.; drainage and water control, F.S. ch. 298. 

Sec. 30-51. - Purpose. 
    This article is intended to allow landowners reasonable use of their property provided stormwater runoff peak rates and volumes retained after development approximate existing predevelopment conditions and precautions will be taken to prevent erosion, sedimentation and flooding. 
(Code 1983, § 13.5-1) 
Sec. 30-52. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. Words not defined in this section shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use as defined by the latest edition of Webster's Dictionary. 
    Agricultural lands means those lands in any agricultural use, including forestry. 
    Applicant means any person applying for or who has been granted a permit to proceed with a project. 
    Aquifer means an underground formation, group of formations, or part of a formation that is permeable enough to transmit, store or yield usable quantities of water. 
    Artificial drainage system means any canal, ditch, culvert, dike, storm sewer or other manmade facility which tends to control the surface flow of water. 
    As-built plans means the amended site plans specifying the locations, dimensions, elevations, capacities and capabilities of structures of facilities as they have been constructed. 
    Clearing means the removal of trees and brush from a substantial part of the land, but shall not include mowing. 
    Comprehensive plan means a plan formally adopted by ordinance pursuant to the 1985 Florida Growth Management Act. 
    Detention refers to the collection and storage of surface water for subsequent controlled discharge at a rate which is less than the rate of inflow. 
    Developer means any person who engages in development or development activity either in his own behalf or as the agent of an owner of property. 
    Development or development activity means: 
(1)  The construction, installation, demolition or removal of a structure or drainage facility. 
(2)  Clearing, scraping, grubbing, killing, or otherwise removing the vegetation from a site. 
(3)  Adding, removing, exposing, excavating, leveling, grading, digging, burrowing, dumping, piling, dredging, or otherwise significantly disturbing the soil, mud, sand or rock of a site. 
    Discharge or discharge point means the point of outflow of water from a project, site, aquifer, drainage basin or facility. 
    Drainage facility means the whole or any part of the drainage system. 
    Drainage plan refers to the detailed analysis required by section 30-54 for each activity described in section 30-53. 
    Drainage system is the system through which water flows; it includes all watercourses, water bodies, and wetlands. 
    Erosion means the wearing or washing away of soil by the action of wind or water. 
    Existing means the average physical condition of the land and buildings on a site immediately before development or redevelopment commences. 
    Fees or charges means costs of any type to be borne by a developer, builder or applicant initiating requests for services delineated within this article. 
    Flood means a temporary rise in the level of any water body, watercourse, or wetland which results in the inundation of areas not ordinarily covered by water. 
    Groundwater means water beneath the surface of the ground, whether or not flowing through known and definite channels. 
    Impervious surface means a surface which has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water. The term includes most conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots, and similar structures. 
    Land means earth, water and air, whether above, below or on the surface, and includes any vegetation, improvements or structures. 
    Maintenance means that action taken to restore or preserve the functional intent of any facility or system. 
    Natural systems means systems which predominantly consist of or use those communities of plants, animals, bacteria, and other life systems which naturally occur on the land, in the soil or in the water. 
    Owner means the person in whom is vested the free ownership, dominion or title of property, that is the lawful proprietor. This term may also include a tenant, if, under his lease, he is responsible for the maintenance of the property; also any agent of the owner or of the tenant, including a developer or a builder. 
    Receiving bodies of water means any water bodies, watercourses, and wetlands into which surface waters flow. 
    Recharge means the inflow of water into a project, site, aquifer, drainage basin or facility. 
    Retention refers to the collection and storage of runoff without subsequent surface discharge to surface waters. 
    Sediment means solid material, whether mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has moved from its site or origin by air, water or gravity. 
    Sedimentation facility means any structure or area which is designed to hold runoff water until suspended sediments have settled. 
    Site means any tract, lot or parcel of land or combination of tracts, lots or parcels of land which are in one ownership, or are continuous and in diverse ownership, where development is to be performed as part of a unit, subdivision or project. 
    Structure means anything constructed, installed or portable, the use of which requires a location on a parcel of land. 
    Swale means a natural or manmade drainage pathway, which if manmade has a top width to depth ratio of the cross section equal to or greater than six to one or side slopes equal to or greater than three feet horizontal to one foot vertical; and has a grade as flat as the topography and design conditions will allow; and only contains continuous areas of standing or flowing water following the occurrence of rainfall or flooding; and is planted with vegetation suitable for soil stabilization, stormwater treatment, and nutrient uptake. 
    Vegetation means all plant growth, especially trees, shrubs, vines, ferns, mosses and grasses. 
    Volume means occupied space, measured in cubic units. 
    Water and community waters means any and all water on or beneath the surface of the ground or in the atmosphere. It includes the water in any watercourse, water body, or drainage system. It also includes diffused surface water and water percolating, standing or flowing beneath the surface of the ground, as well as coastal water. 
    Water body means any natural or artificial pond, lake, reservoir, or other area which ordinarily or intermittently contains water and which has a discernable shoreline. 
    Watercourse means any natural or artificial stream, creek, channel, ditch, canal, waterway, gully, ravine or wash in which water flows in a definite direction, either continuously or intermittently, and which has a definite channel, bed or banks. 
    Water management plan means a compilation of data as reflected in section 30-54. 
    Wetlands means those areas saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a dominance of vegetation adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. 
(Code 1983, § 13.5-2) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-53. - Submission of water management plan; exemptions, waivers and variances. 
(a)  Required. Unless exempted pursuant to subsection (b) or waived pursuant to subsection (c), a water management plan must be submitted and approved before: 
(1)  A plat is recorded or land is subdivided. 
(2)  An existing drainage system is altered, rerouted, deepened, widened, enlarged or obstructed. 
(3)  Development is commenced. 
(b)  Exemptions. The following development activities are exempt from the water management plan requirements: 
(1)  The development of one single-family or duplex residential structure not in an existing subdivision or the development of less than five single-family or duplex residential dwelling units and their accessory structures (such as fences, storage sheds and septic tanks) in an existing subdivision; unless such structures are on property adjacent to a natural watercourse, water body or wetland, in which case the requirements of section 30-56 will apply. 
(2)  Agricultural activity not involving the artificial drainage of land. 
(3)  Any maintenance, alteration, use or improvement to an existing structure not changing or affecting the quality, rate, volume or location of surface water discharge. 
(c)  Waivers. 
(1)  A waiver of the water management plan requirements may be obtained by submitting an application on forms supplied by the city. The application shall contain: 
a.  The name, address and telephone number of the developer and owner; 
b.  A description and a drawing of the proposed development; 
c.  The location of the development; and 
d.  Any other information required by the city or comprehensive plan that is reasonably necessary to evaluate the proposed development. 
(2)  The city may grant a waiver if the application demonstrates the development is not likely to: 
a.  Significantly increase or decrease the rate or volume of surface water runoff; 
b.  Have an significant adverse impact on a wetland, watercourse or water body; 
c.  Significantly contribute to the degeneration of water quality; and 
d.  Impair the spirit and intent of the comprehensive plan. 
(3)  The following types of development shall not be eligible to receive a waiver: 
a.  Shopping centers; 
b.  Industrial or commercial facilities; 
c.  Subdivisions; 
d.  Roads; and 
e.  Impervious surfaces greater than 10,000 square feet. 
(d)  Variances. The city may grant a written variance from any requirement of this article using the following criteria: 
(1)  There are special circumstances applicable to the subject property or its intended use. 
(2)  The granting of the variance will not: 
a.  Significantly increase or decrease the rate or volume of surface water runoff; 
b.  Have a significant impact on a wetland, watercourse or water body; 
c.  Significantly contribute to the degradation or water quality; 
d.  Otherwise significantly impair attainment of the objectives of this article; 
e.  Impair the spirit and intent of the comprehensive plan. 
(Code 1983, § 13.5-3) 
Sec. 30-54. - Contents of water management plan. 
(a)  It is the responsibility of an applicant to include in the water management plan sufficient information for reviewing officials to evaluate the environmental qualities of the affected area, the potential and predicted impacts of the proposed activity on affected waters and the effectiveness and acceptability of these measures proposed by the applicant for reducing adverse impacts. The water management plan shall, when appropriate, contain maps, charts, graphs, tables, photographs, narrative descriptions, explanations and citations to supporting references. The water management plan shall be prepared, sealed and authenticated by a Florida registered engineer. 
(b)  The water management plan, if separate from the construction plan and final plat, shall contain the name, address and telephone number (to include metes and bounds and street address, if applicable) of the owner/developer. In addition, the legal description of the property and tax identification number shall be provided. Also, locations with reference to such landmarks as major water bodies, adjoining roads, railroads, subdivisions or towns shall be clearly identified on a map. 
(c)  The existing environmental hydrologic conditions of the site, receiving waters and wetlands shall be described and mapped where appropriate, including the following: 
(1)  The direction, flow rate and volume of flow of surface water runoff under predevelopment conditions. 
(2)  The location of areas on the site where surface waters collect and percolate into the ground. 
(3)  A description of all watercourses, water bodies and wetlands on or adjacent to the site or into which surface waters flow. Information regarding their water quality and the current water quality classification, if any, given them by the state department of environmental regulation shall be included. 
(4)  Groundwater levels, including seasonal fluctuations, using U.S. Soil Conservation Service (SCS) methodology or other appropriate means. 
(5)  A description of the topography, soils, vegetation and location of the floodplain. 
(d)  Proposed alterations of the site shall be described and mapped where appropriate, including: 
(1)  Changes in topography. 
(2)  Areas where vegetation will be cleared or otherwise destroyed. 
(3)  Areas that will be covered with an impervious surface and description of the surfacing material. 
(4)  The size and location of buildings or structures. 
(5)  Proposed drainage facilities. 
(e)  Predicted impacts of the proposed development on existing conditions shall be described and mapped where appropriate, including: 
(1)  Changes in water quality. 
(2)  Changes in groundwater levels. 
(3)  Changes in the extent of flooding on the site from upstream and downstream sources. 
(4)  Impact on wetlands. 
(5)  Impact on vegetation. 
(f)  All components of the drainage system and any measures for the detention, retention or infiltration of water or for the protection of water quality shall be described and mapped where appropriate, including: 
(1)  The channel, direction, flow rate, volume and quality of surface water that will be conveyed from the site with a comparison to predevelopment conditions. 
(2)  Detention and retention areas, including plans for the discharge of contained waters, maintenance plans and hydrological predictions of water quality in the detention and retention areas. 
(3)  Areas of the site to be used or reserved for percolating water into the ground, including a prediction of the impact on groundwater quality. 
(4)  A plan for the control of erosion and sedimentation, which specifies in detail the type and location of control measures, the stage of development at which they will be put into place or used and provisions for their maintenance. 
(5)  Any other information which the developer or reviewing officials consider necessary for an evaluation of the proposed development. 
(Code 1983, § 13.5-4) 
Sec. 30-55. - Performance standards. 
    Water management plans must demonstrate that the proposed development or activity has been placed and designed and will be constructed and maintained to meet each of the following standards: 
(1)  Ensure that, after development, runoff from the site approximates the rate of flow, volume and timing of runoff that would have occurred following the same rainfall under existing conditions and, to the extent practicable, predevelopment conditions, unless runoff is discharged into an offsite drainage facility and approved by the controlling authority. 
(2)  Maintain the natural hydrodynamic characteristics of the watershed. 
(3)  Protect or restore the quality of ground and surface waters. 
(4)  Ensure that erosion during and after development is minimized. 
(5)  Protect groundwater levels. 
(6)  Protect the beneficial functioning of wetlands as areas for the natural storage of surface waters and the chemical reduction and assimilation of pollutants. 
(7)  Prevent increased flooding and damage that results from improper location, construction and design of structures in areas which are presently subject to an unacceptable danger of flooding. 
(8)  Prevent or reverse salt water intrusion. 
(9)  Protect the natural fluctuating levels of salinity in estuarine areas. 
(10)  Minimize injury to flora and fauna and adverse impacts to fish and wildlife habitat. 
(11)  Otherwise further the objectives of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 13.5-5) 
Sec. 30-56. - Design standards. 
    To ensure attainment of the objectives of this article and to ensure that performance standards will be met, the design, construction and maintenance of drainage systems shall be consistent with the following standards: 
(1)  Channeling runoff directly into water bodies shall be prohibited. Instead, runoff shall be routed through swales and other systems designed to increase time of concentration, decrease velocity, increase infiltration, allow suspended solids to settle and remove pollutants. 
(2)  Natural watercourses shall not be dredged, cleared of vegetation, deepened, widened, straightened, stabilized or otherwise altered. Water shall be retained or detained before it enters any natural watercourse in order to preserve the natural hydrodynamics of the watercourse and to prevent siltation or other pollutions. 
(3)  The area of land disturbed by development shall be as small as practicable. These areas which are not to be disturbed shall be protected by an adequate barrier from construction activity. Whenever possible, natural vegetation shall be retained and protected. 
(4)  No grading, cutting or filling shall be commenced until erosion and sedimentation control devices have been installed between the disturbed area and water bodies, watercourses and wetlands. 
(5)  Land which has been cleared for development and upon which construction has not commenced shall be protected from erosion by appropriate techniques designed to revegetate the area. 
(6)  Sediment shall be retained on the site of the development. 
(7)  Wetlands and other water bodies shall not be used as sediment traps during development. 
(8)  Erosion and sedimentation facilities shall receive regular maintenance to ensure that they continue to function properly. 
(9)  Artificial watercourses shall be designed, considering soil type, so that the velocity of flow is low enough to prevent erosion. 
(10)  Vegetated buffer strips shall be retained in their natural state to a minimum distance of 25 feet along the banks of all watercourses, water bodies or wetlands. The maximum width of the buffer shall be sufficient to prevent erosion, trap the sediment in overland runoff, provide access to the waterbody and allow for periodic flooding without damage to structures. 
(11)  Intermittent watercourses, such as swales, shall be vegetated with approved grasses, etc. 
(12)  Retention and detention ponds shall be used to retain and detain the increased and accelerated runoff which the development generates. Water shall be released from detention ponds into watercourses or wetlands at a rate and in a manner approximating the natural flow which would have occurred before development. Fencing above a certain designated level shall be installed to protect city interests. The type and method of installation of a fence shall comply with established standards provided by the city. 
(13)  Although the use of wetlands for storing and purifying water is encouraged, care must be taken not to overload their capacity, thereby harming the wetlands and transitional vegetation. Wetlands should not be damaged by the construction of detention ponds. 
(14)  The first one inch of runoff from impervious surfaces shall be retained on the site of the development. 
(15)  Runoff from parking lots shall be treated to remove oil and sediment before it enters receiving waters. 
(16)  Detention and retention areas shall be designed so that shorelines are sinuous rather than straight and so that the length of shoreline is maximized, thus offering more space for the growth of littoral vegetation. 
(17)  The banks of detention and retention areas shall slope at a gentle grade into the water as safeguard against drowning, personal injury or other accidents, to encourage the growth of vegetation and to allow the alternate flooding and exposure of areas along the shore as water levels periodically rise and fall. 
(18)  The use of drainage facilities and vegetated buffer zones as open space, recreation and conservation areas shall be encouraged. 
(Code 1983, § 13.5-6) 
Sec. 30-57. - Procedures and fees. 
    Procedures and fees shall apply as follows: 
(1)  Submission of waiver application or water management plan. Any person planning a development, unless exempted, shall submit a water management plan or an application for waiver to the city. 
(2)  Notification of applicant for waiver. Within ten working days after submission of the completed waiver application, the city shall notify the applicant that the waiver has been approved or denied and whether a water management plan must be submitted by the applicant. 
(3)  Collection of permit fee; schedule of fees. A permit fee will be collected at the time the water management plan or application for waiver is submitted and will reflect a cost of administration, engineering review and management of the permitting process. The city council shall establish, by resolution, a prorated fee schedule based upon the relative complexity of the project. The fee schedule may be amended from time to time by the city council as required and shall be reviewed at least annually prior to adoption of the city budget. 
(4)  Approval or rejection of water management plan. Within 30 days after submission of the completed water management plan, the city shall approve, with or without specified conditions or modifications, or reject the plan, and shall notify the applicant thereof in writing. If the city shall approve, with or without specified conditions or modifications, or reject the plan the applicant shall be notified in writing. If the city has not rendered a decision within 30 days after plan submission, the applicant shall be informed of the status of the review process and the anticipated completion date. If the plan is rejected or modified, the city shall state the reasons. However, it shall not be the responsibility of the city or any of its contractual services to design an acceptable project. 
(5)  Compliance with performance standards. The water management plan shall not be approved unless it clearly indicates that the proposed development will meet the performance standards described in section 30-55, except where a variance has been granted pursuant to section 30-53, or where offsite management is approved pursuant to section 30-55. 
(6)  Inspections. No water management plan shall be approved without adequate provision for inspection of the property before development activity commences. The applicant shall arrange with the city for scheduling the following inspections: 
a.  Initial inspection. Prior to approval of the water management plan. 
b.  Bury inspection. Prior to burial of any underground drainage structure. 
c.  Finish inspection. When all work including installation of all drainage facilities has been completed. The city shall inspect the work and shall either approve it or notify the applicant in writing in what respects there has been a failure to comply with the requirements of the approved water management plan. Any portion of the work which does not comply shall be promptly corrected by the applicant or the applicant will be subject to the penalty provisions of section 30-59. 
Provisions of section 30-52 pertaining to the definition of fees and charges shall apply. 
(7)  Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the action of any official charged with the enforcement of the criteria within this article, as the result of the disapproval of a properly filed application from a permit, issuance of a written notice of violation, or an alleged failure to properly enforce provisions of this article in regard to a specific application, shall have the right to appeal the action to the city council. The appeal shall be filed in writing within 20 days of the date of official transmittal of the final decision or determination to the applicant and shall state clearly the grounds on which the appeal is based. 
(Code 1983, § 13.5-7) 
Sec. 30-58. - Maintenance of drainage facilities. 
(a)  Drainage facilities shall be dedicated to the governing authority and accepted after one year where they are determined to be appropriately a part of the local unit maintained regional system or are unlikely to be adequately maintained by the developer or owner of the property. 
(b)  The system maintained by the owner shall have adequate easements to permit the governing authority to inspect it and, if necessary, to take corrective action should the owner fail to properly maintain the system. Before taking corrective action, the governing authority shall give the owner written notice of the nature of the existing defects. If the owner fails within 30 days from the date of notice to commence corrective action or to appeal the matter to the city council, the governing body may take necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien on the real property until paid. 
(Code 1983, § 13.5-8) 
Sec. 30-59. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Nuisance. Any development activity that is commenced without prior approval of a water management plan or is conducted contrary to an approved water management plan as required by this article shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
(b)  Civil and criminal penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided in this article or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment in jail for a period not to exceed 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day during which the violation occurs or continues. 
(c)  Restoration of altered conditions. Any violator may be required to restore any altered conditions of the land to their undisturbed condition. If restoration is not undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the city council may take necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon the property until paid. 
(d)  Notice of violation. When the city determines that development activity is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to the owner of the property. The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or applicant. 
(2)  The street address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring. 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation. 
(4)  A description of the remedial actions necessary to bring the development activity into compliance with this article and a time schedule for completion of such remedial action. 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed. 
(6)  A statement that the city's determination of violation may be appealed to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal within 15 days of service of notice of violation. A notice of violation shall be served upon the person to whom it is directed, either personally in the manner provided for personal service of notices by the court of local jurisdiction or by mailing a copy of the notice of violation by certified or registered mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to such person at his last known address. A notice of violation issued pursuant to this section constitutes a determination from which an administrative appeal may be taken to the city council. 
(Code 1983, § 13.5-9) 
Sec. 30-60. - Emergency exemption. 
(a)  This article shall not be construed to prevent the doing of any act necessary to prevent material harm to or destruction of real or personal property as a result of a present emergency, including but not limited to fire, infestation by pests, hazards resulting from violent storms or hurricanes, or when the property is in imminent peril and the necessity of obtaining a permit is impractical and would cause undue hardship in the protection of the property. 
(b)  A report of any emergency action authorized by this section shall be made to the city by the owner or person in control of the property upon which emergency action was taken as soon as practicable, but no more than ten days following such action. Remedial action may be required by the city. 
(Code 1983, § 13.5-10) 
Sec. 30-61. - Vested rights. 
    Provisions of this article shall not, in any way, limit or modify the vested rights of any person to complete any development or improvements to the lands based upon prior law where a previous permit or authorization has been granted or applied for and where such previous permit or authorization remains in effect. The city council may acknowledge vested rights in other circumstances where it is equitable and just. 
(Code 1983, § 13.5-11) 
Sec. 30-62. - Conflict with other ordinances and codes. 
    In case of conflict between this article or any part thereof, and the whole part of any other existing or future ordinance or code, the most restrictive in each case shall apply. 
(Code 1983, § 13.5-12) 
Chapter 32 - FAIR HOUSING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 853, § 2, adopted Nov. 14, 1994, added provisions designated as ch. 3, §§ 3-1-3-12. In order to conform to the alphabetical sequence of the Code, said ordinance has been redesignated as ch. 32, §§ 32-1-32-12, at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 32-1. - Declaration of policy. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city in the exercise of its police power for the public safety, public health, and general welfare, to assure equal opportunity to obtain adequate housing by all persons, regardless of race, color, religion, ancestry, sex, place of birth, physical and mental handicap, familial status, or national origin, and to that end, to eliminate discrimination in housing. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 2, 11-14-94) 
Sec. 32-2. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations and their derivations shall have the meaning herein given. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall' is always mandatory and not merely director. Words not defined shall be given their common meaning, or for those so included, the meaning found in section 1-2 of the Code. 
    Compliance by out of town broker means any real estate broker not licensed by the city who shall exercise any function of a real estate broker within the city shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter. 
    Council means the City Council of Crestview, Florida. 
    Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under sections 32-4, 32-5 or 32-6 of this chapter. 
    Dwelling means any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designated or intended for occupancy as, a resident by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof. 
    Familial status means one or more individuals (who have not attained the age of 18 years) being domiciled with (a) a parent or another person having legal custody of such individuals; or (b) the designee of such parent or other person having such custody, with the written permission of such parent or other person. The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of familial status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
    Family includes a single individual. 
    Person includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associates, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, and fiduciaries. 
    Real estate broker means any person, firm, partnership or corporation licensed by the city who sells, rents, or leases real estate in the city for residential, industrial, or commercial mortgages or otherwise finances. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 2, 11-14-94) 
Sec. 32-3. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Nothing in section 3-4 (other than subsection 3-4(b)) shall apply to: 
(1)  Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner; provided, that such private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family houses at any one time; provided further that: 
a.  In the case of the sale of any such single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in such house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period; 
b.  Such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to any right to all or a portion of the proceeds for the sale or rental of, more than three such single-family houses at any one time; 
c.  After the effective date of this chapter the sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be excepted from the application of this chapter only if such house is sold or rented: 
1.  Without the use of any manner of sales or rental facilities or the sale or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling for renting dwellings or of any employees or agent of any such broker, agent salesman, or person. 
2.  Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice, of any advertisement or written notice in violation of section 3-4(c) of this chapter; but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title. 
(2)  Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his residence. 
(b)  For the purposes of subsection (a), a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if: 
(1)  He has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or 
(2)  He has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of his personal residence in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or 
(3)  He is the owner of any dwelling designated or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families. 
(c)  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex, or national origin. Nor shall anything in this chapter prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings from which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 2, 11-14-94) 
Sec. 32-4. - Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing. 
    As made applicable by section 32-3 and except as exempted by section 32-3(a) and 32-7, it shall be unlawful: 
(1)  To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, place of birth, physical or mental handicap, familial status, or national origin. 
(2)  To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex, place of birth, physical or mental handicap, familial status, or national origin. 
(3)  To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published any notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, place of birth, physical or mental handicap, familial status, or national origin, or any intention to make any such preference, limitation, or discrimination. 
(4)  To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, place of birth, physical or mental handicap, familial status, or national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(5)  For profit, to introduce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion, sex, place of birth, physical or mental handicap, familial status, or national origin. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 2, 11-14-94) 
Sec. 32-5. - Discrimination in the financing of housing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefore for the purpose of purchasing, construction, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against him/her in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance, because of the race, color, religion, sex, place of birth, physical or mental handicap, familial status, or national origin of such person or of any person associated with him/her in connection with such loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants, or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given, provided that nothing contained in this section shall impair the scope or effectiveness of the exception contained in section 32-3. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 2, 11-14-94) 
Sec. 32-6. - Discrimination in the provisions of brokerage service. 
    It shall be unlawful to deny any person access or to membership or participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him/her in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation on action account of race, color, religion, sex, place of birth, physical or mental handicap, familial status, or national origin. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 2, 11-14-94) 
Sec. 32-7. - Administration. 
(a)  The authority and responsibility for administering this policy shall be with a board appointed by the city council. 
(b)  The council will prescribe the functions, duties, and powers of an appointed board, including functions, duties, and powers with respect to investigating, conciliating, hearing, determining, ordering, certifying, reporting, or otherwise acting as to any work, business, or matter under this chapter. 
(c)  The council appointed board shall: 
(1)  Implement the provisions of this policy and rules and regulations promulgated thereunder and all ordinances, codes, rules, and regulations pertaining to housing discrimination. 
(2)  Receive, initiate, and investigate any and all complaints alleging violations of this chapter, and take appropriate action to eliminate, conciliate, prevent, and/or initiate prosecution of any such violation. 
(3)  Provide assistance in all matters relating to equal housing opportunity. 
(4)  Publish and disseminate public information and educational materials relating to housing discrimination. 
(5)  Recommend entry into written working agreements subject to approval by the city, as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter, with federal, state and county agencies involved in reducing housing discrimination. 
(6)  Administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of evidence before it by subpoenas issued by the appointed board. 
(7)  Take other informational, educational, or persuasive actions to implement the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 2, 11-14-94) 
Sec. 32-8. - Complaint procedures. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by an unlawful practice by this chapter must file a written complaint with the appointed board within 45 days after the alleged unlawful practice occurs. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a complaint, the appointed board shall serve upon the individual charged with a violation (hereinafter referred to as the respondent), the complaint and a written resume setting forth the rights of the parties including, but not limited to, the right of the respondent to a hearing on the matter before adjudication by the appointed board. 
(c)  The appointed board shall immediately investigate the complaint. Within 60 days from the date of the receipt of the complaint, the appointed board shall establish a written report with findings of facts. 
(d)  Copies of the report by the appointed board shall be sent to the complainant and the respondent. Either may within ten days after such services, request a hearing before the appointed board. 
(e)  When the complainant or the respondent request a hearing by the appointed board, or when the appointed board itself determine that a hearing is a desirable, the appointed board shall call and conduct such hearing in accordance with section 32-9, below. 
(f)  The board shall carry into execution the actions specified in this report, or, if a hearing is held, shall carry into execution the actions determined upon the appointed board in the hearing. 
(g)  The appointed board in its review or its hearings may determine: 
(1)  That the complaint lacks ground upon which to base action for violation of this policy; or 
(2)  That the complaint has been adequately dealt with by conciliation of the parties; or 
(3)  That the case warrants filing charges against the offending party in the appropriate court. In some cases both conciliation and adjudicative orders, or both adjudicative orders and initiation of court action may be indicated. 
(h)  If the appointed board issues an adjudicative order to correct, adjust, conciliate, prevent, or prohibit any unlawful act prohibited by this policy, and the respondent refuses or fails to comply with or obey such adjudication, the appointed board shall forthwith request that the state attorney file a complaint in the appropriate court. The appointed board shall, at all times, provide the complainant with full and timely information as to all the alternatives available to him or her under local, state and federal law, including assistance to initiate judicial action if desired, under the circumstances. 
(i)  The provisions of Rule 1.090, Florida Rules of Civil Procedure or any revisions thereto, shall govern the computation of any period of time prescribed by this chapter. 
(j)  All papers or pleadings required by this policy to be served may be served by certified mail or in accordance with the provisions of Rule 1.080(b), Florida Rules of Civil Procedure or any revision thereto. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 2, 11-14-94) 
Sec. 32-9. - Hearing(s) before the appointed board. 
(a)  When a hearing is required before the appointed board, as specified in section 32-8(e) above, the appointed board shall schedule the hearing and serve upon all interested parties a notice of time and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be held promptly, but not less than 15 days after service of such notice and of the appointed board's written report (section 32-8(e) above). 
(b)  The parties, or their authorized counsel, may file such statements with the appointed board, prior to the hearing date, as they deem necessary in support of their positions. The party may appear before the appointed board in person or by duly constituted representative and may have the assistance of legal counsel. The parties may present testimony and evidence, and the right to cross-examine witnesses shall be preserved. All testimony shall be given under oath or by affirmation. The appointed board shall not be bound by strict rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity but due process shall be observed. The appointed board shall keep a full record of the hearing, which records shall be public and open to inspection by any person, and upon request by any principal party to the proceedings the appointed board shall furnish such party a copy of the hearing record at cost. The constitutional rights of the respondent not to incriminate himself shall be scrupulously observed. 
(c)  The appointed board shall make a finding of fact, and a determination of action to be taken (section 3-8(g) above). 
(d)  The appointed board may issue subpoenas to compel access to or the production or appearance or premises, records, documents, individuals, and other evidence or possible sources of evidence relative to the complaint at issue. 
(e)  Upon written application to the appointed board, a respondent shall be entitled to the issuance of a reasonable number of subpoenas by and in the name of the board or, to the same extent and subject to the same limitations as subpoenas issued by the appointed board itself. Subpoenas issued at the request of a respondent shall show on their face the name and address of such respondent and shall state that they were issued at his request. 
(f)  Witnesses summoned by subpoena of the appointed board shall be entitled to the same witness and mileage fees as are witnesses in proceedings in the state courts of Florida. Fees payable to a witness summoned by a subpoena issued at the request of a respondent shall be paid by him, unless he is indigent in which case the city shall bear the cost of said fees. 
(g)  Within ten days after service of a subpoena upon any person, such person may petition the appointed board to revoke or modify the subpoena. The appointed board shall grant the petition if it funds that the subpoena requires appearance or attendance, at an unreasonable time or place, that it requires production of evidence which does not describe with sufficient particularity the evidence to be produced, that compliance would be unduly onerous, or for other good reason. 
(h)  In case of refusal to obey a subpoena, the appointed board or the person at whose request it was issued may petition for its enforcement in the appropriate court. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 2, 11-14-94) 
Sec. 32-10. - Other remedies. 
    Nothing herein shall prevent any person from exercising any right or seeking any remedy to which he might otherwise be entitled, or from filing of any complaint with any other agency or any court having proper jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 2, 11-14-94) 
Sec. 32-11. - Report to real estate commission. 
    If a real estate broker, a real estate salesman, or an employee thereof has been found to have committed an unlawful practice in violation of this policy, or has failed to comply with an order issued by the appointed board, the appointed board shall, in addition to the other procedures set forth herein, report the facts to the Real Estate Commission of the State of Florida. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 2, 11-14-94) 
Sec. 32-12. - Penalty. 
    Any person found guilty of a violation of this chapter shall be punished as provided for in section 1-11 of the Code. Each day that any violation of this chapter shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 2, 11-14-94) 
Chapter 34 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 30; attendance of the chief of police at fires, § 46-7; false police and fire alarms, § 54-8; fires in city parks, § 58-1; police officers and firefighers retirement plan, § 62-2. 
State Law reference- Fire prevention and control, F.S. ch. 633; city required to adopt certain minimum fire safety standards, F.S. § 633.025. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1334, § 2, adopted April 23, 2007, amended the Code by creating an article subheading for §§ 34-1-34-7. 

Sec. 34-1. - National Fire Code adopted; controlling law; new editions; penalty. 
(a)  Adopted and incorporated by reference. For the purpose of providing for the protection of its citizens from the dangers of fire arising in connection with hazardous processes and materials, the National Fire Code, 2000 edition and appendices of record, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as the fire code of the city. 
(b)  Controlling law. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of the fire code adopted and incorporated by reference in this section and the provisions of this Code, the provisions of this Code shall prevail. 
(c)  How cited. The code adopted and incorporated by reference in this section may be cited as "the National Fire Code," followed by the appropriate chapter or section number of the printed code adopted in this section. 
(d)  New editions. The edition of the National Fire Code will be immediately updated by ordinance when a new edition is published. 
(e)  Penalty. Any violation of the provisions of the National Fire Code adopted and incorporated by reference in this section shall be subject to the penalty provided by section 1-11 of this Code and such other penalties as may be specifically set forth in the National Fire Code. 
(Code 1983, § 7-1; Ord. No. 893, § 2, 7-22-96; Ord. No. 973, § 2, 2-8-99; Ord. No. 1033, § 2, 8-28-00) 
Sec. 34-2. - Standard Fire Prevention Code adopted; new editions; controlling law; penalty. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish rules and regulations for governing conditions hazardous to life and property of the public in connection with fires and other hazardous conditions within the city. 
(b)  Adopted and incorporated by reference. The Standard Fire Prevention Code, 2000 edition and all appendices of record, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as the Fire Prevention Code of the city. 
(c)  New editions. The edition of the Standard Fire Prevention Code will be immediately updated by ordinance when a new edition is published. 
(d)  Controlling law. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted and incorporated by reference in this section and the provisions of this Code, the provisions of this Code shall prevail. 
(e)  How cited. The code adopted and incorporated by reference in this section may be cited as "the Standard Fire Prevention Code" followed by the appropriate chapter or section number of the printed code adopted in this section. 
(f)  Penalty. Any violation of the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted and incorporated by reference in this section shall be subject to the penalty provided in section 1-11 of this Code and such other penalties as may be specifically set forth in the fire prevention code. 
(Code 1983, § 7-2; Ord. No. 893, § 2, 7-22-96; Ord. No. 973, § 2, 2-8-99; Ord. No. 1033, § 2, 8-28-00) 
Sec. 34-3. - Designated fire lanes. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of, and while engaged in, loading or unloading merchandise, freight or passengers, at any place or area designated as a fire lane. 
(b)  A designated fire lane shall mean any place or area posted with a sign that reads "No Parking-Fire Lane." The sign shall be a minimum size of 12 inches by 18 inches with a white background and red lettering. Such lettering shall be a minimum of three inches high. The sign shall be posted between 36 inches and 48 inches high. 
(c)  The property owner shall be responsible for installation of signage and the maintenance of stripping associated with the marking of the fire lane. Placement of signs and stripping shall conform with standards set forth in the National Fire Code or other codes adopted by reference by the city. 
(d)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to the maximum penalties provided under general law. 
(Code 1983, § 7-3) 
Cross reference- Standing, stopping and parking, § 86-26 et seq. 
Sec. 34-4. - Reimbursement for extraordinary expenses-Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in sections 34-4 through 34-7, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Extraordinary expense means that expense, and those related costs and fees, that are incurred by the city for any extraordinary service, including but not limited to the city's actual cost of labor and materials associated with the use of any specialized extinguishing or abatement agent, chemical, neutralizer or similar equipment (or equipment damage) or materials that are employed to extinguish, confine, neutralize, contain, or clean any hazardous material that is or may be involved in a fire, accidental spill, or the threat of any fire or accidental spill. 
    Extraordinary service means a service performed by the fire department, the police department, the public services department or any other city department that, in the judgment of the city staff, is additional to or above the normal services provided by such departments. "Extraordinary services" may include, but is not limited to, crowd safety, security, and traffic control; evacuation and emergency housing; the abatement and disposition of hazardous materials; spills or the threat of spills of toxic chemicals; leaks or threats of leaks of toxic or hazardous gases; utility line breaks or leakages; other imminent, perceived, or possible threats to the health, safety or welfare of the city residents that may be detailed or contemplated in the definition of "extraordinary expense," and those instances where a property owner has been previously warned about violations of this Code that, in the judgment of the city staff, are a particular threat to the health, safety or welfare of the city residents, and for which the owner (or owner's agent or person in charge of the property) has neglected to comply or has refused compliance therewith. 
(Code 1983, § 7-4) 
Sec. 34-5. - Same-Administration. 
    The city clerk or designated agent shall collect all fees for extraordinary expenses as follows: 
(1)  Fees and costs shall encompass all manpower, equipment (or equipment damage), material, and maintenance expenses in such a form as to ensure for the city's full reimbursement for charges for those services actually rendered. A particular cost or fee schedule need not be set out in this article, or elsewhere in the Code, or by further formal action by the city council. The city council's approval of this article constitutes an authorization for the city clerk or his designee to collect all such fees and costs pursuant to his receipt of related expenditures or costs that are submitted to him by the affected city departments. 
(2)  Within 30 days of the date of the extraordinary or dangerous occurrence giving rise to the extraordinary service, the affected department shall submit its extraordinary service-related costs, fees, charges, expenses, or any of these things or all of these things in combination, to the city clerk for his review. At such time as all costs, fees and so forth, related to extraordinary services have been collected and reviewed by the city clerk, but in any case not later than 60 days from the date of the rendering of the extraordinary services, the city clerk shall send a bill of consolidated costs, fees and so forth, to the property owner, agent or manager, with a demand that a full remittance be made within 30 days of receipt of the bill. 
(3)  It is also contemplated that local, state or federal agencies may bill, fine or penalize the city for matters (including, but not limited to, a cleanup cost, fee or expense) relating to an extraordinary or dangerous occurrence, and the city clerk shall, if possible, include any and all such costs or fees in the consolidated bill which are not charged to the property owner or his agent within the consolidate billing (60-day) period. In this regard, the city clerk shall expect reimbursement of all local, state or federal costs within 30 days of the owner's or his agent's receipt of the bill for these particular costs, fees and so forth. 
(4)  In cases of hardship or where circumstances are such that a full remittance cannot be made to the city within the 30-day period, the city council shall authorize the city clerk's office to enter into negotiations with the property owner or his agent for an extended payback period of time not to exceed six months, and for which the city may charge the Florida statutorily mandated interest payment on judgments, pursuant to F.S. §§ 55.03 and 55.04, as amended. 
(5)  All monies received under the provisions of this article shall be placed in an account established for the express purpose of reimbursing the various city departments for those actual costs and expenses necessary to furnish fire, police and other emergency or public safety services or protection provided by the city as outlined in this article. 
(Code 1983, § 7-5) 
Sec. 34-6. - Same-Litigation. 
    The city may enforce the provisions of this article by civil actions in a court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of any amounts due under this article, plus attorney's fees, or any other relief that may be appropriate. 
(Code 1983, § 7-6) 
Sec. 34-7. - Municipal services not to be refused for nonpayment. 
    Nothing in this article shall authorize any city department, or any city staff member or department personnel, to refuse or delay any municipal service to any person that has not reimbursed the city for an extraordinary municipal service as provided under this article. Furthermore, nothing in this article shall be construed to demand reimbursement for those municipal services that are normally provided to city residents and others as a matter of the city's general operating procedures, and for which the levying of taxes, or the demand for reimbursement, is normally made. 
(Code 1983, § 7-7) 
Secs. 34-8-34-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE AND FIRE PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITIES FEE 

Sec. 34-21. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise the meaning of terms used in this article shall be as follows: 
(1)  Public assembly unit or building. Public assembly unit or building shall be the types of buildings used for the gathering together of persons for purposes such as civic, social or religious functions or for recreation or for food or drink consumption or for awaiting transportation. Public assembly buildings shall include, among others, the following: auditoriums, churches, gymnasiums, restaurants, motion picture theaters, museums, passenger depots, public assembly halls, recreation halls, stadiums and theaters. 
(2)  Institutional units or buildings. A structure occupied by a group, cooperative, board, agency, or organization created for the purposes of carrying on functions of a public or semi-public nature, such as hospitals or schools, or congregate care living facilities (unless separate dwelling units are occupied having cooking and separate bathroom facilities). 
(3)  Police and fire public safety facilities capital improvements. The land, building, facilities, vehicles and equipment necessary for the police and fire departments of the city to provide crime prevention, police protection, fire fighting and fire protection services to the public. 
(4)  Equivalent dwelling unit (E.D.U.). 
a.  Commercial, industrial/warehousing, or public assembly/institutional property will be assessed one impact fee per 1,000 square feet of building space constructed. 
b.  Parcels used as commercial, industrial/warehousing, or public assembly/institutional property but without a building will be assessed one impact fee per acre (rounded to the nearest tenth acre). 
(Ord. No. 1334, § 3, 4-23-07) 
Sec. 34-22. - Fee imposed. 
    As a condition of the issuance of a building permit for the initial construction of or substantial reconstruction of a building, the person, firm or corporation constructing such residential, commercial, manufacturing, public assembly or institutional building, or addition thereto, shall pay to the city, in advance, the police and fire public safety facilities fee as set forth in section 34-23. The only exceptions to the requirement for payment of such fee are the following type construction: 
(1)  Expansion of existing residential structures not creating another dwelling unit. 
(2)  Remodeling, repair, rebuilding, or restoration of any structure, so long as no substantial additional impact to the services addressed in this article, as determined jointly by the police and fire chiefs and subject to approval to the city council by an aggrieved applicant, is caused thereby. 
(3)  Any construction that is in progress prior to the effective date of this article with a valid building permit. 
(Ord. No. 1334, § 3, 4-23-07) 
Sec. 34-23. - Amount of fee. 
    The police and fire public safety facilities fee to be paid prior to issuance of a building permit shall be as follows: 
(1)  Single dwelling units - $200.00. 
(2)  Commercial structures - $200.00 per E.D.U. 
(3)  Industrial/warehousing structures - $200.00 per E.D.U. 
(4)  Public assembly/institutional structures - $200.00 per E.D.U. 
(Ord. No. 1334, § 3, 4-23-07) 
Sec. 34-24. - Refunds. 
    Refunds of police and fire public safety facilities fees paid hereunder may be allowed upon application therefore when it is determined that no construction has occurred and the building permit issued for such construction has expired or otherwise been canceled. 
(Ord. No. 1334, § 3, 4-23-07) 
Sec. 34-25. - Special fire services facilities fee. 
    In the event that any structure has special fire safety needs because of the size or type of construction or the use thereof, a special fire safety facilities fee shall be paid to the city in the amount determined by the city council. Said fee shall be an amount necessary to permit the acquisition of any equipment or other capital asset necessary for the safe provision of fire protection services to the structure. Said fee shall be in addition to any other fee imposed hereunder and shall be paid prior to the issuance of a building permit for such structure. Alternatively, the owner or developer of such construction may provide to the city the piece of equipment or capital assets as determined to be needed because of such construction. 
(Ord. No. 1334, § 3, 4-23-07) 
Sec. 34-26. - Time of payment. 
    Payment of all police and fire public safety facilities fees provided in this article shall be made prior to the issuance of the building permit. 
(Ord. No. 1334, § 3, 4-23-07) 
Sec. 34-27. - Use of proceeds. 
    The funds accumulated by reason of the collection of the police and fire public safety facilities fee shall be used only for the purchase of capital improvements consisting of land, buildings, vehicles and equipment necessary to provide crime prevention, police protection, fire fighting and fire protection services to the public. 
(Ord. No. 1334, § 3, 4-23-07) 
Sec. 34-28. - Trust funds established. 
    All police and fire public facilities fee received by the city shall be deposited in an appropriate trust fund to be referred to as the "police and fire public improvement trust fund" to be held separately and to be used only for the purposes referred to in section 34-27. Funds from this trust fund may be disbursed in the customary manner in accordance with appropriate law and with the added requirement that the disbursement of such funds shall require the prior approval of the city council upon a finding that the police or fire capital expenditure is in accordance with the terms of this article. Before authorizing an expenditure from the trust fund, the city council shall determine that: 
(1)  Such expenditure is for capital facilities or equipment to be used for the purpose of such fund; 
(2)  Such expenditure is required by new construction from which such funds were collected; and 
(3)  Such expenditure will result predominantly in a special benefit to new construction, as opposed to pre-existing uses. 
    Any funds on deposit in said trust fund which are not immediately necessary for expenditure may be invested by the city and all income derived from such investment shall be deposited in the trust fund. 
(Ord. No. 1334, § 3, 4-23-07) 
Sec. 34-29. - Waivers. 
    The city council may waive the police and fire public safety facilities fee in the following situations: 
(1)  Any occupancy not required under the current fire prevention code to have a fire protection sprinkler system, may have 50 percent of the fees waived upon application for such waiver, if a sprinkler system meeting either NFPA 13. 13A or 13B standards is installed in the structure. 
(2)  The owner or developer of any construction has the right of attempting to demonstrate that their construction will have less impact on the need for police and fire public safety facilities than is indicated by the fee schedule. Data demonstrating less impact shall be submitted to the police chief and fire chief for review. The police and fire chiefs shall jointly make a recommendation to the city council concerning such requested waiver. The city council shall determine the amount of the fee to be waived, if any. 
(3)  Any waiver provided for in this section shall be subject to approval by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1334, § 3, 4-23-07) 
Sec. 34-30. - Capital improvement plan. 
    The city council shall adopt a capital improvement plan for the trust fund established in this article. Such plan shall be reviewed annually during the budget review process. 
(Ord. No. 1334, § 3, 4-23-07) 
Sec. 34-31. - Review of fees. 
    The police and fire public safety facilities fees imposed by this article shall be reviewed biannually. At such time the city council shall analyze the projected construction within the city, the cost of any new or expanded capital facilities and equipment for police and fire protection services which shall be generated by such construction, and the funds otherwise available to finance such costs. 
(Ord. No. 1334, § 3, 4-23-07) 
Chapter 38 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 805, § 2, adopted Nov. 22, 1993, repealed former §§ 38-1-38-3, which pertained to similar subject matter. Section 3 of said Ord. No. 805 added §§ 38-1-38-5, to read as herein set out. 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 10; sales or permitting exposure of animals with, or having been exposed to, infectious disease, § 10-10; rabies control, § 10-19; animal waste, § 10-21; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 30. 
State Law reference- Rules and regulations of state board of health as to matters of public health supersede all ordinances and regulations of cities, F.S. § 381.071. 

Sec. 38-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to protect the comfort, health, repose, safety and general welfare of the citizens who reside in the city and to prevent the maintenance of nuisances affecting the public generally. It is hereby declared by the city council that the creation or maintenance of a nuisance shall constitute irreparable public injury. In order to accomplish the foregoing purpose, it is deemed necessary to establish a mechanism of review and provide for remedies in order to abate a public nuisance by action of the city code enforcement board, city council or county court. 
(Ord. No. 805, § 3, 11-22-93) 
Sec. 38-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Abandoned means voluntarily relinquished by the owner for an apparently indefinite period of time. As applied to motor vehicles or other articles of personal property, the term includes but is not limited to any motor vehicle or other article of personal property which is left upon private property without the consent of the owner, lessee or occupant thereof for longer than two hours. 
    Board means the city code enforcement board which was created by the City Code. 
    Debris means abandoned or inoperative material which is stored externally and shall include but not be limited to one or more of the following: discarded household items, inoperative or abandoned machinery, motor vehicles, boats, trailers or household appliances, including but not limited to freezers, refrigerators, iceboxes, stoves, dishwashers, and washing or drying machines for clothing, or refuse, garbage, rubbish, trash, junk, use scrap, lumber, steel, plumbing fixtures, insulation, barrels, boxes, drums, piping, glass, iron machinery, excelsior or plastic. 
    Excessive growth means the growth of weeds or plants which are not cultivated or landscaped or regularly tended which reach a height in excess of 12 inches. 
    Externally means outside a fully enclosed building or structure, except that materials stored in a carport shall not be deemed to be stored externally. 
    Inoperative means not in working condition as designed, or incapable of being operated lawfully. For example, without limiting the meaning of the term, a motor vehicles designed to be operated upon the public streets shall be deemed inoperative if a current registration tag, also known as a license plate, of a kind required under state law as a condition of operation upon the public streets is not affixed thereto, or if one or more parts which are required for the operation of the vehicle are missing or not attached to the vehicle as designed. 
    Nuisance means that conduct defined in F.S. ch. 823, that conduct specified in this chapter and: 
(1)  Any continuing condition or use of premises or of building exteriors or of land premises or of building exteriors or of land which causes substantial diminution of the value of property in the vicinity of such condition or use; 
(2)  Any continuing condition or use of premises, building exteriors or land which unreasonably annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, health, repose, privacy or safety of the public through offensive odors, noises, substances, smoke, ashes, soot, dust, gas fumes, chemical diffusion, smog, flooding, disturbance and vibrations of earth, air, or structures, emanations, light, sights, entry on adjoining property by persons or vehicles; or 
(3)  Other unreasonable intrusions upon the free use and comfortable enjoyment of the property of the citizens of the city. 
    Owner, with respect to real property, means the person, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity, singular or plural, which is a record owner as recorded on the current tax rolls of the county. For condominium property, the term "owner" means the condominium association and not the individual unit owners. 
    Premises means the land and all structures and articles appurtenant or attached thereto which are owned, leased, occupied or controlled by a person. 
    Property means any individual parcel of real property or any portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 805, § 3, 11-22-93) 
Sec. 38-3. - Conditions and conduct. 
    The existence of any of the following specific conditions or conduct is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance as that item is used in this chapter: 
(1)  A condition or use that causes a substantial diminution of property value of property in the vicinity of the condition or use. 
(2)  Condition similar to that described in F.S. ch. 823 that has occurred or is occurring. 
(3)  A condition or use that unreasonably intrudes upon the free use, privacy and comfortable enjoyment of the property of the citizens of the city. The use or condition may be considered an unreasonable intrusion upon the free use and comfortable enjoyment of property when one or more of the following conditions are found to exist: 
a.  The repeated intrusion upon property adjoining or surrounding the use or condition identified in the complaint of odors, gases, smoke, ashes, soot, dust, fumes, chemical diffusion, smog or other particles or gases. 
b.  The repeated intrusion upon property of disturbances of earth or air including but not limited to vibrations, explosions, light and loud, raucous and unnecessary noise, and the repeated unauthorized intrusion of adjoining property by patrons or uses of the premises, which unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the peace, comfort, privacy, and repose of owners or possessors of real property in the enjoyment and the use of their property. 
c.  The repeated unauthorized intrusion upon property by persons or vehicles which adversely disturb the privacy, comfort, peace, repose, and use of owners or possessors of property adjoining the premises where the persons or vehicles complained of originates. 
d.  The repeated attraction to the premises where the use or condition complained of is maintained by persons who, through frequent raucous or disorderly conduct, through repeated disturbances of the peace or through violation of any law of the state, county or city, adversely affect ordinarily reasonable and reasonably behaved persons in the enjoyment and use of their property. 
(4)  Buildings which are unoccupied, abandoned, boarded up, partially destroyed, or left for unreasonably long periods of time in a state of partial construction or disrepair, such as broken windows, partial walls and foundations, unpainted or peeled paint surfaces, etc., abuse or neglect as to appearance provided that any unfinished building or structure which has been in the course of construction three years or more, and which the appearance and other conditions of such unfinished building or structure substantially detracts from the appearance of the immediate neighborhood or reduces the value of property in the immediate neighborhood or is a nuisance, shall be deemed and presumed to have been left for an unreasonably long period of time in the sense of this subsection. 
(5)  Any attractive nuisance dangerous to children in the form of abandoned or broken equipment, hazardous pools, excavations, or neglected machinery. 
(6)  Overt blocking of drainage pipes, ditches, channels, and streams, so as to cause flooding and adversely affect surrounding property. 
(7)  The existence of excessive growth of weeds or vegetation, or the existence of any accumulation of debris, trash, garden trash, junk, untended growth of vegetation, or undergrowth of dead or living vegetation, upon any property to the extent and manner that such property contains or is likely to contain rodents, reptiles or other vermin, or furnishes a breeding place for flies, mosquitoes, or wood-destroying insects, or otherwise threatens the public health, safety or welfare. 
(8)  The outdoor storage of all or part of any dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative or discarded vehicle, recreational vehicle, machinery, farm equipment, aircraft, construction equipment, boat, personal watercraft, trailer, truck, motorcycle, or bicycle, which is located on the premises of a lawfully established storage yard or which is on the premises of a lawfully established vehicle service establishment and is in the process of repair or maintenance by that establishment. 
(9)  Any other condition or use that constitutes a nuisance to the public, generally, as that term is defined in section 38-2, which is continually or repeatedly maintained, the abatement of which would be in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. No. 805, § 3, 11-22-93) 
Sec. 38-4. - Maintenance of private property. 
    No person owning, leasing, operating, occupying or having control of any premises within the city shall maintain, keep or permit any nuisance, as defined in section 38-2 and as further defined in section 38-3, affecting the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. No. 805, § 3, 11-22-93) 
Sec. 38-5. - Penalty. 
    Any violation of this section shall be punished as provided for in section 1-11 of the City Code and each day that such condition continues [is] regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 805, § 3, 11-22-93) 
Chapter 46 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; enforcement; authority of police; interference with animal control officers, § 10-15; false police and fire alarms, § 54-8; police officers and firefighers retirement plan, § 62-2. 
State Law reference- Law enforcement officer's qualifications, F.S. § 943.13; law enforcement officer's training, F.S. §§ 943.12, 943.14; law enforcement officers' rights, F.S. §§ 112.531-112.534; arrests, F.S. ch. 901. 

Sec. 46-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Chief of police means the chief law enforcement officer of the city and his successors in office. 
(Code 1983, § 13-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-2. - Code in force within corporate limits and police jurisdiction. 
    This Code of Ordinances, enforcing police or sanitary regulations and prescribing fines and penalties for violations thereof, shall have force and effect in the limits of the city and in the police jurisdiction thereof and on any property or rights-of-way belonging to the city. 
(Code 1983, § 13-2) 
Sec. 46-3. - Enforcement of state law. 
    The chief of police or any policeman of the city has authority and it is his duty to make arrests for offenses against the laws of the state in all cases where such authority is conferred on such officers by the laws of the state or city ordinance, and in making such arrests, whether with or without a warrant, they shall have all the authority conferred, and be subject to all the duties imposed, upon such officers by the laws of the state. 
(Code 1983, § 13-3) 
Sec. 46-4. - Enforcement of city ordinances. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of police and that of the police force to enforce the ordinances of the city and all of the penal laws of the state in the city, and police jurisdiction thereof, and to arrest all persons violating either of the same. 
(Code 1983, § 13-4) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 46-5. - Chief to report neglect of duty of subordinates; daily reports of policemen. 
    The chief of police shall report to the mayor forthwith, without fear, favor or partiality, any neglect or violation of duty on the part of any of his subordinate officers, and require each policeman to report to him daily all violations of law which may come to his knowledge. 
(Code 1983, § 13-5) 
Sec. 46-6. - Payment of monies to clerk; monthly report to city council. 
(a)  The chief of police shall pay over to the city clerk all the money which he may receive or collect belonging to the city, taking his receipt therefor. 
(b)  The chief of police shall make a monthly report to the city council through the city clerk, showing the amount collected, from whom and on what account collected. 
(Code 1983, § 13-6) 
Sec. 46-7. - Attendance at fires; protection of property. 
(a)  On an alarm of fire, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to report at once to the fire, or detail an officer for that purpose, to protect and guard the apparatus of the fire department from all or any interruption or interference as well as all property. 
(b)  The chief of police or designated officer shall have power to summon any citizen between the ages of 21 and 45 years to aid in guarding and taking care of property removed from any house. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person summoned by the chief of police or police officer to render aid under this section to refuse to render such aid. 
(Code 1983, § 13-7) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 34. 
Sec. 46-8. - Arrest of prisoners from other cities or counties; authority of police to collect for services. 
(a)  The police department is permitted and hereby instructed to render invoices to other cities or counties for services rendered and expenses incurred in the arrest and maintenance of prisoners from other cities or counties. 
(b)  The amount charged for services rendered under the provisions of subsection (a) shall be the same amount as now allowed by law to the sheriffs of various counties in the state. 
(c)  Money due under this section shall be collected by the police department and turned over to the director of finance of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 13-8) 
Sec. 46-9. - Unclaimed or abandoned articles-To be held by police for 90 days. 
    It shall be the duty of any person upon finding or coming into the possession of any personal property to return such property to the owner if possible; otherwise to deliver such property to the city police department. All unclaimed or abandoned articles coming into the possession of the chief of police or any policeman or other employee of the city, the disposition of which is not otherwise provided for by law, shall be held by the chief of police for a period of 90 days. 
(Code 1983, § 13-9) 
Sec. 46-10. - Same-To be sold at public auction after 90 days; cost. 
    At the expiration of the 90-day period mentioned in the preceding section, the chief of police shall sell such unclaimed or abandoned articles at public auction, and shall deliver the proceeds to the city clerk for deposit in the city general fund. 
(Code 1983, § 13-10) 
Sec. 46-11. - Same-Notice of sale. 
    No sale of unclaimed or abandoned articles shall be made until notice of the time and place of such sale shall have been mailed to the owner of any article to be offered for sale at least 30 days prior to the date thereof, when the address of such owner can be ascertained by the chief of police; nor shall such sale be made until notice of the time and place of such sale shall have been posted at three places within the city for two weeks prior to such sale. Such notice shall contain a description of the articles to be sold and the time and place of sale. 
(Code 1983, § 13-11) 
Sec. 46-12. - Assessment for law enforcement education. 
(a)  Pursuant to F.S. § 943.25, all county courts within this county created by article V of the state constitution, and any such court hereafter created, shall assess an additional $3.00 as court costs against every person convicted of violating a state penal or criminal statute or municipal ordinance within the city, and such additional court costs shall be used for expenditures for law enforcement education for law enforcement officers of the city; provided such education expenditures are approved by the city council. In addition, an additional sum of $2.00 over and above that provided by F.S. § 943.25(13) from every bond estreature or forfeited bail bond related to such penal statutes or penal ordinance shall be assessed and collected for the purposes recited in this section. However, no such assessment shall be made against any person convicted for violation of any state statute or city ordinance relating to the parking of vehicles. 
(b)  All fees, fines, charges, or court costs generated and collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited in the general fund of the city and expended for law enforcement education expenditures for officers of the city's police department. 
(Code 1983, § 13-12) 
Sec. 46-13. - Additional police officers. 
    In case of an emergency, the mayor shall have the authority to appoint any additional police officers that he shall deem necessary to restore law and order and to preserve to the people their right to the enjoyment of life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. 
(Laws of Fla. ch. 63-1249, § 18) 
Chapter 50 - LIBRARY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to establish a regional library, F.S. § 257.171. 

Sec. 50-1. - Established. 
    There is hereby established in the city a public library which library shall be known as the Robert L. F. Sikes Public Library. 
(Code 1983, § 9.7-1; Ord. No. 1443, § 2, 10-25-10) 
Sec. 50-2. - Use by nonresidents of city. 
    The library may be used by persons who do not reside in the city only as prescribed by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1983, § 9.7-2) 
Sec. 50-3. - Regulations for use. 
    Regulations for use of the Robert L. F. Sikes Public Library shall be enacted by resolution of the city council. Such regulations shall govern the issuance of library cards and borrower's cards; hours of operation; borrowing procedures and practices; conduct inside the library; book selection; gifts, fees, fines and such other matters as the council wishes to regulate. No person shall violate or fail to comply with any such regulation. 
(Code 1983, § 9.7-3) 
Sec. 50-4. - Maintenance by city. 
    The city will pay all taxes, assessments, utilities, insurance, improvements, repairs and replacements necessary to maintain the library in good condition and operating order. 
(Code 1983, § 9.7-4; Ord. No. 1443, § 2, 10-25-10) 
Sec. 50-5. - Library department-Duties of director. 
    There is hereby established a public library department to be administered by a library director who shall be accountable to the city council. Said director shall administer the operation and service functions of the public library and have the authority to appoint and remove all employees in the public library department. Said director shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law, ordinance, or required by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1443, § 2, 10-25-10) 
Sec. 50-6. - Appointment of the library director. 
    The library director shall be appointed by the city council and may be removed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1443, § 2, 10-25-10) 
Sec. 50-7. - Budgeting and purchasing authority. 
    The library director shall prepare and submit budgetary recommendations for the public library department for consideration of the city council. The library director shall have purchasing authority in accordance with the city purchasing manual and all other state and federal statutes. 
(Ord. No. 1443, § 2, 10-25-10) 
Chapter 54 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; setting out poison, § 10-11. 

Sec. 54-1. - State misdemeanors adopted. 
    It shall be unlawful to commit within the corporate limits of the city any act which is defined by the Florida Statutes as a misdemeanor. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided by section 1-11. 
(Code 1983, § 11-1) 
State Law reference- Penalty for misdemeanors, F.S. §§ 775.082, 775.083. See also Florida Statutes general index under heading "Fines and Civil Penalties" for listing of state law misdemeanors. 
Case Law annotation- A municipality may enact an ordinance which creates an offense against municipal law for the same act that constitutes an offense against state law. Jaramillo v. City of Homestead, 322 So.2d 496 (Fla. 1975). 
Similarly, a municipality by ordinance may adopt state misdemeanor statutes by specific reference or by the general reference contained in the ordinance. Id. 
Such an adoption by general reference as contained in the ordinance permits subsequent amendments, revisions and repeals of the laws by the state legislature to apply to the municipal ordinances. Id. 
Sec. 54-2. - Use of vehicles or animals without permission of owner. 
    Whoever within the corporate limits of the city wilfully, mischievously and without right takes or uses any vehicle, or takes, rides or uses any horse, ass, mule, ox or any other draught animal, the property of another, without the consent of the owner or the person having the legal custody, care or control of such vehicle or animal, shall be punished as provided by section 1-11. Nothing in this section shall be construed as to apply to any case where the taking of the property of another is with intent to steal such property, or when it is taken under a claim of right, or with the presumed consent of the owner or other person having the legal control, custody or care of such property. 
(Code 1983, § 11-14) 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 10; traffic and vehicles, ch. 86. 
Sec. 54-3. - Weapons, discharge of. 
    Whoever discharges within the corporate limits of the city any firearm, air rifle, slingshot, rock thrower, or bow and arrow, without being in defense of limb, life or property, except in a place duly authorized and licensed by the city, shall be punished as provided by section 1-11. 
(Code 1983, § 11-15) 
Sec. 54-4. - Possession of beer, wine, alcoholic beverages, nonprescription drugs, marijuana, etc., prohibited in, upon or adjacent to public or city parks or recreation areas. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or have under his control in, upon or adjacent to any public or city park or recreation area within the city limits any of the following: 
(1)  Beer, wine or other alcoholic beverage, whether sealed or unsealed; 
(2)  Any nonprescription drugs or dangerous drugs as defined by state law; or 
(3)  Any marijuana or other hallucinogenic drugs. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or have under his control an open container of any type of alcoholic beverage on any city street, sidewalk or any public parking lot within the city. This subsection shall not apply to persons in vehicles being driven on the city streets. 
(c)  Any person guilty of violating this section shall be punished as provided by section 1-11. 
(Code 1983, § 11-17) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; parks and recreation, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, ch. 74. 
Sec. 54-5. - Loitering. 
(a)  As used in this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this subsection: 
    Loitering means remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include the concept of spending time idly; to be dilatory; to linger; to stay; to saunter; to delay; or to stand around, and shall also include the colloquial expression "hanging around." 
    Public place means any place to which the general public has access and a right of resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose, but does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. The term shall also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business and also public grounds, areas or parks. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle either alone or in consort with others in a public place in such manner other than for a lawful purpose so as to: 
(1)  Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians, other than for a lawful purpose; 
(2)  Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property other than for a lawful purpose, or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any such public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building, and which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress and regress therein, thereon and thereto; or 
(3)  Obstruct the entrance to any business establishment, if contrary to the expressed wish of the owner, lessee, managing agent or person in control or charge of the building or premises, without so doing for some lawful purpose. 
(c)  When any person causes or commits any of the conditions in this section, a police officer or any law enforcement officer shall order that person to stop causing or committing such conditions and to move on or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey such orders shall be guilty of a violation of this section. 
(Code 1983, § 11-18) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, ch. 74. 
Sec. 54-6. - Exposure, exhibition, fondling or painting for compensation and advertising of such prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to expose or exhibit his or her breasts, buttocks, genitals or sexual organs to another, or to permit another to fondle or paint same (whether such parts are covered or uncovered), in return for compensation. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, display, maintain, affix, attach or post, at any place in the city visible from a public place, street or right-of-way, any placard, banner, notice, billboard, sign, announcement, marquee or any other type of advertisement, whether permanent or temporary in nature, which advertises, directs attention to, encourages, solicits, induces, or in any manner promotes the conduct prohibited by this section. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise, solicit, encourage, induce or in any manner promote the conduct prohibited by this section in any telephone directory or other publication or through any other media source. 
(Code 1983, § 11-19) 
Sec. 54-7. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  Any person in the city shall be deemed guilty of disorderly conduct who: 
(1)  Shall assault or aid or abet in an assault of another or who shall aid or abet in any fight, quarrel, disturbance or breach of the peace. 
(2)  Shall carry on or about his person in any public place or private place open to the public any knife (other than a small pocket knife with its blades under three inches in length), dirk, knuckles, slingshot or other dangerous weapon without a lawful permit or for lawful use in his business. 
(3)  Is found lounging, prowling, standing, loitering or being on or in the premises of another without the owner's consent, and who is unable to give reasonable excuse for being so found. 
(4)  Is a window peeper. 
(5)  Is found consuming alcoholic beverages on the public streets or vacant lots or in places solely licensed to vend alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises. 
(6)  Takes possession of or conceals property of another without the owner's consent, or has in his possession or control property of another knowing that the owner has not consented thereto, whether such person is on or off the owner's premises, or in any manner aids, assists or abets another person to do the aforesaid. 
(7)  Is found asleep on any of the streets, sidewalks, public places, or upon the private property of another without the consent of the owner. 
(b)  Any person convicted of disorderly conduct, as provided in this section, shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 of the Code. 
(Code 1983, § 11-20; Ord. No. 1471, § 1, 9-26-11) 
Sec. 54-8. - False police and fire alarms. 
(a)  Excessive false alarms unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, controls, or has custody of any police or fire alarm to suffer or permit the existence of excessive false alarms by such devices. 
(b)  Definitions. 
    Alarm or alarm system means any mechanical or electrical device that is arranged, designed or used to signal the occurrence in the city of a burglary, robbery or other criminal offense, fire emergency, or other emergency requiring urgent attention, and to which police or fire personnel are expected to respond. The term "alarm systems" includes those systems through which public safety personnel are notified directly of such signals through automatic recording devices or are notified indirectly by way of third persons who monitor the alarm systems and who report such signals to the fire or police department. "Alarm systems" also includes those designed to register a signal which is so audible, visible or in other ways perceptible outside a protected building, structure or facility as to notify persons in the neighborhood or vicinity beyond the signal location who in turn may notify the police or fire department of the signal. "Alarm systems" does not include those alarm systems affixed to automobiles. Alarms in separate structures are to be counted as separate systems even though owned or controlled by the same person or entity. 
    False alarm means an alarm signal eliciting a response by the police or fire department when a situation requiring a response by the police or fire department does not in fact exist. "False alarm" does not include an alarm signal caused by violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm operator or alarm user. Alarms resulting from the following conditions are not considered false alarms: 
(1)  Criminal activity or unauthorized entry. 
(2)  Fire. 
(3)  Earthquake or other natural occurrence causing structural damage to the protected premises. 
(4)  High winds sufficient to activate motion detection systems or causing physical damage to the protected premises. 
(5)  Flooding of the protected premises due to overflow of natural drainage. 
(6)  Lightning bolt causing physical damage to the protected premises. 
(7)  Telephone line malfunction verified in writing by a telephone company supervisor. 
(8)  Electrical service interruption verified by the Gulf Power Company. 
(9)  Communication to the police or fire department before a unit is dispatched to investigate clearly indicating that the alarm resulted from authorized entry, authorized system test, or other noncriminal cause. 
(10)  An alarm caused by the reasonable but mistaken belief that a burglary, robbery, or other criminal offense, fire emergency, or other emergency is in progress. 
(11)  The generation of a false alarm which is beyond the reasonable control of the system user. 
Excessive false alarms occur when any alarm system produces more than three false alarms in any calendar year; however, persons installing a new alarm system or making substantial modifications to an existing system shall be entitled to a grace period during which alarms generated by such system shall be deemed nonfalse alarms, provided that this grace period shall cease 30 days after installation of or modification to an alarm system; provided further, that the chief of the police or fire departments shall have the authority to grant an extended grace period for good cause shown upon request. 
(c)  Response to alarms. 
(1)  Whenever an alarm is activated in the city thereby requiring an emergency response to the location by the police or fire department and the police or fire department responds, the police or fire department personnel on the scene of the activated alarm system shall inspect the area protected by the system and shall determine whether the emergency response was in fact required as indicated by the alarm system or whether the alarm signal was a false alarm. 
(2)  If the police or fire department personnel at the scene of the activated alarm system determine the alarm to be false, such officers shall make a report of the false alarm, a notification of which shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, or delivered to the alarm user at the address of such alarm system installation location, advising the alarm user of the false alarm. An affidavit of service shall be executed by the officer serving notice on the alarm user of the time and date delivery was conducted. 
(3)  The chief of the police or fire department or his designee shall have the right to inspect any alarm system on the premises to which a response has been made, and he may cause an inspection of such system to be made at any reasonable time thereafter. 
(d)  Penalty fee assessment. 
(1)  If any alarm system produces three false alarms in any calendar year, the chief of the affected department shall provide written notice of the fact, which shall be given by certified mail or delivery to the alarm user, asking the alarm user to take corrective action in regard to false alarms and informing the alarm user of the false alarm fee schedule provided in this section. 
(2)  Upon any alarm system producing a fourth or additional false police alarm in a calendar year, a fee of $50.00 per false alarm shall be charged to the user or owner. 
(3)  Upon any alarm system producing a fourth or additional false fire alarm in a calendar year, a fee of $50.00 per false alarm shall be charged to the user or owner. 
(4)  False alarms occurring within six months of installation of an alarm system shall not be counted in the penalty fee assessment procedure. 
(e)  Appeal of false alarm notice. 
(1)  Any owner or user who has been notified of a false alarm or assessed a false alarm fee may appeal to the city council by giving written notice within three days of the notification of a false alarm or assessment. Upon receipt of the appeal notice, a time certain, not to exceed 30 days of receipt of the appeal, shall be established for a hearing. 
(2)  The appellant shall be given reasonable notice of such hearing date. 
(3)  The city council shall designate a hearing officer, and the burden of proof shall be upon the appellant to show by a preponderance of evidence that the alarm signal in question was not a false alarm as defined in this section. 
(4)  After receipt of all relevant evidence, the hearing officer shall, within three days, render his decision. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 766, § 2, 4-27-92) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; law enforcement, ch. 46. 
Chapter 58 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; environment, ch. 30; possession of beer, wine, alcoholic beverages, nonprescription drugs, marijuana, etc., prohibited in, upon or adjacent to public or city parks or recreation areas, § 54-4; solid waste and recycling services, ch. 70; land use regulations, ch. 102. 
State Law reference- Recreation generally, F.S. ch. 418. 

Sec. 58-1. - Use regulations. 
    The following rules and regulations shall govern the use and operation of the public parks and recreational facilities in the city: 
(1)  Camping facilities. It shall be unlawful to camp in any city park or recreational facility unless otherwise authorized and posted. 
(2)  Alcoholic beverages. No alcoholic beverages of any kind shall be sold, consumed, served or permitted to be served or consumed in any city facility or on any city property except with an approved special event permit and when holding a license under the division of alcoholic beverages and tobacco of the department of business and professional regulation. 
a.  The following guidelines shall be used by the city division of parks and recreation in issuing any and all permits that include a request for the consumption of alcohol in city parks, buildings, and outdoor areas: 
1.  Public buildings: 
A.  Private parties/commercial groups: Individuals and groups requesting the use of public facilities for private parties can serve (but not sell) alcohol at approved functions. Approval shall be subject to all of the terms and conditions of our special event policies. 
B.  Non-profit organizations: Officially registered non-profit organizations requesting the use of public facilities can sell and serve alcohol at approved functions. Subject to the issuance of a state alcoholic beverage license, the city division of parks and recreation may approve special events that include the consumption and sale of alcoholic beverages in public facilities subject to all of the terms and conditions of our special event policies. 
C.  City functions: Officially sponsored city functions are subject to the same terms and conditions as listed for non-profit organizations. 
D.  Approved locations: Subject to review and approval, the facilities listed below are approved for events that may include the consumption or sale (subject to state approval) of alcohol: 
Crestview Community Center. 
Warriors Hall Auditorium. 
Old Spanish Trail Park facilities. 
2.  Outdoor areas: 
A.  Commercial groups: Shall be prohibited from applying for the use of any outdoor facility or park that would include the consumption or sale of alcohol. 
B.  Non-profit organizations: Officially registered non-profit organizations (strictly for private, noncommercial functions) may apply to the city division of parks and recreation for the use of any outdoor area listed below for any event that includes the consumption or the sale of alcohol. Application for this use shall be made as part of a special event permit application which shall be subject to review and approval by the division of parks and recreation and the city police department. Users must meet security staff requirements as defined by the city police department. 
C.  City functions: Officially sponsored city functions are subject to the same terms and conditions as listed for non-profit organizations. 
D.  Approved locations: Subject to review and approval, the outdoor areas listed below are approved for events that may include the consumption or sale (subject to state approval) of alcohol: 
Crestview Community Center grounds. 
Old Spanish Trail Park (not to include city recreational scheduled events/seasons). 
3.  Special conditions: 
A.  Note: Non-profit organizations: Shall be defined as officially registered non-profit organizations with a non-profit identification number. 
B.  All applicants are subject to the terms and conditions listed in applicable special event policies and ordinances, including fees and insurance requirements. User must provide an insurance certificate listing liquor liability and naming the city as an additional insured. The user must pay a damage deposit commensurate with the proposed use. 
C.  All applicants are subject to regulations and must comply with all requirements from the division of alcoholic beverages and tobacco of the department of business and professional regulation. 
D.  All applicants agree to be fully responsible for ensuring that event participants and organizers are not served excessive amounts of alcohol and do not endanger themselves. All applicants must define a method of control for location of sale, quantity of sale to individuals, and prohibiting individuals from bringing alcoholic beverages into the event. 
E.  All applicants agree to be fully responsible for ensuring that no person under the age of 21 can purchase or consume alcohol beverages at the event. 
(3)  Reservation of facilities and fees. 
a.  Reservations for picnic tables and/or other designated park areas are prohibited; however, advanced reservations for pavilion use will be accepted. 
b.  A permit fee for advanced reservation of pavilion use will be a designated amount set by the city council. Permits may be applied for and fees paid at the office of leisure services located at the Twin Hills Park complex. 
(4)  Vehicles and parking facilities. 
a.  No person shall park any vehicle, camper, trailer or any towed conveyance in any area not specifically authorized or designated therefor. 
b.  There shall be no overnight parking of any vehicle, camper, trailer or any towed conveyance in any area unless otherwise posted. 
c.  No motorized vehicle shall be allowed on any portion of the recreational facility other than designated roads or parking areas. 
(5)  Sanitation. 
a.  Failure to dispose of all garbage and refuse, including paper, cans, bottles, waste materials and rubbish in designated containers for removal from the site or area constitutes a violation of this section. 
b.  No person or company shall use any city park or recreational facility refuse containers for dumping of household or commercial garbage, refuse or trash brought from private property. 
(6)  Pets and animals. 
a.  No dog, cat or other animal shall be allowed into a city park or recreational facility unless it is crated, caged, upon a leash not longer than six feet or otherwise under physical restraint at all times. 
b.  No horses or other saddle animals shall be allowed into a city park or recreational facility unless there are accommodations to allow entry and use of the facility. 
(7)  Public behavior. It shall be unlawful to incite or participate in riots, or indulge in boisterous, abusive, threatening, indecent or disorderly conduct or behavior in any city park or recreational facility. Anyone in violation of this subsection may be forcibly ejected from the park or recreational facility or arrested and shall not be entitled to a refund of any fee or rental. 
(8)  Destruction of property. 
a.  It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, deface, or remove any native wild or domestic tree, shrub, plant or wildflower in any city park or recreational facility. 
b.  Destroying, injuring, defacing, removing or disturbing in any manner any real, personal or public property in any city park or recreational facility shall be unlawful. 
(9)  Fires. Building a fire outside of stoves, grills, fireplaces, or other places provided for such purposes shall be unlawful. All fires shall be attended to at all times and, upon abandonment, such fires shall be completely extinguished. 
(10)  Fireworks. 
a.  No person shall discharge or explode any firecrackers, torpedoes, rockets, cap pistols, or any other fireworks of any nature within a city park or recreational facility. Public fireworks displays authorized by the city shall be allowed. 
(11)  Audio devices. 
a.  No person shall operate or use any audio device, including radio, television, musical instruments, or any other noise producing devices, such as electrical generators and equipment driven by motor engines, in such a manner and at such times so as to disturb another person. 
b.  No person shall operate or use any public address system, whether fixed, portable, or vehicle mounted, except when such operation has been approved by the division of leisure services of the department of public services. 
(12)  Closed areas and closing hours. 
a.  No person shall be allowed to enter or use a site or area or portion of a site or area which is closed to public use. 
b.  No person shall be admitted or allowed to remain in any city park after the designated closing hour except for the purpose of camping where designated or as approved by the leisure services department. 
c.  All city parks open at 7:00 a.m. and close at 11:00 p.m. daily unless otherwise posted or changed by council resolution. 
(13)  Personal injuries and accidents. The city shall not be responsible for any accident or injury to any person while on a city park or recreational facility property or using any facilities thereto. Any person entering a city park or recreational facility shall by such entrance waive any claim against the city or its agents for any accident or injury occurring while on or within a city park or recreational facility. 
(14)  Lost or stolen articles. The city shall not be responsible for any property or article lost or stolen from any bathhouse, restroom, parking area, or any park building or recreational facility. 
(15)  Commercial use. No person shall utilize any city park or recreational facilities to generate personal or corporate business unless specifically authorized by the city council. Such prohibited uses include, but are not limited to: 
a.  The sale, or the display for sale, of any merchandise; 
b.  The servicing or repairing of any vehicle, except the rendering of emergency services; 
c.  The storage of vehicles being serviced or repaired on abutting property or elsewhere; 
d.  The solicitation for sale of goods, property, fundraisers or services; and 
e.  The display of advertising of any sort. 
f.  The providing of professional services to include medical or legal services for users of the facilities. 
Note: Nonprofit civic organizations may conduct activities in city parks such as sales of food or merchandise or fundraisers if the civic organization obtains a permit from the city for such activity. 
(16)  Fishing. 
a.  No person shall fish in any body of water that rests upon city park property, except as posted and allowed by the city. 
b.  Fishing in east lake located within Twin Hills Park shall be subject to the following: 
1.  No person 16 years of age or older shall fish unless accompanied by an angler under 16 years of age. 
2.  Fishing will be permitted as posted beginning 30 minutes before sunrise and ending 30 minutes after sunset. 
3.  The city's department of leisure services may issue a special activities permit allowing exemptions to the previously mentioned access restrictions. 
4.  The daily bag limit for channel catfish is six. 
5.  The daily bag limit for striped bass is six. 
c.  Fishing in west lake located within Twin Hills Park shall be subject to the following: 
1.  No person shall kill or possess in any day more than two black bass. 
2.  No person shall take in any day more than 20 panfish, in the aggregate. 
(17)  Swimming. No person shall swim in any body of water located on city park property. Boating and other surface water uses can be allowed by written consent as directed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 779, § 3, 8-24-92; Ord. No. 852, § 2, 10-24-94; Ord. No. 1025, § 2, 4-24-00; Ord. No. 1035, § 2, 8-28-00; Ord. No. 1469,§ 1, 8-22-11; Ord. No. 1472, § 1, 9-26-11) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; animals, ch. 10; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; solid waste and recycling services, ch. 70; traffic and vehicles, ch. 86; stopping, standing and parking, § 86-26 et seq.; utilities, ch. 90. 
Sec. 58-2. - Citation authority. 
    The staff and employees of the division of leisure services, department of public services, shall be empowered to issue verbal and written corrective notices. 
(Ord. No. 779, § 3, 8-24-92) 
Sec. 58-3. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Any person convicted of any violation under this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-11, except that violations of section 58-1(16) shall constitute a civil infraction with a penalty of $50.00. 
(Ord. No. 779, § 3, 8-24-92; Ord. No. 1025, § 3, 4-24-00) 
Chapter 62 - PENSIONS AND RETIREMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; officers and employees, § 2-136 et seq. 
State Law reference- Social security for public employees, F.S. ch. 650; actuarial soundness of retirement systems, F.S. § 112.61 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - General employees' retirement plan. 
    There is hereby established a general employees retirement plan for the city, as set forth in the document designated "City of Crestview General Employees' Retirement Plan," adopted August 26, 2013, which document is hereby made a part of this chapter by reference. 
(Code 1983, §§ 12-36-12-44; Ord. No. 781, § 1, 9-28-92; Ord. No. 792, 4-26-93; Ord. No. 1441, § 1, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 1499, §§ 1-3, 8-26-13; Ord. No. 1628, §§ 1-7, 10-9-17) 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-136 et seq. 
Sec. 62-2. - Police officers' and firefighters' retirement plan. 
    There is hereby established a police officers' and firefighters' retirement plan for the city, as set forth in the document designated "City of Crestview Police Officers' and Firefighters' Retirement Plan," adopted August 26, 2013, which document is hereby made a part of this chapter by reference. 
(Ord. No. 780, § 1, 9-29-92; Ord. No. 1440, § 1, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 1500, §§ 1-3, 8-26-13; Ord. No. 1608, §§ 1-8, 11-14-16; Ord. No. 1627, § 1, 12-11-17) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; law enforcement, ch. 46. 
Secs. 62-3-62-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OLD-AGE AND SURVIVORS INSURANCE 

Sec. 62-26. - Federal social security act; participation. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend, effective as of January 1 (first quarter), 1952, to the employees and officials thereof not excluded by law, and whether employed in connection with a governmental or proprietary function, the benefits of the system of old-age and survivors insurance as authorized by the federal social security act and amendments thereto, including PL 734 of the 81st Congress, and by F.S. ch. 650; and to cover by such plan all services which constitute employment as defined in F.S. § 650.02, performed in the employ of the city by employees thereof. In pursuance of this policy, and for that purpose, the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1983, § 12-16) 
Sec. 62-27. - Agreements authorized. 
    The mayor, or other chief executive officer, is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the state for the purpose of extending the benefits provided by the system of old-age and survivors insurance to the employees and officials of this city as provided in section 62-26, which agreement shall provide for such methods of administration of the plan by the city as are found by the state agency to be necessary for the proper and efficient administration thereof, and shall be effective with respect to services in employment covered by such agreement performed after January 1, 1952. 
(Code 1983, § 12-17) 
Sec. 62-28. - Withholdings from salaries. 
    Withholdings from salaries, wages, or other compensation of employees and officials for the purpose provided in section 62-26 are hereby authorized to be made, and shall be made, in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the state agency designated by the laws or regulations to receive such amounts. 
(Code 1983, § 12-18) 
Sec. 62-29. - City appropriation. 
    There shall be appropriated from available funds such amounts, at such times, as may be required to pay promptly the contributions required of the city as employer by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, which shall be paid over to the lawfully designated state agency at the times and in the manner provided by law and regulation. 
(Code 1983, § 12-19) 
Sec. 62-30. - Records and reports. 
    The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall adhere to the rules and regulations of the state agency for the enforcement of the laws and regulations. 
(Code 1983, § 12-20) 
Sec. 62-31. - Adoption of terms of federal aid. 
    The city does hereby adopt the terms, conditions, requirements, reservations, benefits, privileges, and other conditions thereunto appertaining of title 11 of the social security act, as amended by PL 734, 81st Congress, for and on behalf of all the officers and employees thereof and of its departments and agencies, excepting any official or employee who occupies any position, office or employment not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1983, § 12-21) 
Sec. 62-32. - Custodian of funds and records. 
    The city clerk is hereby designated the custodian of all sums withheld from the compensation of officers and employees and of the appropriated funds for the contribution of the city, and the city clerk is hereby made the withholding and reporting agent and charged with the duty of maintaining personnel records for the purposes of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 12-22) 
Chapter 70 - SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 10; animal waste, § 10-21; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 30; junkyards and littering, § 30-26 et seq.; parks and recreation, ch. 58; sanitation in public parks, § 58-1; streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 90; land use regulations, ch. 102; subdivisions, § 102-481 et seq. 
State Law reference- Municipal public works, F.S. ch. 180; resource recovery and management, F.S. §§ 403.702-403.7893. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 70-1. - Authority. 
    The authority for enactment of this chapter is F.S. chs. 180 and 403, F.S. § 166.021, and section 2 of the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 1, 3-23-92) 
Sec. 70-2. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words not defined in this section shall be given their common and ordinary meaning, or for those so included, the meaning found in section 1-2 of this Code. 
    Apartment house means a building with more than two residential units. 
    Approved landfill means a place designated by classifications set forth in the Florida Statutes and designed and approved for dumping or disposal of garbage, refuse, rubbish and yard refuse. 
    Clean debris means any solid waste which is virtually inert and which is not a pollution threat to groundwater or surface waters and is not a fire hazard, and which is likely to retain its physical and chemical structure under expected conditions of disposal or use. The term includes brick, glass, ceramics and uncontaminated concrete including embedded pipe or steel. Mixing of clean debris with other types of solid waste will cause it to be classified as other than clean debris. Clean debris which is disposed of shall be considered construction and demolition debris. 
    Closing means the cessation of operation of a construction and demolition (C & D) landfill formerly permitted for operation by the state department of environmental protection and a special exception granted by the board of adjustment within the city limits. This includes monitoring, maintenance and financial responsibility after closing. 
    Collection and disposal means the actual picking up and discarding of garbage at an approved landfill. 
    Construction and demolition debris means materials generally considered to be not water soluble and nonhazardous in nature, including but not limited to steel, glass, brick, concrete, asphalt roofing material, pipe, gypsum wall board, and lumber, from the construction or destruction of a structure as part of a construction or demolition project or from the renovation or maintenance of a structure. The term includes rocks, soils, tree remains, trees, and other vegetative matter which normally results from land clearing or land development operations for a construction project. Mixing of construction and demolition debris with other types of solid waste, including material which is not from the actual construction or destruction of a structure, will cause it to be classified as other than construction and demolition debris. 
    Cover means any device, equipment, container, close-fitting tarpaulin, chain, rope, wire or line used on vehicles to prevent any part of a vehicle load to shift, blow, leak, fall or escape in any manner from the vehicle. Cover also means dirt or soil to cover a C & D landfill. 
    Curb service means a single collection point not to exceed two feet from the street edge or right-of-way. 
    Customer billing means the billing for services provided to residential, commercial and industrial users of solid waste, recycling and yard refuse services, including landfill tipping fees. 
    Decal means a self-sticking emblem or sign placed on commercial or industrial containers that cites a warning and fine for unauthorized or illegal dumping. 
    Department means the Administrative Services Department of the City of Crestview. 
    Disposal means the discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any construction and demolition debris into or upon any land or water so that such debris or any constituent thereof may enter other lands or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including groundwaters, or otherwise enter the environment. 
    Dumpster or container means placement and servicing of containers (usually measured in cubic yards) for residential, commercial and industrial customers. 
    Duplex apartment means a two residential unit building. 
    Environmental enforcement officer means a designated official of the police department or the public services department to enforce provisions of this chapter. 
    Fence means a restraining measure or barrier designed to preclude the transfer of C and D debris onto adjoining properties as well as concealment of the landfill site. The fence shall be opaque in nature and meet provisions of the city Code. 
    Final cover means the material used to cover the top and sides of a landfill when fill operations cease. 
    Garbage means and includes all waste and discarded material, including waste and discarded food, animal matter and vegetable matter (other than liquid waste), wastepaper, cans, glass, crockery, rags, ashes and cinders, but the term "garbage" does not include rubbish and yard trash as defined in this section. It shall be placed in containers as defined in this section. 
    Garbage container means and includes a regulation garbage can, having a capacity of 35 gallons, of substantial construction, with a tightfitting lid or cover, with not less than one handle on the lid or cover, and two handles on the sides of the receptacle or can, or fitted with some other convenient means by which it can be lifted or moved. 
    Handicapped carryout service means a household solid waste or recycling service at the rear or side of a residence for handicapped persons. 
    Illegal dumping means the placement, dumping or unauthorized or illegal disposal of litter, debris or trash into a residential, commercial or industrial container. 
    Intermediate cover means a layer of compacted earth at least one foot in depth applied to a C and D landfill site. 
    Landfill tipping fees means those fees levied by the county or other authorized sources providing state approved disposal sites. 
    Mobile home subdivision means a subdivision dedicated to the placement of mobile or manufactured homes within the city. 
    Person means any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual, firm, or association, any municipal or private corporation organized or existing under the laws of Florida or any other state, any county of this state, and any governmental agency of this state or the federal government. 
    Public awareness program means promotional programs developed and provided through sources of the county or the city to inform and encourage residents to use the recycling collection services. 
    Recycling means any process by which solid waste or materials which would otherwise become solid waste are collected, separated or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. 
    Recycling collection services means those services performed through sources of the county or the city which includes delivery of recycling containers to customers, collection of recyclable material from locations specially designated, and transportation and unloading of recycling materials at a processing center. 
    Recycling container means a container of such construction and material as designated by county or city sources. 
    Recycling drop station means a designated cubic yard segregated container placed at special locations or facilities. 
    Recycling fee means a monthly fee assessed to customers via the monthly utility bill. 
    Recyclable material means those materials which are capable of being recycled and which would otherwise be processed or disposed of as solid waste, which include newspapers, glass bottles, metal cans (aluminum and delabeled tin) and plastic containers. 
    Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish and street cleanings, but does not include industrial wastes, dead animals, or abandoned automobiles. 
    Residence or residential unit means a dwelling for housing one family. 
    Apartment house means a building with more than two residential units. 
    Duplex apartment means a two residential unit building. 
    Hotel, motel, store, or place of business means the usual terms ascribed to such. 
    Trailer court means any person within the city renting spaces to trailers, mobile or modular homes. 
    Rubbish means waste such as furniture, bedding, and similar materials. 
    Site means the area of land within the boundaries of a C and D landfill permitted by the state department of environmental protection and the city. 
    Solid waste means all garbage, rubbish and yard refuse. 
    Special exception means a legal transaction granted by the board of adjustment which, if approved, allows a person to purchase a permit to operate a C and D landfill on their property. 
    Special services refers to unusual or special residential needs (excludes commercial businesses and private haulers) for yard refuse and rubbish disposal purposes. 
    Storage means the interim containment of garbage, refuse and rubbish in an approved manner after generation and prior to proper and final disposal. 
    Tree trimmings are the residue from trimming limbs from shrubs and trees, tree trunks, stumps and bark, which shall not exceed six feet in length and four inches in diameter. 
    Unauthorized accumulation means the accumulation of garbage, refuse and rubbish on any residential, commercial or industrial properties in violation of this chapter. 
    Written corrective notices means a written instrument issued to the violator of any provisions of this chapter, or to his agent, identifying and specifying the violation, date and time of issuance, corrective measures to be taken, and date and time the correction is to be completed. 
    Yard trash means vegetative matter resulting from landscaping, maintenance such as tree and shrub trimmings, grass clippings, pine straw, etc. Cardboard boxes are also considered the same as yard trash. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 3(8-1), 3-23-92; Ord. No. 782, § 2, 10-12-92; Ord. No. 823, § 2, 1-24-94; Ord. No. 842, § 4, 9-26-94) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 70-3-70-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION 

Sec. 70-26. - Use of solid waste collection and disposal service required for dwellings; exception. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any dwelling in the city to dispose of any solid waste or recycling items generated at such dwelling except by subscribing to a solid waste or recycling collection and disposal service. All such dwellings capable of being served by solid waste or recycling collection service shall be served exclusively by the city or its designated agents. Accordingly, it shall be unlawful for any person to provide solid waste collection and disposal service to any dwelling in the city for which the city council has not made a written determination that the city is not capable of providing such service. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 3(8-2), 3-23-92; Ord. No. 823, § 2, 1-24-94) 
Sec. 70-27. - Refuse not acceptable for collection. 
    Refuse materials not acceptable for collection as enumerated in this chapter, unless specifically noted in this section, shall be disposed of by the person generating the nonacceptable refuse: 
(1)  Materials which have not been prepared for collection in accordance with this article. 
(2)  Hazardous materials or substances, such as poisons, acids, caustics, infected materials, explosives, batteries, hydrocarbons and radioactive materials. The county solid waste department will handle requests for disposal of these materials. 
(3)  Materials approved by FDER that are commonly referred to as "C & D waste" (see article III of this chapter). 
(4)  Solid wastes resulting from industrial processes. 
(5)  Tree stumps, trunks and limbs larger than four inches in diameter or six feet in length. 
(6)  Refuse created by any private contractor as described in sections 70-35 and 70-36. 
(7)  Animal waste, dead animals or tires. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 3(8-3), 3-23-92; Ord. No. 823, § 2, 1-24-94; Ord. No. 842, § 4, 9-26-94) 
Sec. 70-28. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 823, § 2, adopted Jan. 24, 1994, repealed former § 70-28, which pertained to refuse as the property of the city and scavenging. 
Sec. 70-29. - Burying on private property. 
    No refuse, waste matter, rubbish or garbage, including but not limited to old buildings and structures, whether or not such materials are biodegradable, shall be buried on any parcel of private property within the city unless the property has been properly permitted by the state department of environmental protection or similar state agencies and the City of Crestview. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 3(8-5), 3-23-92; Ord. No. 823, § 2, 1-24-94; Ord. No. 842, § 4, 9-26-94) 
Sec. 70-30. - Storing of refuse. 
(a)  Public places. No person shall place any refuse in any street, alley or other public place or upon any private property, whether owned by the person or not, within the city, unless the refuse shall be in proper containers for collection or under express approval granted by the public services director. No person shall throw or deposit any refuse in any stream or other body of water. 
(b)  Unauthorized accumulation prohibited, declared nuisance. Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse on any premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. 
(c)  Scattering of refuse. No person shall cast, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the city any refuse in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other public place, or into any occupied premises within the city. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 3(8-6), 3-23-92; Ord. No. 823, § 2, 1-24-94) 
Sec. 70-31. - Placement of refuse in gutters or streets prohibited, declared nuisance. 
    The placement or scattering of yard clippings, tree limbs and/or other refuse in or upon street gutters and/or the street surface is hereby declared a nuisance and a danger to storm drainage control and shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 3(8-7), 3-23-92) 
Sec. 70-32. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 823, § 2, adopted Jan. 24, 1994, repealed former § 70-32, which pertained to cardboard and packing boxes. 
Sec. 70-33. - Yard trash, rubbish. 
(a)  A franchisee will collect on a once weekly basis one pile of yard trash, including limbs, trimmings, cuttings, and pine needles, not to exceed the volume dimensions of a trash pile which measures four feet by four feet by six feet. Special hauling arrangements for trash piles which exceed that amount will be coordinated by the occupant and/or property owner with the franchisee or private vendor for proper removal. 
(b)  Limbs shall not exceed six feet in length and four inches in diameter. Bushy limbs shall be cut apart and trimmed to lay flat. Yard trash shall not be placed on top of and shall not cover sprinkler heads and water meters. The franchisee will not be responsible for damage to sprinkler systems, sprinkler heads, water meters and other objects, including fences, gates and hedges, other plants and trees damaged due to yard trash being placed over or piled on or against such items as a result of being placed there for collection by the occupants and/or owner of the property where damage might occur. 
(c)  Yard trash and/or rubbish may be disposed of by the owner or occupant in an approved landfill facility. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 3(8-9), 3-23-92; Ord. No. 823, § 2, 1-24-94) 
Sec. 70-34. - Dead animals. 
    Dead animals will not be collected as part of the solid waste service. It is unlawful for any person to store a dead animal in a container or place it at curbside for collection by the franchisee. It is the responsibility of the owner of a dead animal or the person who first discovers a dead animal to promptly notify the animal shelter or other local agency assuming responsibility for disposing of dead animals. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 3(8-10), 3-23-92; Ord. No. 823, § 2, 1-24-94) 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 10. 
Sec. 70-35. - Building construction wastes. 
    The person to whom a building permit is issued shall be responsible for removing all refuse, waste matter, rubbish, garbage, trash and construction debris and C & D wastes, including, but not limited to, trees, stumps, dirt, old buildings and structures resulting from the clearing of land before the completion of the work permitted and final inspection is made or within 72 hours of completion of the work. It shall also be the responsibility of any person to whom the permit is issued to inspect the site and to remove therefrom all such materials which have been previously buried, stored, or left to remain on the site. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 3(8-11), 3-23-92) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14. 
Sec. 70-36. - Tree surgeons, fence companies, landscape contractors, swimming pool contractors, etc., responsible for waste removal. 
    It shall be the responsibility of all fence companies, tree surgeons, nurseries, landscape contractors and swimming pool contractors or any company doing work on private property to remove from the premises all residue resulting from their work and deposit it in a permitted landfill. Residue shall not be placed at the curbside for pickup. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 3(8-12), 3-23-92; Ord. No. 823, § 2, 1-24-94) 
Sec. 70-37. - Collection schedule. 
(a)  Household garbage. All household garbage in residential areas shall be collected twice each week and yard trash and/or rubbish at least once a week. Pickups shall not be reduced by holidays but pickups normally scheduled to be made on a holiday may be rescheduled upon approval of the city, in the case of a franchise service, after at least five days prior notification to the affected residences by publication or other means approved by the city is conducted. 
(b)  Commercial garbage. All commercial garbage shall be collected according to category of service as follows: 
(1)  Nondumpster service is defined as hand pickup (curbside) and hand pickup (carryout) and shall be provided at least once weekly. This service is intended for certain small businesses which generate small volumes of solid waste. 
(2)  Dumpster pickup service shall be provided as scheduled and directed in the franchise ordinance. Customers desiring additional pickups must submit a written request to the office of the city clerk for processing. 
(c)  Yard trash. Collection of yard trash shall occur at least once each week provided the volume does not exceed one cubic yard. (For clarification, one cubic yard is equal to five standard 35-gallon cans or six 30-gallon plastic bags or a pile of limbs four feet by four feet by six feet allowing for noncompaction or up to seven empty cardboard boxes not broken down or up to 15 cardboard boxes broken down.) Limbs shall not exceed six feet in length or four inches in diameter. Customers should not place more than one cubic yard of yard trash at the curbside for pickup service. Customers who generate more than one cubic yard of yard trash and desire removal of the entire volume at one time should either contact the franchisee or a private vendor. 
(d)  Recycling. The city shall provide residential curbside pickup services through a contract vendor or in-house services pursuant to the Florida Statutes. Curbside service is provided once a week on a designated day. A monthly fee is assessed on the utility bill and collected concurrently with all other utility fees. The city reserves the right to implement other phases of recyclable features as deemed necessary to comply with the Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 3(8-13), 3-23-92; Ord. No. 823, § 2, 1-24-94) 
Sec. 70-38. - Placement for collection; racks, hangers. 
(a)  All refuse, including garbage containers, rubbish, tree trimmings, hedge cuttings, etc., to be collected from residential areas, shall be placed not to exceed two feet from the street edge or right-of-way. 
(b)  Refuse or garbage containers shall be placed for collection no earlier than 6:00 p.m. of the day preceding the scheduled collection day and not later than 6:00 a.m. on the day of collection. 
(c)  In the business district, no containers or refuse shall be placed on the street prior to 5:00 p.m., and all containers shall be removed from the street prior to 9:00 a.m. the following morning. In the business district, no refuse or containers shall be placed upon the street on Saturday evenings or Sundays. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 3(8-14), 3-23-92) 
Sec. 70-39. - Containers, types and sizes. 
    The containers used pursuant to this article shall be as follows: 
(1)  Residential and certain commercial customers shall use either a 35-gallon galvanized or plastic container for garbage pickup. Recycling customers shall use the receptacle container provided through the city or its designated vendor. 
(2)  Truck-loaded containers for commercial customers, the use of which is described in section 70-42, shall consist of either two-, four-, six- or eight-cubic-yard capacities. The containers shall be labelled with appropriate decals depicting a warning and fine for unauthorized or illegal dumping. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 3(8-15), 3-23-92; Ord. No. 823, § 2, 1-24-94) 
Sec. 70-40. - Overloading. 
    The contents of any garbage container which is so overloaded that the lid will not fit securely on the container will not be picked up by the franchisee. In order to lower the number and severity of injuries to collection employees and to reduce insurance costs, each item shall not exceed 40 pounds including the weight of the receptacle. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 3(8-16), 3-23-92; Ord. No. 823, § 2, 1-24-94) 
Sec. 70-41. - Disturbing, removing after placement for collection. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, remove, handle or otherwise disturb the garbage containers or the contents which have been placed on city property for servicing; provided, this section does not apply to the owner, occupant, lessee or tenant of the residence or dwelling so placing the contents. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 3(8-17), 3-23-92) 
Sec. 70-42. - Commercial containers. 
(a)  Commercial businesses shall utilize a truck-loaded container unless they qualify for business and office building service authorized for very small businesses. In those instances, no more than two 35-gallon containers may be utilized. Based on volume and frequency of pickup service, commercial businesses may elect service in a two-, four-, six- or eight-cubic-yard container. 
(b)  Any person, owner, agent or occupant of a business establishment furnished a container by the franchisee shall pay the monthly fee reflected on their utility bill. 
(c)  All commercial containers furnished by the designated vendor shall belong to and be the sole property of the city or vendor and are nontransferable. Any establishment which shall go out of business or move outside the corporate limits of the city shall forfeit the container and it shall be picked up for reuse by the vendor. 
(d)  Garbage shall not be deposited directly into the containers, but shall be drained and wrapped in sanitary bags, such as plastic or kraft paper bags, etc. 
(e)  Industrial or hazardous wastes shall not be placed in the containers nor shall the franchisee pick up such industrial or hazardous wastes. 
(f)  Failure of any person, owner, agent or occupant of a business establishment to observe this section shall be cause to discontinue service. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 3(8-18), 3-23-92; Ord. No. 823, § 2, 1-24-94) 
Sec. 70-43. - Residential containers. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to provide for and regulate the use of containers for the storage of garbage collected. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, all garbage collected shall be stored prior to collection by the customer in a 35-gallon container. The use of any other container for such storage is unlawful. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to store for collection in containers any materials described in section 70-27, any metal from automobile parts, any metal or plastic garbage containers, and any other materials which do not constitute household garbage. 
(d)  Containers utilized by customers of the city are the property of the customer. It is the responsibility of the head of the household or business to keep containers clean and to protect them from theft, destruction and damage beyond repair. 
(e)  Households or businesses which do not have an occupant who is physically capable of placing the container on the curbside may apply to receive service at a designated location. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 3(8-19), 3-23-92; Ord. No. 823, § 2, 1-24-94) 
Sec. 70-44. - Recycling services; waivers. 
(a)  Recycling services. A monthly fee of $1.65 per residence shall be assessed for curbside services to collect and dispose of recyclable items. The monthly charge shall be reflected on the current utility bill and collected concurrently with all other utility fees. The city reserves the right to implement other phases of recyclable collection as deemed necessary. 
(b)  Waivers. A voluntary participation program waiving payment of recycling fees is hereby established subject to certain criteria. For recycling waivers, a customer must: 
(1)  Be 60 years or older; 
(2)  Be designated head of household or principal wage earner; 
(3)  Reside at an address that receives recycling services; and 
(4)  Be a volunteer and process through a certifying agency designated by the city. 
(c)  Application for waiver consideration and approval must be accomplished on city designated forms and returned to the utility office at city hall. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 3(8-20), 3-23-92; Ord. No. 782, § 3, 10-12-92; Ord. No. 823, § 2, 1-24-94) 
Sec. 70-45. - Private franchise authorized. 
    The solid waste services may be operated by awarding the services to a private person in the form of a private franchise as provided by F.S. ch. 180, or through a contractual agreement with another entity of government. If no award of franchise or contractual agreement is made (which award is discretionary based upon reasonableness), the city shall operate the solid waste services and charge such fees as the council may establish by ordinance or resolution. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 3(8-21), 3-23-92) 
ARTICLE III. - CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION LANDFILL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- C and D landfills, § 18-58. 

Sec. 70-46. - Approved C and D landfills. 
    C and D landfills granted a permit by the state department of environmental protection to operate within the city shall be subject to the tenants of this article upon passage except that: 
(1)  Permitted C and D landfills by the FDEP prior to enactment of this article shall be excluded from the special exception process outlined in chapter 102 of the Code. Upon expiration of an FDEP C and D landfill permit or closure of the site persons must apply and be granted a special exception by the board of adjustment if a renewal is granted by FDEP. 
(2)  Current permitting and operating C and D landfills shall be exempt from the fencing and landscaping requirement for a period of one year from the passage of this article. Afterward, all approved landfills in operation shall be subject to fencing and landscaping requirements. 
(Ord. No. 842, § 5, 9-26-94) 
Sec. 70-47. - Special exceptions. 
    The person make application for a special exception before the board of adjustment for a construction and demolition (C and D) landfill permit shall follow the administrative steps outlined in section 102-129 of the Code. As a condition precedent to this process, an approved state department of environmental protection permit allowing a construction and demolition (C and D) landfill granted pursuant to the Florida Statutes and FDEP F.A.C.s currently in force must accompany the supporting documentation required in chapter 102 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 842, § 5, 9-26-94) 
Sec. 70-48. - Preparation of C and D landfill application. 
    The application for a permit shall be prepared on forms provided by the administrative services department and signed by the applicant. The application shall include all information necessary for the department to make an evaluation of the proposed facility to ensure that it will pose no significant threat to public health or the environment. The permit application and supporting information shall include the following: 
(1)  A copy of the approved board of adjustment order granting the special exception for a C and D landfill to the applicant. 
(2)  A copy of the approved state department of environmental protection permit which authorizes the applicant to site a C and D landfill on the property. 
(3)  Payment of administrative fees as set forth in chapter 102 of the Code by cash, check or money order. 
(4)  Appointment or power of attorney to act on behalf of the applicant. 
(5)  A site plan or other instrument in sufficient detail indicating the situs of the C and D landfill and its relationship to adjoining property lines, location and type of fence and border landscaping to satisfy the aesthetics of the entranceway, etc. 
(6)  A stormwater plan in sufficient detail to satisfy provisions of chapter 102 of the city Code. 
(7)  A copy of the deed of conveyance or other documentation that connotes ownership of the property and a legal description plus any known land restrictions to the land. 
(8)  Payment of fees to the office of city clerk for issuance of an occupational license if the applicant plans to charge fees for disposal of C and D materials at the site. The basic application shall reflect a statement as to whether or not the applicant intends to access a fee for disposal at the site. 
(Ord. No. 842, § 5, 9-26-94) 
Sec. 70-49. - Construction and demolition debris disposal. 
(a)  Clean debris may be used as fill material in any area, including a permitted landfill, subject to receipt of a dredge and fill permit from the FDEP and city where applicable. Clean debris used as fill material is not solid waste, and such use does not require a solid waste permit under this section. Clean debris that is not used as fill material shall be disposed of as construction and demolition debris. 
(b)  Construction and demolition debris which is disposed of on the property where it is generated, or on property which is adjacent or contiguous to and under common ownership and control as that property where the waste is generated, is exempt from the permitting requirements of section 17-701.040, F.A.C. Such disposal areas must also be closed, graded and vegetated as specified in Rule 17.701.803(9), F.A.C. 
(c)  Nothing in this rule shall prevent the burning or recycling of construction and demolition debris in accordance with FDEP rules. 
(d)  Construction and demolition debris may be disposed of only in accordance with one of the methods authorized above. 
(Ord. No. 842, § 5, 9-26-94) 
Sec. 70-50. - General permit for off-site disposal of construction and demolition. 
(a)  The owner or operator of the construction and demolition debris disposal facility shall notify the FDEP and city in writing on form 17-701.900(1) of the facility location, size in acres, general description of the facility operations, planned active life of the facility and the mailing address and phone number of the owner and operator. 
(b)  The owner or operator of the disposal facility shall certify in writing to the department and the city that the owner or operator will operate the disposal facility in accordance with the requirements of this section and that they either own the land or have legal authorization from the land owner to use the land for a disposal facility. 
(c)  The disposal facility is exempt from the requirements of Rule 17-701.050 and 17-701.070 through 17-701.076, F.A.C. provided that none of the prohibitions contained in Rule 17-701.040, F.A.C., or the water quality standards contained in Chapter 17-3 and 17-28, F.A.C. shall be violated. 
(d)  Stormwater shall be controlled in accordance with Chapter 17-25, F.A.C., and any water management district rules plus provisions of article III, chapter 30 of the Code. 
(e)  Construction and demolition debris shall be compacted as necessary to assure that the requirements of subsection (h) below can be met. 
(f)  Access to the disposal facility shall be controlled during the active life of the facility by fencing or other effective barriers to prevent disposal of solid waste other than construction and demolition debris. 
(g)  Operation of a facility under a general permit with FDEP and the city constitutes consent for department and city personnel to inspect the site during normal business hours for compliance with department and city rules. 
(h)  Final cover and seedling or planting of vegetative cover shall be placed on each disposal unit within 180 days after final receipt of wastes. Final cover shall consist of a 24-inch-thick soil layer, the upper six inches of which shall be capable of supporting vegetation and shall be graded to eliminate ponding, promote drainage, and minimize erosion. 
(i)  The owner or operator shall notify the department and city within 30 days after closing, covering, and seeding the facility as required in subsection (h) above. 
(Ord. No. 842, § 5, 9-26-94) 
Sec. 70-51. - Periodic inspections, permit renewal and closure provisions. 
(a)  The city will conduct periodic inspections as may be necessary to ensure that provisions and/or conditions of the permit FDEP and the city Code are carried out by the C and D landfill owner. If a condition or violation is sited by the inspecting party, notice in writing shall be given by certified mail, return receipt requested, by the city to take corrective action. The landfill owner will be given ten days to correct the condition or violation. Failure to correct the condition or violation shall constitute a referral to the code enforcement board. Operation of the code enforcement board and administrative action thereto shall be carried out pursuant to the city Code. 
(b)  At least six months prior to expiration of the FDEP permit, the landfill owner shall notify the city in writing of his intent to pursue permit renewal with FDEP. If not previously granted a special exception by the board of adjustment (see section 70-46), the landfill owner shall initiate a special exception request pursuant to chapter 102 of the city Code. Operation of a renewal permit issued by FDER without approval of a special request permit by the city shall constitute a violation of the city Code and shall be subject to a fine as set forth in chapter 1 of the city Code. 
(c)  At least six months prior to closure of the permitted C and D landfill, the landfill owner shall provide a written notice to the FDEP and city advising when the landfill activities will cease operations and provide a copy of the closure plan for review and approval by the city. At a minimum, the closure plan shall contain general information such as: 
(1)  Identification of the landfill. 
(2)  Name, address and phone number of property owner. 
(3)  Location by township, range and section, and latitude and longitude of the entrance to the C and D landfill. 
(4)  Total acreage and dimensions of the C and D landfill area. 
(5)  Legal description of the property on which the landfill operation is conducted on. 
(6)  Certification as to the amount of earth used in the covering of the landfill area (see section 70-50(9)), type of grass or sodding used to restore the aesthetics of the land, and final disposition of the fence or other barrier. 
(7)  The proposed method to control stormwater runoff on the landfill properties other than through an osmosis control process. The stormwater method of disposal shall meet the requirements imposed by the city. 
(8)  Written assurance for a ten-year period that if the land site is subsequently developed for a residential, commercial or industrial project, notice will be given that the site contained a C and D landfill and operated for a period of time pursuant to a FDER C and D landfill permit and special exception granted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 842, § 5, 9-26-94) 
Chapter 74 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND CERTAIN OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 10; restraint of certain animals, § 10-5; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 30; possession of beer, wine, alcoholic beverages, nonprescription drugs, marijuana, etc., prohibited in, upon or adjacent to public or city parks or recreation areas, § 54-4; loitering, § 54-5; solid waste and recycling services, ch. 70; traffic and vehicles, ch. 86; utilities, ch. 90; vehicles for hire, ch. 94; land use regulations, ch. 102; subdivisions, § 102-481 et seq. 
State Law reference- Supplemental method of making improvements, F.S. ch. 170; classification of roads, F.S. § 335.04. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 74-1. - Littering. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, throw, place or pile any trash, litter of any type, paper, garbage, cans, cartons, bottles or other waste or discarded materials along any public street, sidewalk, or right-of-way within the municipal limits of the city; provided that, materials left on the property by the respective property owners for collection by the sanitation department shall be excluded from the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided by section 1-11. 
(Code 1983, § 14-1) 
Cross reference- Junkyards and littering, § 30-26 et seq. 
Sec. 74-2. - Display of wares. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit or demonstrate and/or place on exhibit or demonstrate any article for sale of a business or of a profession on the sidewalks or streets of the city; provided, that any person may place on exhibit or demonstration any of their articles for sale of a business or of a profession within 24 inches of their building or the business or profession. 
(Code 1983, § 14-2) 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 
Sec. 74-3. - Peddling from vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, offer for sale or sell any goods, wares or merchandise from any vehicle parked or otherwise in the city except as authorized by article II of chapter 18 and for which a license has been issued by the city. 
(Code 1983, § 14-3) 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18; traffic and vehicles, ch. 86; vehicles for hire, ch. 94. 
Sec. 74-4. - Obstructions prohibited. 
    Whoever obstructs any street or avenue of the city, by fencing across or into such street or avenue or by wilfully causing any other obstruction in such street or avenue, or any part thereof, shall be punished as provided by section 1-11, and the judgment of the court shall also include that the obstruction be removed. 
(Code 1983, § 14-4) 
Sec. 74-5. - Injury to trees and shrubs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to chop, cut, trim, dig or injure in any manner whatever any shade or ornamental tree or shrubbery on the streets of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 14-5) 
Sec. 74-6. - Traffic on Main Street. 
(a)  No through commercial truck traffic shall be allowed on Main Street in Crestview, from where the street leaves U.S. Highway 90 to where it intersects with State Road 85 South. 
(b)  Anyone violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1983, § 14-6) 
Sec. 74-7. - Assessment for street paving, curbs and storm sewers for corner properties. 
    Whenever any property owner owns property that is located upon a corner where the property abuts two city streets, upon the development to such streets under a special assessment, as provided by any general or special law, for the purpose of paving, curbing or installation of storm sewers, such property owner shall be assessed only two-thirds of the total footage of such property (measured on both streets) in determining the assessment lien to be collected from such landowners. However, this section shall not apply unless the streets joining at the corner are improved within three years of each other. 
(Code 1983, § 14-7) 
Sec. 74-8. - Streets, sidewalks, sewers and drainage. 
    The council may provide for the construction of street paving, curbs and gutters, sidewalks, sewers and drainage, and for keeping the same clean and in repair, provided that at least 50 percent or more of the real estate owners of the property benefited thereby, shall have by petition requested said council to construct said improvements, and may assess any property benefited thereby for its proportion of the expense, which assessment shall constitute a lien upon such property prior in dignity to all other liens except annual taxes; may establish street grades, including grades for sidewalks, foot walks, curbs and gutters and require property owners to bring their property to the established grade by filling or excavating, and may require the construction of sidewalks and regulate the hanging of gates within the city, and may require and regulate the construction or abatement of awnings and steps within fire limits, and the time and manner of repair thereof, and may provide that the expense shall be a lien upon the property if done by the city upon default of the owner after 30 days' notice. 
(Laws of Fla. ch. 63-1249, § 6(c)) 
Sec. 74-9. - Approval of council required for cemeteries. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to locate, plat, designate, maintain and/or sell burial lots of or for any cemetery or burial ground within the limits of the city without the person first having obtained the approval of the city council for and in behalf of same. 
(Code 1983, § 20-76) 
Sec. 74-10. - Skateboards, roller blades and skates prohibited on downtown streets and sidewalks. 
(a)  The use of skateboards, roller blades and skates on public streets and sidewalks in the downtown area of the city is prohibited. 
(b)  Anyone violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 987, § 2, 9-27-99) 
Sec. 74-10.1. - Fee for telecommunications company occupation of rights-of-way. 
(a)  (1)  Any telecommunications company providing local telephone service, as defined in section 203.012(3), Florida Statutes (2000), in the city and that is occupying municipal streets or rights-of-way within the corporate limits of the city with poles, wires or other fixtures shall pay to the city a fee in the amount of one percent of the gross receipts on recurring local service revenues for services provided within the corporate limits of the city by such telecommunications company. Included within the fee are all taxes, licenses, fees, in-kind contributions accepted pursuant to section 337.401, Florida Statutes (2000), and other impositions except ad valorem taxes and amounts for assessments for special benefits, such as sidewalks, street pavings, and similar improvements, and occupational license taxes levied or imposed by the city upon the telecommunications company. 
(2)  In the event that a telecommunications company which provides telecommunications services defined as toll services in section 203.012(7), Florida Statutes (2000), occupies the city's rights-of-way, the telecommunications company shall pay to the city annually $500.00 per linear mile, which amount is prorated for any portion thereof; for any cable, fiber optic, or other pathway that makes physical use of the city's rights-of-way. Such annual fee shall be prorated to reflect the expiration date of this section and shall be payable annually, in advance. If a telecommunications company that is required to pay a fee pursuant to this subparagraph (a)(2) increases the amount of its facilities occupying the city's rights-of-way after such advance payment has been made, but prior to the expiration date of this section, the fees due for the additional facilities shall be prorated and paid in full at the time the facilities are installed in the city's rights-of-way. 
The fee or other consideration imposed pursuant to this subsection (2) shall not apply in any manner to any telecommunications company which provides local telephone service as defined in section 203.012(3), Florida Statutes (2000), for any services provided by such telecommunications company. 
(3)  "Telecommunications company," as used in this section, shall have the meaning set forth in section 364.02(12), Florida Statutes (2000). 
(b)  The fees provided for in subsection (a)(1) shall be paid by the telecommunications company to the city in quarterly installments. The installment payments shall be based upon such gross receipts on recurring local service revenues for the immediately preceding installment period or portion thereof after the effective date of this section, and shall be made within 30 calendar days following the end of the period. Past due payments or underpayments shall bear interest accrued from the last day of the quarter for which the payment was due. Interest shall be paid at the state statutory rate of interest on judgments as established by section 55.03, Florida Statutes (2000). Payments shall include a statement as to how the fee amount was determined and the statement shall be certified by the telecommunications company's chief financial officer or other duly authorized representative of the company. 
(c)  If the city wishes to verify the payments due to the city under this section, the telecommunications company shall permit the city or a designated representative of the city, upon reasonable advance written notice, and during normal business hours at the location of the telecommunications company where such records are maintained in the city, at another location satisfactory to the city, or elsewhere pursuant to (1) or (2) below, to review or audit the telecommunications company's billing and payment records kept in the ordinary course of business upon which the payments were based. If a telecommunications company's records are not maintained in the city, the telecommunications company shall either: 
(1)  Pay all reasonable expenses, including travel, following the provisions of subsections 112.061(6), (7) and (8), Florida Statutes (2000), to the city for the city to have a review or audit performed; or 
(2)  Provide the city with access to copies of the telecommunications company's records in the city or within 55 miles of the city or by an electronic method satisfactory to the city. 
However, without the specific written consent of a telecommunications company's audit representative, no company records may be duplicated or taken from the telecommunications company's premises, and the city shall maintain the confidentiality of the information disclosed in these records and use the information solely for the purposes of verifying payments by the telecommunications company. No acceptance of payment shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the city may have for sums due and payable under this section unless the city agrees in writing. In the event that the city, pursuant to final audit findings, determines that there exists a difference between the amount due to the city and the amount paid to the city, indicating an underpayment to the city, in excess of five percent of the amount due, such telecommunications company shall pay all reasonable costs, fees and expenses of the audit. 
(d)  This section is adopted consistent with the provisions of section 337.401, Florida Statutes (2000), and other applicable provisions of law. This section shall not be construed as a waiver or limitation of the power of the city to prescribe and enforce reasonable rules and regulations pursuant to applicable provisions of law. 
(e)  If required by applicable city ordinances, codes or regulations, a telecommunications company shall be registered with the city and obtain all permits that may be required by the city regarding occupation of the city's public rights-of-way for telecommunications facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1045, § 2, 12-29-00) 
ARTICLE II. - STREET DESIGNATION AND BUILDING NUMBERING PLAN[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1578, § 2, adopted November 10, 2014, in effect repealed former art. II, §§ 74-11-74-15, and enacted a new art. II. Former art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 841, adopted August 8, 1994; and Ord. No. 1091, adopted June 3, 2002. 

Sec. 74-11. - Addressing system; streets and roadways; naming, changes, and signage. 
    In order to provide clear and distinctive names and signage for the streets and roadways within the city, a system of control for those names shall be utilized. The system of rules and regulations shall be known simply as the "street designation criteria" and shall adhere to the following guidelines: 
(1)  Street names shall be pleasant sounding; easy to read; and, to the extent possible, of a character which allows the public to relate to and remember the names. Request for names for all public and private rights of way within the city shall be submitted to the GIS division of the growth management department for processing and approval. 
a.  The proposed street or road name(s) shall be reviewed by 911, emergency services agencies and the city departments, prior to approval. 
b.  The applicant shall be notified in writing of the approval status. 
(2)  Street name duplications that exist within the city will be reviewed for renaming as an element of the implementation of the addressing system. See section 74-12. 
(3)  Changes in street names will be considered where any of the following conditions exist: 
a.  A street is unnamed. 
b.  The configuration of a street results in confusion in the numbering process. 
c.  A street has more than one name and a single name is in the public interest. 
d.  There is a duplication of names or if a street is phonetically similar to another street in the city. 
(4)  Proper signage shall be installed for all streets and roadways within the city. 
a.  The signage within newly constructed subdivisions and commercial developments shall be installed by the developer and approved by the planning and zoning department and the city engineer prior to acceptance of the subdivision or certificate of occupancy is issued for the commercial development. 
b.  The signage installation and maintenance for existing streets and roadways shall be the responsibility of the street and road maintenance department of public services. 
c.  Proper signage shall: 
1.  Provide a consistent name along the length of the roadway. 
2.  Provide for the appropriate post directional indicator (when necessary) to be shown. 
3.  Provide the necessary adjustments in the existing signage to meet the reflectivity mandate from the state for street signs. 
(Ord. No. 1578, § 2, 11-10-14) 
Sec. 74-12. - Addressing system; location numbering plan. 
    The implementation of the addressing system shall initially provide for the accumulation of the actual physical addresses as posted on the structures and allow for address verification via the database comparison with various land management and address database files utilized by city departments as well as those provided by other governmental agencies. This timeframe for the assimilation of data shall herein be referred to as the "review and correction phase." 
    The review and correction phase shall commence with the effective date of Ordinance 1578 November 10, 2014 and shall conclude on September 30, 2015 with the creation of the master address point database to be simply known as the "location numbering plan." 
(1)  Within the review and correction phase, prime concern shall be given for the removal of invalid and inappropriate addresses for existing structures and to allow the readdressing with the appropriate uniform address. Corrections shall include the following protocols: 
a.  Removing any address using a fractional or alpha value in the address and replacing with the proper whole number address and/or the appropriate unit or suite indicator. 
b.  Removing any addresses inconsistent with the odd/even address cycle and replacing with the odd or even number address depending upon location of the structure in relationship with the roadway. 
c.  Providing for "the readdressing of" or "adjustments to" the existing addresses to insure the proper road name and post directional indicator are incorporated within the address. (i.e. East Highway 90, within the city is James Lee Blvd., East) 
(Ord. No. 1578, § 2, 11-10-14) 
Sec. 74-13. - Addressing system; management control protocol. 
    The management control protocol shall provide the management mechanism to monitor, review, revise, update, issue and correct the addresses within the master address point database. The primary functions shall be to monitor the validity and accuracy of the unique addresses through database comparison, input of newly created point data and coordination of revisions throughout the various agencies and departments. This control shall allow the ever increasing functionality and accuracy of the addressing data, yielding more accurate database production for distribution purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1578, § 2, 11-10-14) 
Sec. 74-14. - Administration and number assignment. 
    The GIS division of the growth management department will be responsible for managing, coordinating and maintaining the street designation criteria and location numbering plan. 
(1)  The number assignments shall adhere to the following guidelines: 
a.  The owner or occupant of any building to which a number has been assigned or reassigned will be notified in writing of the number assigned upon request. 
b.  Should an existing building have, exhibit or be addressed by a number in conflict with the uniform "location numbering plan," notice shall be given to the owner or occupant, to correct such conflict. 
c.  A completed address request form will initiate the creation of a new address. The request form will be submitted to the GIS division of the growth management department for processing. Upon completion of the approval cycle, an address notice letter will be issued in writing to the property owner and occupant of the structure and then, distributed to the appropriate governmental agencies and utility companies. The new address shall be added to the address point database and incorporated into the location numbering system. There shall be no charge for this service. 
d.  The notice, also referred to as the address letter, is the written format of the address assignment or reassignment and the posting directions of the numbers to the structure. Other information that may be included are the reminder to file a change of address with the U. S. Postal Service and to expedite the posting of the numbers as soon as possible as the address shall be incorporated into the various agencies within ten days. 
(Ord. No. 1578, § 2, 11-10-14) 
Sec. 74-15. - Standard for street address numbers. 
    All principal buildings in the city shall be assigned address numbers and shall display such assigned numbers, whether or not mail is delivered to such locations. Numbers need not be displayed on accessory buildings. Vacant lots shall be assigned the same number as would be assigned a principal building if existing. 
(1)  Physical numbering shall conform to the following minimum standards: 
a.  Assigned numbers for principal buildings shall be displayed and clearly visible and legible from the street, road or private way on which the building fronts. Numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters not less than three inches in height width for residential buildings, structures, or portions thereof and not less than six inches in height for all other buildings, structures, or portions thereof. 
b.  Numbers must be in color contrasting to the building or other background and must be permanently affixed to the building/structure. 
c.  Where applicable, easily legible numbers shall also be affixed to the mailbox of the building or house. 
d.  In the case of a principal building which has a separate entrance for each dwelling or occupancy space, the assigned number shall be displayed on each separate front entrance. 
e.  Any different numbers on a building which might be mistaken for or confused with the address number assigned in accordance with the "numbering system," shall be removed. 
f.  Assigned numbers for principal buildings which are not visible from the street or private way shall additionally be displayed at the intersection of the driveway and servicing street, attached to a post, wall, fence or mailbox at a level to ensure visibility and shall comply with the minimum height requirements as stated in section 74-15(1). 
g.  All adjoining numbers shall be considered in making any address designation. 
h.  In the case of multi-unit buildings, the range of the dwelling unit or the occupancy space shall be mounted on the exterior of the building so that it is visible from the street or private way. The numbers must be Arabic numerals and at least six inches in height. 
i.  In extreme cases, there may be occasions when it is necessary for an entire street within the city to be renumbered in order to assist the emergency service agencies or the postal delivery. All structures on streets so designated shall be renumbered in accordance with the new numbering system within three months of a certified notice thereof given by the city to the owner/occupants of such structures. 
j.  For new subdivision developments, legible copy of the approved final subdivision plat together with the AutoCAD drawing file or equivalent, shall be submitted for purposes of addressing the entire subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 1578, § 2, 11-10-14) 
Sec. 74-16. - Building permit and certificate of occupancy restrictions. 
    The city shall assign an address when a building permit is issued for any principal building. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the required number or numbers are displayed in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 1578, § 2, 11-10-14) 
Sec. 74-17. - Notice and coordination with agencies. 
    Notices of the issuance of all house numbers, new or reassignments, shall be acknowledged in writing to the U.S. Post Office; Okaloosa County Offices of 911, Public Safety, Property Appraiser, Supervisor of Elections and GIS; all local utility providers and all departments and agencies of the city. (Reference 74-14(1)) 
(Ord. No. 1578, § 2, 11-10-14) 
Sec. 74-18. - Penalty. 
    Violation of this article shall be subject to punishment as provided in chapter 1 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1578, § 2, 11-10-14) 
Secs. 74-19-74-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DRIVEWAYS 

Sec. 74-25. - Removing old sidewalks; drainage. 
(a)  If a driveway is being built across an existing sidewalk, the existing sidewalk shall be removed and a new sidewalk constructed with a minimum thickness of six inches of concrete reinforced with mesh. 
(b)  Each person receiving a permit to perform work pursuant to this section is required to provide and construct drainage structures of the size and kind and a the location and grade indicated by the public services department. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 2, 10-11-99) 
Sec. 74-26. - Curb cuts; installation. 
    Curb cuts and the installation of driveways in all sections of the city shall be constructed pursuant to the following criteria: 
(1)  Residential driveways crossing drainage swells. Swells shall conform to subdivision or other designated plans as close as possible, not to exceed an algebraic difference in grades greater than 15 percent and no grade shall exceed 25 percent. When in the opinion of the public services department grades exceed these guidelines then drainage structures shall be provided in size, kind and at the location and grade as indicated by public services department. 
(2)  Driveway (geometric requirements). 
a.  Residential. Single driveway minimum width of ten feet, with a right turn radius or flare of five feet. 
b.  Commercial. Driveway width for a one-way operation minimum width 15 feet, two-way 27 feet with a right turn radius or flare of 20 feet. Driveways through front perimeter landscape areas shall be no less than 20 feet apart except as otherwise required by the state department of transportation. 
c.  Industrial. Driveway width for a one-way operation minimum width 20 feet, two-way 40 feet with a right turn radius or flare of 20 feet. Driveways through front perimeter landscape areas shall be no less than 20 feet apart except as otherwise required by the state department of transportation. 
(3)  Minimum angle. Minimum acute angle measured from the edge of the pavement and generally based on one-way operation shall not be less than 45 degrees; for two-way driveways the minimum angle shall not be less than 60 degrees. 
(4)  Structural requirements. Driveways shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete, minimum of four inches thick. Concrete shall be reinforced with welded wire fabric or with plant mixed fiber mesh. Compressive strength shall not be less than 2500 p.s.i.; one-eighth-inch open control joints shall be placed every ten feet. Every fourth joint shall be one-half wide constructed with preformed joint filler. If driveway is 40 feet long or longer it shall have a one-half-inch wide joint constructed with preformed joint filler at the property line and against the garage slab. Subgrade shall be compacted with a vibratory tamp prior to concrete being poured. If asphalt concrete is used the minimum thickness shall be two inches and have a suitable base material approved by the public services department. 
(5)  Inspections. Inspections of newly installed driveways within the city shall be conducted by the public services department and the results provided to the administrative services department. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the city until all conditions of this article are complied with. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 2, 10-11-99) 
Sec. 74-27. - Penalty. 
    Violation of this article shall be subject to punishment as provided in Chapter 1 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 2, 10-11-99) 
Chapter 82 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; finance, § 2-181 et seq.; electricity, § 14-96 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 82-1-82-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC SERVICE TAX[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Public utilities, § 18-34; utilities, ch. 90. 
State Law reference- Public service tax, F.S. § 166.231. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 82-26-82-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MANUFACTURED OR NATURAL GAS 

Sec. 82-36. - Levy of tax. 
    There is hereby levied on each and every sale of gas (natural or manufactured) in the city a tax equal to ten percent of the charge made by the seller of such gas (natural or manufactured), which tax shall in every case be paid by the purchaser for the use of the city to the seller of such gas (natural or manufactured), at the time of paying the charge to the seller therefor, and not less often than monthly. 
(Code 1983, § 16-26) 
Sec. 82-37. - Collection; duty of seller; discontinuance of service. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every seller of gas (natural or manufactured) in the city to collect from the purchaser, for the use of the city, the tax levied by this division at the time of collecting the selling price or charge in each transaction, and report and pay over monthly to the city all taxes. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any seller to collect the price of any sale of gas (natural or manufactured) in the city without at the same time collecting the tax levied by this division in respect to such sale, unless such seller shall elect to assume and pay such tax without collecting such tax from the purchaser thereof. 
(c)  Any seller failing to collect the tax levied by this division at the time of collecting the price of such sale, where the seller has not elected to assume and pay such tax, shall be liable to the city for the amount of such tax in like manner as if the tax had been actually paid to the seller, and the city clerk and mayor shall bring and cause to be brought all such suits and actions, and take all such proceedings, as may be necessary for the recovery of such tax. 
(d)  If any purchaser shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay to the seller the seller's charge and the tax levied by this division and as required by this division on account of the sale for which such charge is made, or either, the seller shall have and is hereby invested with the right to immediately discontinue further service to such purchaser until the tax and such seller's bill have been paid in full. 
(Code 1983, § 16-27) 
Sec. 82-38. - Records to be kept by seller; inspection. 
    Each and every seller of gas on which a tax is levied by this division shall keep complete records showing all sales in the city of such gas (natural or manufactured), which records shall show the price charged for each sale, the date thereof, and the date of payment thereof, and shall, at all times, be open for inspection by duly authorized representatives of the city, who shall have authority to make such transcripts thereof as they may desire. 
(Code 1983, § 16-28) 
Sec. 82-39. - Application of tax to all sales. 
    The tax levied by this division on sales of gas (natural or manufactured) shall apply to all charges made for such gas, whether on a monthly basis or otherwise. The tax levied by this division on the sale of gas (natural or manufactured) shall apply to all sales for such gas, whether delivered through medium of a meter or other measuring device, or otherwise, to premises located in the city, except as exempted by state law. 
(Code 1983, § 16-29) 
State Law reference- Purchase of natural gas by a utility for resale or for use as fuel in the generation of electricity is exempt, F.S. § 166.231(4); purchases by any recognized church for use exclusively for church purposes are exempt, F.S. § 166.231(5). 
Sec. 82-40. - Computing upon monthly basis. 
    In all cases where the seller of gas (natural or manufactured) collects the price therefor on a monthly basis, the tax levied by this division may be computed on the total amount of sales for such period, the tax to be computed to the nearest cent. 
(Code 1983, § 16-30; Ord. No. 998, § 2, 10-11-99; Ord. No. 1015, § 3, 1-10-00) 
Sec. 82-41. - Appropriation of funds. 
    All moneys accruing from the tax levied by this division are hereby appropriated and shall be paid into the general revenue fund of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 16-31) 
Sec. 82-42. - Failure or refusal to pay tax; penalty. 
    Any purchaser wilfully failing or refusing to pay the tax levied by this division, where the seller has not elected to assume and pay such tax, and any seller violating the provisions of this division, shall be punished as provided by section 1-11. 
(Code 1983, § 16-32) 
Secs. 82-43-82-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ELECTRICITY, TELEGRAPH AND TELEPHONE SERVICE 

Sec. 82-56. - Levy of tax. 
    There is hereby levied by the city on each and every sale of electricity, telegraph and telephone service in the city a tax equal to ten percent of the charge made by the seller of such electricity, telegraph or telephone service, as the case may be, which tax shall in every case be paid by the purchaser for the use of the city to the seller of such electricity, telephone or telegraph service at the time of paying the charge to the seller therefor, and not less often than monthly. 
(Code 1983, § 16-41) 
Sec. 82-57. - Collection by seller; monthly payment to city; failure to collect or pay tax. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every seller of electricity, telegraph or telephone service in the city to collect from the purchaser for the use of the city, the tax levied by this division at the time of collecting the selling price or charge in each transaction, and report and pay over monthly to the city all such taxes. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any seller to collect the price of any sale of electricity, telegraph or telephone service in the city without at the same time collecting the tax levied by this division in respect to such sales, unless such seller shall elect to assume and pay such tax without collecting the tax from the purchaser thereof. 
(c)  Any seller failing to collect the tax levied by this division at the time of collecting the price of such sale, where the seller has not elected to assume and pay such tax, shall be liable to the city for the amount of such tax in like manner as if the tax had been actually paid to the seller, and the city clerk and mayor shall bring and cause to be brought all such suits and actions, and take all such proceedings, as may be necessary for the recovery of such tax. 
(d)  If any purchaser shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay to the seller the seller's charge and tax levied by this division and as required by this division on account of the sale for which such charge is made, or either, the seller shall have and is hereby invested with the right to immediately discontinue further service to such purchaser until the tax and such seller's bill have been paid in full. 
(Code 1983, § 16-42) 
Sec. 82-58. - Records of seller; inspection by city. 
    Each and every seller of electricity, telegraph or telephone service on which a tax is levied by this division shall keep complete records showing all sales in the city of such electricity, telegraph and telephone service, which records shall show the price charged for each sale, the date thereof, and the date of payment thereof, and shall, at all times, be open for inspection by duly authorized representatives of the city who shall have authority to make such transcripts thereof as they may desire. 
(Code 1983, § 16-43) 
Sec. 82-59. - Application of tax. 
    The tax levied by this division on sales of telegraph and telephone service shall apply to all charges made for such telephone and telegraph service, whether on a monthly basis or otherwise, and shall include all charges made for such service. The tax levied by this division on the sale of electricity shall apply to all sales of electricity, whether delivered through medium of a meter or other measuring device, or otherwise, to premises located in the city, except as exempted by state law. 
(Code 1983, § 16-44) 
State Law reference- Purchase by any recognized church for use exclusively for church purposes are exempt, F.S. § 166.231(5). 
Sec. 82-60. - Computing tax. 
    In all cases where the seller of electricity, telegraph and telephone services collects the price therefor on a monthly basis, the tax levied by this division may be computed on the total amount of sales for such period, the tax to be computed to the nearest cent. 
(Code 1983, § 16-45; Ord. No. 998, § 3, 10-11-99; Ord. No. 1015, § 4, 1-10-00) 
Sec. 82-61. - Penalty for violation of division. 
    Any purchaser wilfully failing or refusing to pay the tax levied by this division where the seller has not elected to assume and pay such tax, and any seller violating the provisions of this division, or any officer, agent or employee of any seller violating the provisions of this division, shall be punished as provided by section 1-11. 
(Code 1983, § 16-46) 
Secs. 82-62-82-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - WATER SERVICE 

Sec. 82-71. - Tax levy upon city water. 
    There is hereby levied by the city a tax equal to six percent of the charge made for water furnished by the city, which tax shall be included in and be a part of the water rates and charges set forth elsewhere in this Code and shall be collected along with and in the same manner as the water rates and charges. 
(Code 1983, § 16-56) 
State Law reference- Municipal public service tax, F.S. §§ 166.231, 166.232; exemption of purchases by any recognized church for use exclusively for church purposes, F.S. § 166.231(5). 
Secs. 82-72-82-89. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - EXEMPTIONS 

Sec. 82-90. - Exemption for public agencies and churches. 
(a)  The United States of America, the state, the county, the city and their subordinate agencies and bodies are hereby exempt from the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Purchases by any recognized church for use exclusively for church purposes are exempt from the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 998, § 5, 10-11-99; Ord. No. 1015, § 6, 1-10-00) 
Sec. 82-91. - Partial exemption for qualified businesses located in enterprise zones. 
(a)  Any business located within the enterprise zone established by Resolution 02-11, shall be eligible to receive an exemption of 50 percent of the utility tax imposed by the city on the purchase of electrical energy if such business is a qualified business under the provisions of F.S. § 212.08, and is determined to be eligible for the exemption by the department of revenue. 
(b)  To receive the exemption, a business must file an application with the Okaloosa County-Crestview Enterprise Zone Development Agency on a form provided by the department of revenue for the purposes of F.S. §§ 166.231(8) and 212.08(15). A qualified business may receive the benefit herein provided for a period of five years from the billing period beginning not more than 30 days following notification to electrical energy provider by the department of revenue that an exemption has been authorized. The benefits of this article shall expire on May 31, 2012. Any qualified business which has been granted an exemption under F.S. § 212.08(15) shall be entitled to the full benefit of that exemption as if expiration had not occurred on that date. Notwithstanding the expiration referenced above, if a subsequent audit conducted by the department of revenue determines that the business did not meet the criteria mandated in F.S. § 212.08(15), the amount of taxes exempted pursuant to this article shall immediately be due and payable to the city by the business, together with the appropriate interest and penalty, computed from the due date of each bill for the electrical energy purchased as exempt under this article. 
(Ord. No. 1085, § 2, 4-22-02) 
ARTICLE III. - CASUALTY INSURANCE PREMIUM TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to levy tax on casualty insurance premiums, F.S. § 185.08. 

Sec. 82-91. - Levy of tax; amount. 
    There is hereby assessed, imposed and levied on every insurance company, corporation or other insurer now engaging in or carrying on, or which shall hereafter engage in or carry on the business of insuring with respect to casualty risks, as shown by the records of the insurance commissioner of the state an excise or license tax in addition to any license tax or excise tax now levied by the city which tax shall be in the amount of one percent of the gross amount of receipts of premiums from policyholders on all premiums collected on casualty insurance policies, covering property within the city. 
(Code 1983, § 16-71; Ord. No. 1085, § 2, 4-22-02) 
Sec. 82-92. - When tax due and payable. 
    The license or excise tax levied in this article shall be due and payable annually on March 1 of each year. 
(Code 1983, § 16-72; Ord. No. 1085, § 2, 4-22-02) 
Secs. 82-94-82-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROPERTY INSURANCE PREMIUM TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to levy tax on property insurance premiums, F.S. § 175.101. 

Sec. 82-116. - Levy of tax; amount. 
    There is hereby assessed, imposed and levied on every insurance company, corporation or other insurer now engaging in or carrying on, or which shall hereafter engage in or carry on the business of property insurance, as shown by the records of the insurance commissioner of the state, an excise or license tax in addition to any license tax or excise tax now levied by the city, which tax shall be in the amount of 0.85 percent of the gross amount of receipts of premiums from policyholders on all premiums collected on property insurance policies covering property within the city. 
(Code 1983, § 16-86) 
Sec. 82-117. - When tax due and payable. 
    The license or excise tax levied in this article shall be due and payable annually on March 1 of each year. 
(Code 1983, § 16-87) 
Secs. 82-118-82-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ADDITIONAL HOMESTEAD TAX EXEMPTION FOR SENIOR CITIZENS 

Sec. 82-131. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as "City of Crestview Additional Homestead Tax Exemption for Senior Citizens." 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 1, 12-28-99) 
Sec. 82-132. - Authority. 
    This article is adopted pursuant to F.S. § 196.075, as amended, and Section 6(f), Article VII of the Florida Constitution to allow an additional homestead tax exemption of $25,000.00 for any person who has legal or equitable title to real estate and maintains thereon the permanent residence of such owner, who has attained age 65, and whose household income does not exceed $20,000.00 in accordance with the regulations established herein. 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 2, 12-28-99) 
Sec. 82-133. - Definitions. 
    The words and phrases in this article shall have the meanings provided by F.S. § 196.075, as amended, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Household means a person or group of persons living together in a room or group of rooms as a housing unit, but the term does not include persons boarding in or renting a portion of the dwelling. 
    Household income means the adjusted gross income, as defined in § 62 of the United States Internal Revenue Code, of all members of a household. 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 3, 12-28-99) 
Sec. 82-134. - Terms and conditions. 
(a)  In accordance with Section 6(f), Article VII of the Florida Constitution and F.S. § 196.075, an amended, the city council hereby authorizes and additional, homestead tax exemption of $25,000.00 commencing with the year 2000 for any person who has legal or equitable title to real estate and maintains thereon the permanent residence of such owner, who has attained age 65, and whose household income does not exceed $20,000.00. 
(b)  Beginning January 1, 2001, such person's $20,000.00 income limitation shall be adjusted annually, on January 1, by the percentage change in the average cost-of-living index in the period January 1 through December 31 of the immediate prior year compared with the same period for the year prior to that. The index is the average of the monthly consumer-price-index figures for the stated 12-month period, relative to the United States as a whole, issued by the United States Department of Labor. 
(c)  Persons receiving such additional homestead tax exemption shall be subject to the provisions of F.S. § 196.131 and 196.161, as amended, if applicable, pertaining to wrongful receipt of a homestead tax exemption. 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 4, 12-28-99) 
Sec. 82-135. - Rescission. 
    It is the intent of the city council in establishing this article that it be and is hereby empowered to rescind this additional homestead tax exemption at the end of any particular year should it be determined in the sole discretion of the council that there is an adverse financial impact of such an exemption, and it no longer serves the best financial interest of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 5, 12-28-99) 
Sec. 82-136. - Exemption limitation. 
(a)  The additional homestead tax exemption established hereunder shall apply only to taxes levied by the city council. Unless otherwise specified by the city this exemption will apply to all levies of the city, including dependent special districts and municipal service taxing units. 
(b)  Should the city council hereafter specify a different exemption amount for any dependent special districts or municipal service taxing units, that exemption amount must be uniform in all such dependent special districts and municipal service taxing units. 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 6, 12-28-99) 
Sec. 82-137. - Application procedures. 
(a)  Those person entitled to the homestead tax exemption in F.S. § 196.031, as amended, may apply for and may receive an additional homestead tax exemption as provided in this article. 
(b)  A taxpayer claiming the additional homestead tax exemption provided under this article shall annually submit to the county property appraiser, no later than March 1, a sworn statement of household income on a form prescribed by the department of revenue. 
(c)  The filing of the statement of the taxpayer shall be supported by copies of any federal income tax returns for the prior year, any wage and earnings statements (W-2 forms), and any other documents it finds necessary, for each member of the household, to be submitted by June 1. The taxpayer's statement shall attest to the accuracy of such copies. The property appraiser may not grant the exemption without the required documentation. 
(d)  If title is held jointly with right of survivorship, the person residing on the subject property and otherwise qualifying may receive the entire amount of the additional homestead tax exemption. 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 7, 12-28-99) 
Sec. 82-138. - Filing. 
    The city council shall deliver a copy of the adopted ordinance to the property appraiser no later than December 31 of the year prior to the year that this exemption will take effect. If this article is thereafter repealed, the city council shall notify the property appraiser no later than December 1, of the year prior to the year the exemption expires after enactment of this article a certified copy shall be filed with the secretary of state within ten days and with the county property appraiser no later than December 31, 1999. 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 2, 12-28-99) 
Chapter 86 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Duty of driver to report accident after striking a domestic animal, § 10-20; trucks and vehicles, § 18-49; use of vehicles or animals without the permission of owner, § 54-2; vehicles and parking facilities in city parks, § 58-1; streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, ch. 74; peddling from a vehicle, § 74-3; vehicles for hire, ch. 94. 
State Law reference- Motor vehicles, F.S. § 316.001 et seq.; powers of local authorities, F.S. § 316.008; Uniform Disposition of Traffic Infractions Act, F.S. ch. 318. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 86-1. - Adoption of Florida Uniform Traffic Control Law. 
    There is hereby adopted by reference the Florida Uniform Traffic Control Law, F.S. ch. 316, as amended, which law shall be in full force and effect in the city as if fully set forth in this chapter, and shall be considered as part of this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 17-1) 
Sec. 86-2. - Adoption of Florida Uniform Disposition of Traffic Infractions Act. 
    There is hereby adopted by reference the Florida Uniform Disposition of Traffic Infractions Act, F.S. ch. 318, as amended, which act shall be in full force and effect in the city as if fully set forth in this chapter, and shall be considered as part of this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 17-2) 
Secs. 86-3-86-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 923, § 2, adopted May 12, 1997, repealed former Art. II, §§ 86-26-86-29, and § 3 of said ordinance added a new Art. II, §§ 86-25-86-48. Former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the Code of 1983, §§ 17-16-17-19. 
Cross reference- Designated fire lanes, § 34-3; vehicles and parking facilities in city parks, § 58-1. 

DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 86-25. - Definitions. 
    Motor vehicle is defined as any self-propelled vehicle not operated upon rails or guideway, but not including any bicycle or moped. Also, the term "vehicle" used within this ordinance text is interchangeable with and shall mean the same as that of motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 923, § 3, 5-12-97) 
Sec. 86-26. - Manner of parking. 
    No person shall stand or park a motor vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of traffic and with the curb-side wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the edge of the roadway, except upon a street which has been marked or a sign erected for angle parking, a vehicle shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such mark or sign. 
(Ord. No. 923, § 3, 5-12-97) 
Sec. 86-27. - Unattended motor vehicle. 
(a)  No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended with the ignition key in the vehicle whether or not the motor is in use. 
(b)  Whenever any motor vehicle standing unattended with the ignition key in the vehicle is found in violation of this section, a police officer is authorized to remove such key from such vehicle and to post a notice in such vehicle stating where the key may be recovered. 
(Ord. No. 923, § 3, 5-12-97) 
Sec. 86-28. - Stopping, standing and parking prohibited in specified places. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a motor vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk or in such manner that any part of such vehicle is protruding over a sidewalk or any part of the sidewalk area; 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway; 
(3)  Within an intersection; 
(4)  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant; 
(5)  On a crosswalk; 
(6)  Within ten feet of a crosswalk at an intersection, unless permitted to do so by appropriate signs or devices posted in such areas; 
(7)  Within 30 feet of any flashing beacon, stop sign or other official traffic-control device located at the side of a roadway, unless the city engineer or designee indicates a different length by signs or markings; 
(8)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the city engineer or designee indicates a different length by signs or markings; 
(9)  Within thity (30) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; 
(10)  Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire or sub-fire station and on the side of a street opposite such station, if prohibited by a sign; 
(11)  On a roadway side of any motor vehicle stopping or parked at the edge or curb of a street or on the roadway end of any vehicle parked at an angle to curb or street edge, except commercial vehicles engaged in loading or unloading from 2:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. only; 
(12)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel; 
(13)  At any place where an official sign prohibits stopping, standing or parking; 
(14)  Opposite a dead-end or job street outside of the central business district; 
(15)  At any place in such a manner as to block access to commercial refuse containers by the city or its designated non-exclusive franchise holder refuse removal equipment; 
(16)  Alongside any curb which has been painted yellow or red, unless otherwise specifically permitted by appropriate signs or devices posted by the city; 
(17)  In any parking space specifically designated and marked for the disabled unless such motor vehicle displays a parking permit as required by state law; or in such a manner as to block or obstruct a wheelchair ramp; 
(18)  In a designated bus stop or taxicab stand unless the motor vehicle is a bus or taxicab, respectively; 
(19)  If the motor vehicle is a commercial vehicle, upon the public streets or on or within privately owned driveways or property within all dwelling, or office districts as established by the land use regulations of the Code, except for loading or unloading purposes or when parked within a completely enclosed garage; 
(20)  In a metered parking space adjacent to a parking meter which has been covered by a bag placed thereon by the city indicating no public parking; 
(21)  In an area designated as a fire lane pursuant to the Code; 
(22)  On any property owned or controlled by the city not designated for parking, unless otherwise approved by the city council, or authorized city departments; 
(23)  In painted safety zones on roadways within the city, except for emergency purposes. Any motor vehicle s parked in such a roadway, for more than two hours will be towed at the owner's expense pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; 
(24)  On the shoulders or medians of Interstate 10 and all state roadways within the city limits except for emergency purposes. Any motor vehicle parked on such a shoulder or median for more than 24 hours will be towed at the owner's expense pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 923, § 3, 5-12-97) 
Sec. 86-29. - Stopping, standing or parking so as not to obstruct traffic. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park any motor vehicle in a street in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of any lane of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic, except that a driver may stop momentarily during the actual loading or unloading of passengers or when necessary in obedience to a traffic regulation or a traffic sign or signal or police officer. 
(Ord. No. 923, § 3, 5-12-97) 
Sec. 86-30. - Parking prohibited by sign. 
    No person shall park a motor vehicle at any place where an official sign or marking prohibits parking. 
(Ord. No. 923, § 3, 5-12-97) 
Sec. 86-31. - Parking prohibited at all times on certain designated streets. 
    When a sign is erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a motor vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or portion of streets as designated by the city. 
(Ord. No. 923, § 3, 5-12-97) 
Sec. 86-32. - Overtime parking in parking zones. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any motor vehicle to be parked overtime or beyond the period of legal parking time, and any vehicle in any parking zone longer than the time limit fixed for such zone by sign or ordinance shall be considered to be illegally parked. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to relocate a motor vehicle from one parking space within the same parking zone or to relocate a vehicle temporarily from the same parking space unless the vehicle has left the parking zone for an amount of time equal to or greater than the legal time limit for parking fixed for such zone. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to roll the tires of a motor vehicle to remove or obscure or attempt to remove or obscure the markings made by parking enforcement personnel prior to removing the vehicle from the parking zone. 
(Ord. No. 923, § 3, 5-12-97) 
Sec. 86-33. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
    No person shall stand or park a motor vehicle: 
(1)  Upon a public or private street, public parking lot or any other public property for the purpose and intent of displaying such vehicle thereon for sale, hire or rental; 
(2)  Upon any public or private street, public parking lot or any other public property for the purpose of painting, greasing or repairing such vehicle; except repairs necessitated by an emergency; 
(3)  Upon any public or private street, public parking lot or any other public property for the purpose of washing or polishing such vehicle or any part thereof; 
(4)  Upon any public or private street, public parking lot or any other public property for the purpose of displaying advertising; 
(5)  Upon any public or private street, public parking lot or any other public property for the purpose of selling merchandise from the vehicle, except in a duly established marketplace or when so authorized or licensed under the laws of the city. 
(Ord. No. 923, § 3, 5-12-97) 
Sec. 86-34. - Stopping, standing or parking for loading only. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a motor vehicle in any place marked as a passenger zone for a period of time longer than the time indicated by signs or other appropriate markings or devices. 
(Ord. No. 923, § 3, 5-12-97) 
Sec. 86-35. - Standing or parking of buses and taxicabs. 
    The driver of a bus, hackney or taxicab shall not stand or park upon any street at any place other than at a bus stop, hackney stand or taxicab stand, respectively, except that these provisions shall not prevent the driver of any such motor vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers. 
(Ord. No. 923, § 3, 5-12-97) 
Sec. 86-36. - Parking on parkways. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, "parkway" is defined as that area from the right-of-way line to the edge of pavement of the lateral lines of a roadway including any grassy or unpaved median between two paved areas. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle in or on a parkway except as provided in subsections (c) and (d) below. 
(c)  The prohibition contained in subsection (b) above shall not apply to motor vehicles owned or operated by the city, by a public utility, or by the county, state or federal government when such vehicles are engaged in the performance of work by employees of said agencies in the course and scope of their employment, nor shall the prohibition apply to authorized emergency vehicles actually engaged in emergency service. 
(d)  The prohibition contained in subsection (b) above shall not apply to parkway areas, which have been officially designated and assigned by the city as permissible areas for parking when such is deemed to be in the public interest after review by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 923, § 3, 5-12-97) 
Sec. 86-37. - Removal and impounding of illegally parked, abandoned or disabled motor vehicles. 
    Police officers or designees of the city are hereby authorized to remove any motor vehicle from any street or alley within the city, to a public garage or other place of safety at the owner's expense, under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated: 
(1)  When any vehicle is left unattended: 
a.  On a sidewalk; 
b.  In front of a public or private driveway; 
c.  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant or in a fire lane; 
d.  Within an intersection; 
e.  On a crosswalk; 
f.  Between a safety zone and the nearest curb or within thirty (30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the city has indicated a different length; 
g.  In a space designated for emergency vehicles only; 
h.  Within 20 feet of a driveway entrance to a fire or sub-fire station and, if prohibited by a sign, on the side of a street opposite such station; 
i.  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or construction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic and is prohibited by sign; 
j.  At any place where official signs prohibit parking, stopping or standing and the vehicle is obstructing traffic or otherwise creating a safety hazard; 
k.  In a city off-street parking facility for any period of time longer than 24 hours or upon any street longer than 72 hours; 
l.  Upon any bridge, elevated structure, viaduct, causeway, tube or tunnel where such vehicle is obstructing traffic or otherwise creating a safety hazard; 
m.  For more than two hours in a painted safety zone on roadways within the city; 
n.  For more than 24 hours on the shoulder or median of Interstate 10 or state roadways within the city limits. 
(2)  When a vehicle is obstructing traffic or otherwise creating a safety hazard and the person in charge of the vehicle is absent or by reason of physical injury or condition is incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody of removal. 
(3)  When any vehicle is parked on any parking facility or area designated or used in connection with City Hall, police station, or other facilities of the city in violation of the posted signs and the permitted uses. 
(4)  When any vehicle remains stopped or parked on any property owned or controlled by the city not designated for parking for a period longer than twelve hours. 
(Ord. No. 923, § 3, 5-12-97) 
Sec. 86-38. - Removing, impounding an immobilization of motor vehicles bearing outstanding citations. 
(a)  Any motor vehicle found parked at any time upon any street or m any off-street parking facility in the city against which there are five or more outstanding or otherwise unsettled parking violation notices for which no hearing has been requested within the requisite time period, and for which a notice of summons has been mailed, may, by or under the direction of the police department, be immobilized in such a manner as to prevent its operation. No such vehicle shall be immobilized by any means other than by the use of a device or other mechanism which will cause no damage to such vehicle unless it is moved while such device or mechanism is in place. 
(b)  If, after contacting the appropriate state agency which acts as custodian of motor vehicle registration and license tag records for the state from which the license tag attached to the vehicle was issued, the police department is unable to determine the vehicle owner's address, the vehicle may be immobilized in accordance with the provisions of the preceding subsection (1), except it shall not be necessary for the police department to mail notice of summons before the vehicle may be immobilized. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the police department immobilizing such motor vehicle, or under whose direction such vehicle is immobilized, to post on such vehicle, in a conspicuous place, notice sufficient to inform the owner or operator of the vehicle that: 
(1)  Such motor vehicle has been immobilized pursuant to and by the authority of section 86-38 of this code; and 
(2)  The owner of such immobilized motor vehicle, or other duly authorized person, shall be permitted to repossess or to secure the release of the vehicle upon compliance with either of the following alternative procedures: 
a.  Payment to the police department of the city of a $50.00 service charge for removal of the immobilization device; or 
b.  Posting with the police department of the city of a cash or surety bond or other adequate security equal to the amount of $50.00. If, during the hearing on the outstanding parking violation notices which necessitated the immobilization of the motor vehicle, the city prevails on any or all of the outstanding violations, the $50.00 cash or surety bond shall be forfeited to the city. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for anyone, except those persons authorized by the police department, to remove or attempt to remove, tamper with, or in any way damage or alter the immobiIization device. 
(e)  Any motor vehicle immobilized pursuant to section 86-38 or 86-37, shall be subject to impoundment as authorized by section 86-37 hereinabove. 
(Ord. No. 923, § 3, 5-12-97) 
Sec. 86-39. - Storage, costs and removal of impounded motor vehicles. 
    When a motor vehicle is removed pursuant to section 86-37 or 86-38, notice shall be provided to the owner pursuant to the provisions of Florida Statute 713.78. 
(Ord. No. 923, § 3, 5-12-97) 
Sec. 86-40. - Notice of owner's claim for loss or damage to immobilized motor vehicle. 
    At the time of the release of a motor vehicle immobilized pursuant to section 86-38, the owner of such vehicle or other duly authorized person, shall inspect the vehicle and shall give a receipt to the chief of police or his designee reciting any claims he has for loss or damage to the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 923, § 3, 5-12-97) 
Sec. 86-41. - Stopping, standing or parking in more than one space. 
    Any person who stops, stands or parks a motor vehicle in more than one space allotted for stopping, standing or parking shall pay the appropriate fees or fines for the number of spaces utilized. 
(Ord. No. 923, § 3, 5-12-97) 
Sec. 86-42. - Fire lanes on private property devoted to public use. 
(a)  Fire lanes shall be established by the fire department on private property, devoted to public use, where the parking of motor vehicles or other obstructions may interfere with the ingress and egress of fire department vehicles for the protection of persons or property, such as shopping centers, bowling lanes, theaters, hospitals, churches, private alleys, and similar locations. 
(b)  Marking of fire lanes designated by the fire department shall be done by the owner or lessee of the private property. Fire lane pavement markings and signs shall be of a type and constructed to confirm with Chapter 34 of this Code and furnished and erected by the owner or the lessee of the private property. 
(c)  Parking of motor vehicles or otherwise obstructing fire lanes shall be prohibited at all times. 
(d)  Any motor vehicle found parked in a designated fire lane shall be ticketed with an "illegal parking" ticket, as used by the city. The fine for parking in a designated fire lane shall be $20.00 plus a $5.00 surcharge to be used for fire department training programs pursuant to and as authorized by Chapter 86-154, Laws of Florida. 
(Ord. No. 923, § 3, 5-12-97) 
Sec. 86-43. - Liability for payment of parking ticket violations. 
    Under authority of Chapter 316, Florida Statutes, the owner of a motor vehicle is responsible and liable for payment of any parking violation under this chapter unless the owner can furnish evidence that the vehicle was, at the time of the parking violation, in the care, custody or control of another person. In such instances, the owner of the vehicle is required, within a reasonable time after notification of the parking violation, to furnish to the police department, the name and address of the person or company who leased, rented, or otherwise had the care, custody or control of the vehicle. The owner of a vehicle is not responsible for [a vehicle which is] stolen or in the care, custody, or control of some person who did not have permission of the owner to use the vehicle. Prima facie evidence that the vehicle involved was, at the time, stolen or in the care, custody or control of some person who did not have permission of the owner to use the vehicle, shall be in the form of a report from the appropriate law enforcement official that the vehicle was not under the care, custody or control of the owner of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 923, § 3, 5-12-97) 
DIVISION 2. - PENALTIES AND PROCEDURES 

Sec. 86-44. - Schedule of civil penalties for parking violations. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted the following schedule of civil penalties for parking violations occurring within the city for which payment may be made at the police department. 
Violation Amount of 
City Penalty  
(1)  No parking anytime ..... $10.00* 
(2)  No parking, stopping or standing ..... 10.00* 
(3)  No parking-here to corner ..... 10.00* 
(4)  No parking-between signs ..... 10.00* 
(5)  No parking-this side ..... 10.00* 
(6)  No parking-emergency ..... 10.00* 
(7)  No parking-on parkway ..... 10.00* 
(8)  No parking-6:00 a.m. - 6:00 p.m. ..... 10.00* 
(9)  No parking-7:00 - 9:00 a.m., 4:00 - 6:00 p.m. ..... 10.00* 
(10)  No parking-7:00 - 9:00 a.m., 2:00 - 3:30 p.m., except passenger loading ..... 10.00* 
(11)  No parking-on street after 2:00 a.m. (in certain areas) ..... 10.00* 
(12)  No parking-passenger loading permitted ..... 10.00* 
(13)  No parking-passenger loading 8:00 a.m. - 6:00 p.m. ..... 10.00* 
(14)  No parking-except 6:00 - 10:00 p.m., passenger loading permitted 
7:00 a.m. - 9:00 a.m. ..... 10.00 
2:00 p.m. - 4:00 p.m. ..... 10.00* 
(15)  No parking-bus space ..... 10.00* 
(16)  No parking-taxi stand ..... 10.00* 
(17)  No parking anytime-freight loading zone ..... 10.00* 
(18)  No parking-parking for assigned personnel only ..... 10.00* 
(19)  No parking-official motor vehicles only ..... 10.00* 
(20)  No parking-law enforcement vehicle only ..... 10.00* 
(21)  No parking-police duty car only ..... 10.00* 
(22)  No parking-patient loading only ..... 10.00* 
(23)  No parking-yellow or red curb (not a sign) ..... 10.00* 
(24)  No parking-on sidewalk ..... 10.00* 
(25)  No parking-on crosswalk ..... 10.00* 
(26)  No parking-blocking driveway ..... 10.00* 
(27)  No parking-blocking dumpster ..... 10.00* 
(28)  No parking-blocking wheelchair ramp ..... 10.00* 
(29)  No parking-within 30 feet of official traffic control device ..... 10.00* 
(30)  No parking-within 30 feet of nearest rail at railroad crossing ..... 10.00* 
(31)  No parking-improper parking-obstructing traffic ..... 10.00* 
(32)  No parking-left wheels to curb (on two-way street) ..... 5.00* 
(33)  No parking-wrong way on one-way street (parked facing opposite flow of traffic) ..... 10.00* 
(34)  Blocking fire hydrant ..... 20.00* 
(35)  Parking by disabled permit only ..... 250.00* 
(36)  Parking overtime (limit authorized in zone) ..... 5.00* 
(37)  Parking over line ..... 5.00* 
(38)  Designated fire lane ..... 20.00* 
Plus $5.00 surcharge 
*Provided the penalty is paid within five working days of the date of issuance of the parking violation notice by either hand delivery to the police department or by mailing the penalty in the postage paid envelope provided with the notice. If such penalty is not paid within the five working days as above provided, the amount of the civil penalty shall be $1.00 greater than the amount specified for the parking violation as provided above. 
(b)  Any person receiving a parking violation notice shall, within five working days, pay the civil penalty as prescribed in subsection (a) of this section or request a hearing before a judge of the county court. Any person electing to appear before the designated judge shall be deemed to have waived his right to pay the civil penalty as set forth in this Code. The judge, after a hearing, shall make a determination as to whether a violation has been committed. If the commission of a violation has been proven, the judge may impose a fme not to exceed $250.00 plus court costs. 
(c)  If an individual who has received a parking violation notice for parking a motor vehicle in a parking space, the proper use of which requires a specific permit or decal, appears at the offices of the police department within five working days of the date of such notice and furnishes proof that the required permit or decal was issued to such vehicle and that such permit or decal was valid on the date of the violation, the police department may reduce the civil penalty authorized by section 86-46(a) to $5.00. 
(Ord. No. 923, § 3, 5-12-97) 
Sec. 86-45. - Parking fines unit; procedures upon noncompliance with parking violation notice. 
(a)  The police department shall accept payment of civil penalties for parking violations and issue receipts therefor. The police department shall maintain a record of such civil penalties and shall daily report the monies collected and deposited in the city clerk's office. 
(b)  If any person summoned by a parking violation notice affixed on a motor vehicle does not respond to such notice within the time period specified on such notice, the police department shall assess the appropriate delinquent fee per violation against the registered owner of the vehicle. In addition, a notice of summons shall be sent, by mail, or hand delivered to the registered owner of the vehicle which is cited, informing such owner of the parking violation notice and the failure to comply therewith. Such notice shall direct the recipient to respond within ten calendar days; otherwise, a summons will be issued for failure to comply in violation of section 86-46(a) of this Code. Costs in the amount of $5.00 shall be assessed incident to this notification process. 
(c)  Any person who fails to respond to the original parking violation notice within the time period specified on such notice shall have deemed to have waived the right to contest the merits of such parking violation and may, if found guilty, be fined up to $250.00 for each parking violation notice for which there has been no compliance. 
(d)  A violation of section 86-46(a) of this code shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation and shall not be construed to be merged with or a part of the original parking violation. 
(e)  $1.00 from each paid parking citation issued under this article will be placed into the law enforcement training fund for the city. 
(Ord. No. 923, § 3, 5-12-97) 
Sec. 86-46. - Failure to obey notice; alteration or destruction of notice prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the responsible party as defined in section 86-43 to neglect to answer to the charge set forth in a parking violation notice affixed to a motor vehicle by a police officer or parking enforcement specialist. 
(b)  The notice referred to in subsection (a) of this section is and shall remain the property of the city before and after the serving, delivery or affixing thereof. All persons receiving any such notice in writing, whether by personal service or by affixing the same to a vehicle, shall be and are hereby required to preserve such notice and to bring and present or otherwise transmit the same to the police department when answering the charge set forth in such notice. 
(Ord. No. 923, § 3, 5-12-97) 
Sec. 86-47. - Altering parking tickets. 
    No person, whether the recipient thereof or otherwise, shall willfully throw away, alter, mar, mutilate, destroy or discard the parking violation notice of the city. Any person violating this section shall be subject to the penalty as provided in section 1-11 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 923, § 3, 5-12-97) 
Sec. 86-48. - Unlawful use of envelope accompanying notice. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place in the envelope, provided with and accompanying the parking violation notice, any non-paper item or object. Paper items include the written notice, currency and checks. Any person violating this section shall be subject to the penalty provided in section 1-11 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 923, § 3, 5-12-97) 
Sec. 86-49. - Timed parking. 
(a)  A two-hour parking restriction is imposed on both sides of Main Street commencing at U.S. Highway 90 and extending south to Martin Luther King Avenue. 
(b)  A 15-minute parking restriction is imposed on both sides of South Pearl Street commencing at the corner of Cane Avenue and extending northwesterly to South Ferdon Boulevard. 
(Ord. No. 978, § 2, 4-26-99) 
Sec. 86-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRAINS 

Sec. 86-51. - Blocking certain city streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any train which is not moving to block Wilson Street and Main Street simultaneously. 
(Code 1983, § 17-31) 
Secs. 86-52-86-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WRECKER QUALIFICATIONS AND ALLOCATION SYSTEM[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18; vehicles for hire, ch. 94. 

Sec. 86-71. - Scope and purpose. 
(a)  This article applies only to those wrecker operators who participate in the city's call allocation system established in this article. 
(b)  This article is designed to assist private and commercial users of the highways and streets of this city by ensuring that only qualified, reputable wrecker operators and equipment are provided for removal of wrecked, disabled, stolen or abandoned motor vehicles in the event the owner or operator is incapacitated, unavailable or leaves the procurement of wrecker service to the discretion of the city police department officer at the scene. 
(c)  This article does not apply to a vehicle owner's request for utilization of a specific wrecker operator, whether or not such operator is qualified under this article. In such event, the owner's request will be honored without resort to this article unless there will be an unreasonable time delay and a traffic problem exists. 
(Code 1983, § 17-41) 
Sec. 86-72. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations and their derivations shall have the meanings given in this section. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words not defined in this section shall be given their common and ordinary meaning, or for those so included, the meaning found in section 1-2 of this Code. 
    Abandoned vehicle means an unattended vehicle which is directed by the city to be removed because it is improperly parked in violation of F.S. §§ 316.194, 316.1945 or 316.1951. 
    Answering service means commercial enterprise, which pursuant to a contract or agreement, receives calls and relays messages to the wrecker service such that the calls are answered by persons other than the owner or an employee of the wrecker service. 
    Commercially manufactured wrecker means a tow truck that is designed and constructed by a wrecker manufacturer which offers its wreckers for sale; or assembled by a business licensed and approved to assemble and certify wreckers according to manufacturer's specifications. 
    Failure to answer a call for service means failure to answer the telephone when called by the duty officer, or failure to arrange at the scene after accepting a call. 
    Operator or wrecker operator means the individual, partnership, corporation or business entity engaged for hire in the recovery, towing or removal of wrecked, disabled, stolen or abandoned motor vehicles. For the purpose of this definition, a hired driver or employee shall be governed by this article while on duty and, unless otherwise stated, shall be considered an agent of the wrecker operator. 
    Roll-back or slide-back carrier means a vehicle transporter, including trailer, designed to carry passenger cars, light trucks, small trailers, burned vehicles, sports cars, boats and other cargo without causing further damage. It shall consist of a flat bed-type body which hydraulically slides back on the frame until it reaches ground level to facilitate loading by use of a winch which is used to pull or slide the vehicle on the transporter. 
    Solicitation means the conduct of an owner, employee or agent of a wrecker service which tempts, entices, suggests, offers services to, or makes request of any persons regarding removal of a vehicle involved in an accident or a disabled vehicle without authority of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 17-42; Ord. No. 844, § 2, 9-26-94) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 86-73. - Eligibility and application. 
(a)  Each wrecker operator must make application to the city for inclusion on the wrecker rotation list. Each application for inclusion shall be completed, and signed, and shall be filed with the police department. The application shall be made on forms provided by the police department. 
(b)  A police department representative shall investigate each application. The investigation will include the following: background checks, criminal history checks, driver's license status/record checks, and inspection of the applicant's wrecker(s), equipment and facilities. The investigator will, at the conclusion of his investigation, report the findings and make a recommendation to the police chief in writing. The chief will decide whether the wrecker operator is approved or denied inclusion ont he wrecker rotation list based on the investigation results. The police chief's decision may be reviewed by the mayor. 
(c)  The police department shall deny the applicant's inclusion on the wrecker rotation list if the wrecker operator fails to meet or comply with the provisions of this article, or fails to maintain any city or state license required for the operation of a wrecker service. 
(d)  To be eligible for inclusion on the wrecker rotation list to tow within the city, the wrecker's place of business must be located within or near the corporate limits so as to provide service in a fast and reasonable time frame. An operator's place of business must have the following: 
(1)  The business must have a sign that identifies it to the public as a wrecker established. The sign must be painted with letters of at least four inches in height and placed so that it is clearly visible to the public. 
(2)  The place of business must maintain office space. 
(3)  The office must have personnel on duty from at least 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday to answer calls from the city and to serve the public. However, on the following holidays observed by the city, no personnel are required to be on duty at the office to serve the public: New Years Day; Martin Luther King, Jr. Day, Good Friday, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day, Friday after Thanksgiving, Christmas Eve, and Christmas Day. If a holiday falls on Saturday, the preceding Friday shall be observed as the holiday. If a holiday falls on a Sunday, the following Monday shall be observed as the holiday. City holidays are normally observed on the same days as state and federal agencies. 
(4)  The place of business must maintain a telephone communications system to answer calls from the city or from the public, 24 hours a day. 
(5)  The wrecker operator must maintain at least one tow truck and one qualified driver for the place of business. 
(Ord. No. 844, § 2, 9-26-94) 
Sec. 86-73.1. - Call allocation operation. 
(a)  Wrecker operators shall be called for the removal of a wrecked, disabled, stolen or abandoned vehicle by the city according to the operator's placement on a wrecker rotation list and according to the wrecker classification for the size of the vehicle to be towed. Wrecker operators will be called in succession from the top of the list. Following each call an operator will be rotated to the bottom of the list except as provided in this article. An operator shall respond to a call with a tow truck classified to meet or exceed the size of the vehicle to be towed. 
(b)  The wrecker operator may not assign, transfer, pledge, surrender or otherwise encumber or dispose of his approval under this article or his place on the rotation list. A replacement or successor operator must be approved under this article before being placed within the city's call system. If a wrecker operator currently participating in the rotation list transfers ownership to another wrecker operator, the new owner may remain in the rotation system provided that it otherwise qualifies pursuant to these rules. 
(c)  Wrecker requests from the field will be transmitted to the police dispatcher who will contact the proper wrecker operator. An owner's request for wrecker operators will not be rotated and such operators will maintain their position on the list. The city may cancel a request for services of a participating wrecker operator at any time. In the event of cancellation or response without rendering service, the operator will not be rotated, but will maintain his position on the list. 
(d)  Wrecker operators will be listed only once on each list and only in the name under which they are qualified under the provision of this section and for conducting business in this state. It is prohibited for a wrecker operator conducting business at one location to receive multiple listings or classifications by utilizing a different or fictitious name for trucks operating out of the same location or by utilizing the same area. All wreckers operated in conjunction with a wrecker operator's towing and recovery business will have a number painted on both sides of the cab. The same number on two or more vehicles is prohibited. The number shall be painted in contrasting color and shall be at least four inches in height. 
(e)  Wrecker operators shall only respond to accidents or remove vehicles involved in an accident within the city's jurisdiction pursuant to a call from a law enforcement agency, as set forth in this article. In the event of a call to a wrecker operator by someone other than a law enforcement agency, such operator will first clear the call through the police department before proceeding to the scene. 
(f)  Wrecker operators shall have one day and one night telephone number. Answering services or beepers will not be permitted. The wrecker operator will notify the dispatcher at the time the call is received whether or not he will respond. The wrecker operator shall notify the department of any additional telephone numbers or change of numbers. 
(g)  Wrecker operators shall be on call 24 hours a day, seven days a week. 
(h)  The first wrecker on the list will have a choice of wrecked vehicles. If the first listed wrecker does not arrive on the scene within a reasonable time, the investigating officer will assign vehicles to available operators. The first wrecker on the scene may be required to move vehicles from the roadway, and such movement will not affect the choice of wrecked vehicles. No fee shall be charged for such service. 
(i)  If a wrecker responds to a call pursuant to these rules and removal of the vehicle is not required, the wrecker operator may charge a reasonable fee for services rendered, which shall include but not be limited to changing a flat time, providing gas or use of battery jumper cables, assisting in starting a vehicle, or unlocking a vehicle not to exceed $35.00. The fee does not include the cost of parts or labor required for any authorized vehicle repairs made at roadside, which may be charged by the wrecker operator in addition to the service fee. A wrecker operator is prohibited from assessing a towing charge if the vehicle is not removed. The wrecker operator which renders services rather than towing a vehicle shall not be rotated to the bottom of the rotation list but shall remain at the top of the list for the next available calls. 
(j)  For a period of at least one year from the date of the rendering of services to a vehicle, as provided in subsection (i), the wrecker operator shall retain a record of the name, driver's license number, address, and telephone number of the driver of the vehicle, the name and address of the registered owner of the vehicle if different from the driver, and the make, model and vehicle identification number of the vehicle which was assisted by the wrecker operator. This information shall be provided to the city upon request for verification. Providing false information to the city concerning the services rendered to the vehicle or the identification of the driver or the owner shall result in the removal of the wrecker operator from the rotation list pursuant to this article. 
(k)  When a wrecker responds to a call by the city to remove an abandoned vehicle, the wrecker shall not be rotated to the bottom of the rotation list, but shall remain at the top of the list for the next available call. 
(l)  Wrecker logs will be maintained at the police department. 
(m)  If a wrecker does not respond to a request for service made under this article or if the request is cancelled pursuant to section 86-74, the operator shall be rotated to the bottom of the list. 
(Code 1983, § 17-43; Ord. No. 844, § 2, 9-26-94) 
Editor's note- Formerly § 86-73. 
Sec. 86-74. - Response to calls. 
(a)  The wrecker operator shall respond to all requests for service made through the police department within a reasonable time under the existing conditions and circumstances. If a response cannot be made within a reasonable time, the wrecker operator shall notify the police station dispatcher of the estimated time of delay and the reasons therefor and the dispatcher may cancel the request for service and use the services of another participating wrecker operator. 
(b)  Flashing amber lights shall not be used while responding to a call for wrecker service. 
(c)  Flashing amber lights shall be used at the scene and when towing from the scene in accordance with F.S. § 316.2397(3). 
(d)  When a vehicle is released at the scene by the investigating officer or representative of the police department, the wrecker operator shall tow the vehicle to any location the owner requests. 
(e)  Any ancillary service, such as the use of a dolly, dropping and hooking up linkage, are to be performed only if required and appropriate. 
(f)  The motor vehicle owner or operator is responsible for payment of charges imposed by the wrecker operator. 
(g)  The wrecker operator will forfeit a call if the wrecker operator or his employee or agent responds to a call in such a condition that the officer on the scene reasonably believes that he is incapable of safely removing the vehicle. Such condition shall include, but shall not be limited to, impairment due to consumption of alcohol or any chemical substance or controlled substance. 
(Code 1983, § 17-44) 
Sec. 86-75. - Wrecker classification and required equipment. 
(a)  Generally. Each tow truck owned or maintained by a wrecker operator shall be commercially manufactured and shall conform to the requirements set out in this section. The requirement for commercial manufacture of trucks and equipment is waived for those operators who have been on the city's rotation list for one year prior to May 9, 1988. The wrecker and equipment shall be operable. 
(b)  Inspections. The tow truck and equipment shall be inspected by the police chief or his designee before being placed on the rotation list. Thereafter, they shall be subject to periodic checks. 
(c)  Specifications and equipment for operators who wish to remove cars and light trucks. Operators who wish to remove cars and light trucks shall provide the following: 
(1)  One class A wrecker with specifications and equipment as follows: 
a.  A truck chassis with a manufacturer's rated capacity of at least 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight. A complete, commercially manufactured crane and winch having a manufacturer's rating of at least four-plus tons must be mounted on the chassis. Hand-crank winches do not satisfy these requirements and will not be approved. 
b.  A minimum of 100 feet of three-eighths-inch cable. 
c.  Cradle or tow plate or tow sling to pick up vehicles. The cradle or tow plate is to be equipped with safety chains and so constructed that no further damage will occur when picking up vehicles. 
d.  Dual rear wheels. 
e.  Vehicles which are equipped with wheel lifts or equivalent may also qualify as class A tow trucks so long as all other applicable requirements are met. 
f.  Dollies. 
g.  Flood lights on the hoist. 
(2)  In addition, operators who wish to remove cars and light trucks may have a roll-back or slide-back carrier with specifications and equipment as follows. These are trucks which are used to pick up burned vehicles, sports vehicles (to prevent damage to plastic front ends), small trailers, and boats and to transport cargo from an accident scene: 
a.  A minimum of one-ton truck with a 16-foot bed, dual wheels and one winch with an 8,000-pound capacity. 
b.  A minimum of 50 feet of three-eighths-inch cable. 
c.  A brake lock device. 
d.  A minimum of two safety tiedown chains 20 feet in length. 
e.  Two spotlights (floodlights) mounted on the rear. 
(d)  Specifications and equipment for class B wreckers (for removal of medium duty trucks and vehicles weighing 20,000 pounds gross vehicle weight or less). Class B wreckers (for removal of medium duty trucks and vehicles weighing 20,000 pounds gross vehicle weight or less) shall provide the following equipment: 
(1)  A truck chassis with a manufacturer's rated capacity of at least 20,000 pounds gross vehicle weight. A complete, twin-winch, commercially manufactured boom and winches having a manufacturer's combined rating of at least ten ton capacity mounted on the chassis. Class B wreckers that were previously approved at 15,000 pounds gross vehicle weight may continue in use within this class, even if sold to another approved rotation operator. 
(2)  A minimum of 100 feet of at least one half-inch cable on each drum. 
(3)  A cradle or tow plate or tow sling to pick up vehicles. The cradle or tow plate or tow sling is to be equipped with safety chains and so constructed that no further damage will occur when picking up vehicles. 
(4)  Dual rear wheels. 
(5)  One set of scotch blocks for wheels or hydraulic rear-6 scotch blocks. 
(6)  Flood lights on the hoist. 
(e)  Specifications and equipment for class C wreckers (for removal of heavy duty trucks, house trailers and buses, etc.). Class C wreckers (for removal of heavy duty trucks, house trailers and buses, etc.) shall provide the following equipment: 
(1)  A truck chassis with a manufacturer's rated capacity of at least 30,000 pounds gross vehicle weight and 50,000 pounds gross vehicle weight for tandem axle trucks. A complete, twin-winch, commercially manufactured boom and winches having a manufacturer's combined rating of at least 25-plus-ton capacity mounted on the chassis. 
(2)  A minimum of 200 feet of at least five-eighths-inch cable on each drum. 
(3)  Air brakes so constructed as to lock the rear wheels automatically upon failure. 
(4)  External air hookup and hoses, to supply air to disabled vehicles. 
(5)  One set of scotch blocks for wheels or hydraulic rear-extendable scotch blocks. 
(6)  Flood lights on the hoist. 
(f)  Specifications and equipment for all wreckers. All wreckers shall provide the equipment and specifications required by this subsection (f). 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the wrecker operator must be professionally lettered and painted in a conspicuous place on both sides of the truck as required by F.S. § 713.78(6). The name must be in letters at least four inches high and the address and telephone number shall be at least two inches high. Magnetic or removable signs or placards shall not meet this requirement. 
(2)  Sirens on wreckers are prohibited. 
(3)  The wrecker operator shall have nothing on his vehicles, buildings or correspondence that implies any official relationship between the wrecker operator and the city or any other police agency. 
(4)  Wreckers shall be properly equipped with clearance and marker lights and all other equipment as required by the Florida Statutes. 
(5)  It is prohibited for a tow truck or the business establishment maintained by the wrecker operator to have any equipment capable of monitoring messages or signals or frequencies assigned to the city. 
(6)  All trucks operated pursuant to this rule shall be equipped with a business-type communication radio or mobile telephone or cellular telephone. There shall be one radio or phone for each truck. Such equipment shall be licensed and approved by the Federal Communications Commission. The mobile radio or telephone shall enable the wrecker operator to communicate with his area of operations from any point within the city. A citizens band radio does not meet the requirements of this section. 
(7)  There shall be a rotor beam or strobe-type light, amber in color, mounted on the wrecker in such a manner that it can be seen from the front, rear and both sides. 
(8)  Dollies, except class B and C and roll-back carriers. 
(9)  At least one heavy-duty push broom with a minimum width of 24 inches. 
(10)  Floodlights on the hoist. 
(11)  One square shovel. 
(12)  One axe. 
(13)  One crowbar or prybar with a minimum length of 30 inches. 
(14)  Minimum of one five-pound CO 2 or dry chemical fire extinguisher or equivalent. The extinguisher must be of an approved type and have attached a current inspection tag. 
(15)  One pair of bolt cutters with a minimum of one half-inch opening. 
(16)  One set of jumper cables. 
(17)  One four-way lug wrench. 
(18)  One flashlight. 
(19)  One set of red reflectors. 
(20)  Five 30-minute fuses. 
(21)  One snatch block for each winch, manufacturer's rating to match winch, except roll-back carrier. 
(22)  One set of scotch blocks for wheels or hydraulic rear extendable scotch blocks (class B and C trucks only). 
(23)  External air hookup and hoses, class C trucks. 
(24)  Extra towing chain, six to eight feet with hooks. 
(25)  At least six safety cones or triangle reflectors. 
(26)  Fifty pounds of sand or suitable equivalent. 
(27)  It is prohibited for a tow truck or the business establishment maintained by the wrecker operator to have any equipment capable of monitoring messages or signals or frequencies assigned to the police department, as provided in F.S. § 843.16. 
(Code 1983, § 17-45; Ord. No. 844, § 2, 9-26-94) 
Sec. 86-76. - Wrecker operator requirements. 
(a)  All wrecker operators and drivers must have in their possession a valid Florida driver's license as required by Florida law for the operation of any vehicle to be driven. Prior to approval, the city shall obtain background information on each driver, including the driver history record. Forms prescribed by the city shall be used to record such information. 
(b)  The wrecker operator shall immediately notify the city of any changes in wrecker driver(s), wreckers, wrecker unit numbers, insurance coverage or any other changes relating to ownership or management of the business. 
(c)  Wrecker operators and their drivers are required to comply and be familiar with the Florida Uniform Traffic Control Law, F.S. ch. 316. 
(d)  Any wrecker operator who maintains a permanent business location or branch office within the city for the privilege of engaging in or managing a wrecker service within its jurisdiction shall be subject to the required occupational license pursuant to article II of chapter 18 of this Code. 
(e)  Any wrecker operator who does not maintain a permanent business location or branch office within the city but wishes to be placed on the wrecker rotation list shall be required to obtain a certificate of registration with the city. An annual registration fee of $50.00 shall be required for each certificate. 
(f)  Wrecker operators properly at the scene of an accident shall remove only the vehicle involved at the direction of the investigating officer. 
(g)  Wrecker operators shall sweep glass from the roadway and remove all debris or hazards from the scene, and comply with the requirements of F.S. § 316.2044(2). Wrecker operators shall impound such vehicles as requested by the officer on the scene. 
(h)  Wrecker driver(s) shall be thoroughly familiar with the operation of the wrecker. 
(i)  The wrecker operator is responsible for any damage to a vehicle caused by the wrecker operator. The city is not responsible for any damage to a vehicle caused by the wrecker operator. 
(j)  Except as provided for in this article for Class C wreckers, wrecker operators who are called from the rotation list shall not delegate or request assistance from another wrecker operator to perform the services necessary to accomplish the recovery or removal of vehicles in that class as defined pursuant to these rules. A wrecker operator unable to perform the recovery or removal shall be rotated and the next rotation wrecker on that list shall be called. 
(k)  Insurance. 
(1)  The wrecker operator shall maintain the following policies of insurance according to the minimum limits set forth in this subsection. Each policy shall be in the name of the wrecker operator and shall include coverage for towing and storage. The policy shall be effective throughout the period that the wrecker operator is qualified under this article. It is not the intent of this rule to limit the operator to the types of insurance required in this article. 
a.  Worker's compensation and employer's liability insurance as required by statute. 
b.  Garage liability insurance in an amount not less than $300,000.00 combined single limit liability. 
1.  Garagekeepers' legal liability insurance in an amount not less than $50,000.00 for each loss, covering periods of fire and explosion, theft of a vehicle, its parts or contents, riot and civil commotion, vandalism, malicious mischief, and damage to a vehicle in tow. 
c.  The following minimum levels of combined bodily injury liability insurance and property damage liability insurance required by F.S. § 627.7415, in addition to any other insurance requirements as required by this rule: 
1.  $50,000.00 per occurrence for a wrecker with a gross vehicle weight of less than 35,000 pounds. 
2.  $100,000.00 per occurrence for a wrecker with a gross vehicle weight of 35,000 pounds or more, but less than 44,000 pounds. 
3.  $300,000.00 per occurrence for a wrecker with a gross vehicle weight of 44,000 pounds or more. 
(2)  The insurance coverage required in this section shall include those classifications that are listed in standard liability manuals, which most nearly reflect the operations of wrecker operators. 
(3)  All insurance policies required in this section shall be issued by companies authorized to do business in the State of Florida. 
(4)  The wrecker operator shall furnish certificates of insurance and a "Wrecker Insurance Statement of Compliance" (HSMV form 60313) from the state jurisdiction to the chief of police prior to approval for participation on the rotation list, and thereafter 30 days prior to the expiration dates of the policies. The certificates shall clearly indicate that the wrecker operator has obtained insurance of the type, amount and classifications required for compliance with this section and that no material change or cancellation of the insurance shall be effective without 30 days' prior written notice to the city. Upon failure of an approved wrecker operator to provide proof of insurance, as required by this paragraph, the city shall provide notice to the wrecker operator of its noncompliance. 
(Code 1983, § 17-46; Ord. No. 844, § 2, 9-26-94) 
Sec. 86-77. - Denial of inclusion on, or removal or suspension from, rotation list-Grounds. 
(a)  Violation of any provision of these rules by a wrecker operator shall be grounds for denial of inclusion on or removal or suspension from, the rotation list. 
(b)  Violations of the following offenses shall result in a letter of warning from the city for the first offense, 30 days' suspension for a second offense within three years, and removal for a third or subsequent offense within five years of the first offense: 
(1)  Chasing or running wrecks in the city without proper call from the police department. 
(2)  Solicitating. 
(3)  Failure to answer a call three times within a calendar month. 
(4)  Inability to properly operate the tow truck in the removal of disabled vehicles or to remove a vehicle without causing additional damage. 
(5)  Any charge, demand, or request by a wrecker operator of a rate which exceeds the maximum rate established by the city. 
(c)  Removal of a wrecked, disabled or abandoned vehicle without investigation or clearance by a proper law enforcement agency shall result in 30 days' suspension for a first offense and removal for a second or subsequent offense within three years. 
(d)  Lack of reputability of a wrecker operator shall result in removal from the rotation wrecker list. For the purpose of this section, lack of reputability shall mean that the city cannot trust the wrecker operator to safeguard the welfare and property of the public. Lack of reputability shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Conviction of any felony without restoration of the person's civil rights. 
(2)  Conviction of any felony or first degree misdemeanor directly related to the business of operating a wrecker, regardless of whether civil rights have been restored. For the purpose of this rule, any offense involving perjury or false statement shall be considered to be directly related to the business of operating a wrecker. 
(3)  Responding to a call while under the influence of alcohol or any controlled substance or chemical substance. 
(e)  If a wrecker unit is inspected and fails to meet the requirements of this article, the following action shall be taken: 
(1)  The failed wrecker unit shall be immediately suspended from the list by the city, until such time as it passes inspection and is approved for use. The operation of a nonqualified wrecker unit is declared to be an immediate suspension of the wrecker unit. The continued use of a suspended wrecker unit shall constitute grounds for the emergency suspension of the wrecker operator. 
(2)  In the event this is the only wrecker unit maintained by the operator which has been approved by the city for its class, the wrecker operator shall be suspended immediately by the city. The city shall issue a "notice of emergency suspension and administrative complaint (inspection)" by letter to effect the suspension. The suspension shall continue until such time as the wrecker successfully passes inspection and is approved for use, or the wrecker operator is removed from the list for failure to pass inspection. The wrecker operator must correct the deficiencies and request to have the wrecker unit re-inspected within 30 days from the date of the suspension. If the wrecker unit has not been re-inspected and approved within the 30-day period, the wrecker operator shall be removed from the list. 
(f)  Insurance coverage. If the wrecker operator's insurance policy is canceled or not renewed according to the requirements of this article: 
(1)  The wrecker operator shall be immediately suspended from the list by the city. A letter citing "notice of emergency suspension and administrative complaint (insurance)" shall be issued by the city. The use of a wrecker by a wrecker operator who does not maintain the insurance coverage required by these rules is declared to be an immediate serious danger to the public health, safety or welfare requiring the immediate suspension of the wrecker operator. 
(2)  If the required insurance coverage is not obtained and provided to the city within 30 calendar days of the date of cancellation or expiration, the wrecker operator shall be removed from the list. 
(g)  Once a wrecker operator has been suspended for more than 30 days or removed from the list the wrecker operator must make a new application for retention or inclusion on the list. 
(h)  Wrecker operators are responsible for complying with any applicable federal, state, county or city laws, rules or regulations regarding the removal, towing, recovery, storage and notification of owners and lien holders. Wrecker operators shall maintain a city and state license required for the operation of a wrecker service. If the required license is not obtained and provided to the city within 30 days of the date of cancellation or expiration, the wrecker operator shall be removed from the list. 
(Code 1983, § 17-47; Ord. No. 844, § 2, 9-26-94) 
Sec. 86-78. - Same-Procedure. 
    Appeals from administrative decisions for denial of inclusion on, or removal or suspension from, a rotation list shall be made to the board of adjustment. 
(Code 1983, § 17-48; Ord. No. 844, § 2, 9-26-94) 
Sec. 86-79. - Maximum rates for towing and storage. 
(a)  Public service rates. Wrecker operators who operate in Crestview may charge for towing and storage of vehicles removed at the city's request in the amounts established by the city council. 
(b)  Procedure for setting rates. The city council shall establish maximum towing and storage rates for each occurrence or application. In determining such rates the city council shall consider: 
(1)  Costs incurred by the wrecker operator in the storage of vehicles, including the rental or purchase of property, insurance premiums, and maintenance of storage facilities. 
(2)  Costs incurred by the wrecker operator in the removal of vehicles including maintenance and operation of wrecker units. 
(3)  Prior or existing contracts between wrecker services and governmental agencies for the removal and storage of vehicles. 
(4)  Towing and storage charges currently imposed by wrecker services for rotation and owner's requests calls. 
(c)  Rates set by the city council shall consist of the following rate schedule. Separate rates may be established for each tow truck classification (A, B, C, roll-back). 
(1)  Base rate. The basic charge for responding to a call within a ten-mile radius from the wrecker operator's place of business. It includes attaching to the disabled vehicle and towing it to the place of storage. It also in cludes no more than a 30-minute wait at the accident scene before commencing actual retrieval. Any waiting time at the scene beyond 30 minutes may be charged at the hourly rate as defined below. Milage traveled, in going to the scene or in returning to the place of storage, which is beyond the ten-mile radius from the operator's place of business may be billed at the applicable mileage rate. 
(2)  Hourly rate. The per hour charge for use of a wrecker in retrieving submerged vehicles, upright overturned vehicles, retrieval from ditches or the attachment of dollies. It does not include travel time or the first 30 minutes of working or waiting time on the scene. There shall be no separate charge for winching. 
(3)  Mileage. The rate charged per mile for travel or towing outside of the ten-mile radius from the wrecker operator's place of business. 
(4)  Daily outside storage rate. The daily rate for storing a vehicle in outside storage based on a 24-hour day, each day starting at 12:01 a.m. The initial six hours of storage shall be without charge pursuant to F.S. § 713.78(2)(c). Thereafter, the daily rate will apply and any fraction of a day will count as a full day. 
(5)  Daily inside storage rate. The separate rate charged for inside storage according to the same criteria as that set forth above for outside storage. 
(d)  A maximum of $30.00 may be charged to the owner/driver of a vehicle towed or stored for the preparation, filing or mailing of any forms required by Florida Statutes, or this article if a vehicle is in storage for more than 24 hours. 
(e)  Any wrecker operator qualified under these rules who charges a fee for a particular service or services in excess of the rates established by this rule will be subject to sanctions as set forth in this article. A wrecker operator shall not charge the base towing rate fee for a call resulting in service only to a disabled motorist which does not involve towing the vehicle from the scene. 
(Ord. No. 844, § 2, 9-26-94) 
Sec. 86-80. - Storage facilities. 
(a)  Wrecker operators shall provide storage facilities which shall be maintained at the operator's place of business and located within the city. These facilities must be fenced and locked for the protection of vehicles and property. 
(b)  The wrecker operator shall provide storage for all impounded/towed vehicles in the outside storage area unless specific written instructions are given for inside storage by the impounding officer or the owner. If required for investigative purposes, the wrecker operator shall move the vehicle(s) to a designated area for processing prior to storage. In such instance, the city will not authorize release of the vehicle until all outstanding charges by the operator, as authorized by the city, have been satisfied. 
(c)  The wrecker operator shall not change the type of storage facility (inside or outside) afforded a vehicle without written permission from the chief of police. The wrecker operator shall not change the storage facility location without first obtaining written permission from the chief of police. 
(d)  If impractical because of zoning or other considerations such as lack of space, storage facilities may be maintained at a place other than a wrecker operator's place of business so long as the following requirements are met as to such storage facility: 
(1)  The storage facility is located in the city within five miles of the wrecker operator's place of business. 
(2)  The storage facility must be owned or leased solely by the wrecker operator and vehicles stored by the operator must be separately fenced and locked. 
(e)  The registered owner of a vehicle of the owner's representatives or owner's insurance adjusters, upon proper identification, shall be permitted to inspect or photograph stored vehicles during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. The wrecker operator shall not require the owner, adjusted or representative to pay any fee in order to inspect or photograph the stored vehicle. 
(f)  All fencing shall be chain-link or solid-wall type, at least six feet high, to discourage theft of any vehicle or any property being stored inside. All storage facilities shall be illuminated with lighting of sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a distance of at least 150 feet during nighttime. 
(g)  Permanent inside storage facilities must be available for 24-hour storage when weather or other conditions require inside storage for the protection of the vehicle or personal property. A lean-to, ten or shed does not meet the requirements of this section. Inside storage must be within a weather-tight building. 
(h)  A minimum of 25 storage spaces with three inside storage spaces must be available. Wrecker operators who have been on the city's rotation system for six months prior to the effective date of this rule may continue on the list without regard to the minimum storage spaces required herein, so long as all other applicable provisions of these rules are met. Note: Service bays or repair bays do not qualify as inside storage, nor does any area that is utilized for any activity other than serving as a permanent inside storage area, when vehicles are actually stored inside at the request of a law enforcement agency or the owner of a vehicle. 
(i)  Wrecker operator shall comply with hold orders placed by the city, including any instructions for inside or outside storage. Vehicles involved in a fatality and sealed by the traffic homicide investigator shall remain intact until the seals are removed by the investigator. No property of any kind shall be released to anyone without authority of the homicide investigator. If no fatality occurred, then the vehicle and the property may be released by the wrecker operator upon valid proof of ownership once the hold is released. 
(j)  A copy of an inventory prepared by the city, of all personal property found in a wrecked, disabled or abandoned vehicle shall be provided to the wrecker operator. The wrecker operator shall permit the removal of such property by the vehicle owner or his agent from a stored vehicle during normal business hours without charge. The agent's authority shall be evidenced by a writing acknowledged by the owner before a notary public or other person empowered by law to administer oaths. A signed receipt for each article removed by the owner or his agent shall be obtained. Personal property shall be defined as any item not affixed to the vehicle which was in the vehicle at the time of the tow. In the case of vehicles stored where no "hold order" has been placed, the wrecker operator will directly release any vehicle upon presentation of proper proof of identification and ownership. If these conditions cannot be met due to unusual or extraordinary circumstances, the vehicle will be released only upon authorization obtained from the city. 
(k)  Wrecker operators handling the initial tow shall exercise reasonable care and control of parts and contents located in vehicles while under their protection or while in storage. 
(l)  During the hours from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, wrecker operators will provide adequate staffing at the storage facility so that personal property may be removed from the vehicle or the vehicle itself may be released without undue delay. 
(m)  Should it become necessary that personal property be removed from a vehicle or a vehicle be released when the storage facility is not staffed, the wrecker operator will be required to do so and allowed to charge a reasonable fee. 
(Ord. No. 844, § 2, 9-26-94) 
Secs. 86-81-86-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TRAFFIC IMPACT FEE 

Sec. 86-90. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this article shall be as follows: 
    Building shall mean any structure, having a roof and used or built for the enclosure or shelter of persons, animals, vehicles, goods, merchandise, equipment, materials, or property of any kind for a period of time in excess of four weeks in any one calendar year. This term shall include tents, trailers, mobile homes, or any vehicles serving in any way the function of a building. This term shall also include outdoor-patio seating provided as part of a restaurant or bar, whether such seating is covered by a roof or not. 
    Building permit shall mean an official document or certificate, issued by the authority having jurisdiction, authorizing the construction of any building. The term shall also include tie-down permits for those structures or buildings that do not require a building permit, such as a mobile home, in order to be occupied. 
    Capital improvement shall mean any long-term investment of public funds for the acquisition, construction, or improvement of public lands or facilities that by reason of its size and cost, is nonrecurring in the local budget. 
    Capital improvement plan or (CIP) shall mean a multi-year schedule of capital improvement projects, including priorities and cost estimates, budgeted to fit the financial resources of the community. This plan is updated annually and is incorporated into part of the city's comprehensive plan as part of the capital improvements element. 
    Dwelling unit means a single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. 
    Square feet or square footage (also referred to as "sq ft") in both this section and the fee schedule shall mean the area under roof used for occupancy or storage that is used to calculate the square footage of the development, including the gross area measured in square feet from the exterior faces or exterior walls or other exterior boundaries of the building, excluding areas within the interior of the building which are utilized for parking. With respect to dwelling units, the square footage shall be calculated as the living area under heat/air conditioning. 
(Ord. No. 1419, § 2, 1-16-09) 
Sec. 86-91. - Fee imposed. 
    As a condition of the issuance of a building permit for the initial construction of or substantial reconstruction of a building, the person, firm or corporation constructing such residential, commercial, manufacturing, public assembly or institutional building, or addition thereto, shall pay to the city in advance, the traffic impact fee as set forth in section 86-92. The only exceptions to the requirement for payment of such fee are the following type construction: 
(1)  Expansion of existing residential structures not creating another dwelling unit; 
(2)  Remodeling, repair, rebuilding, or restoration of any structure, so long as no substantial additional impact to the services addressed in this article, as determined jointly by the administrative services department director or designee and subject to approval to the city council by an aggrieved applicant, is caused thereby; and 
(3)  Any construction that is in progress prior to the effective date of this article with a valid building permit. 
(Ord. No. 1419, § 2, 1-16-09) 
Sec. 86-92. - Amount of fee. 
    The traffic impact fee to be paid prior to issuance of a building permit shall be as follows: 
Land Use Type ITE 
Code Unit Transportation 
Cost 
Per Unit Credit 
for 
Fuel Taxes Transportation 
Impact Fee 
Per Unit Industrial General Light Industrial 110 1,000 Sq Ft $       2,630 $       1,286 $       1,344 Manufacturing 140 1,000 Sq Ft $       1,441 $       705 $       737 Warehousing 150 1,000 Sq Ft $       1,872 $       915 $       957 Mini-warehousing/Self-storage 151 1,000 Sq Ft $       943 $       461 $       482 Concrete Plant n/a acres $       5,887 $       2,878 $       3,008 Sand Mining n/a acres $       755 $       369 $       386 $       -   $       -   Land Use Type ITE 
Code Unit Transportation 
Cost 
Per Unit Credit 
for 
Fuel Taxes Transportation 
Impact Fee 
Per Unit Residential $       -   $       -   Single Family Detached 210 DU $       3,448 $       1,686 $       1,762 Attached Housing Unit (Condo/Townhouse) 230 DU $       2,112 $       1,032 $       1,079 Apartments 220 DU $       2,421 $       1,184 $       1,237 Mobile Home Part 240 DU $       1,798 $       879 $       919 Retirement/Senior Adult Housing-Detached 251 DU $       1,337 $       654 $       683 Assisted Living/Nursing Home 254 Beds $       879 $       430 $       449 Hotel/Motel 320 Rooms $       1,178 $       576 $       602 $       -   $       -   Recreational/Civic $       -   $       -   Golf Course 430 hole $       10,460 $       5,114 $       5,346 Golf Driving Range 432 Tees/Positions $       3,595 $       1,758 $       1,837 Bowling Alley 437 1,000 Sq Ft $       7,804 $       3,816 $       3,988 Health/Fitness Club 492 1,000 Sq Ft $       7,228 $       3,534 $       3,694 Recreational Community Center 495 1,000 Sq Ft $       6,027 $       2,947 $       3,080 Church 560 1,000 Sq Ft $       2,002 $       979 $       1,023 Daycare Center 565 1,000 Sq Ft $       14,961 $       7,315 $       7,646 School (Elementary) 520 1,000 Sq Ft $       2,997 $       1,466 $       1,532 School (Middle/Jr High 522 1,000 Sq Ft $       2,851 $       1,394 $       1,457 School (High) 530 1,000 Sq Ft $       3,000 $       1,467 $       1,533 Hospital 610 1,000 Sq Ft $       4,619 $       2,259 $       2,361 Clinic/Outpatient Care 630 1,000 Sq Ft $       9,879 $       4,831 $       5,049 $       -   $       -   Office $       -   $       -   General Office 710 1,000 Sq Ft $       3,496 $       1,709 $       1,787 Medical/Dental Office 720 1,000 Sq Ft $       10,980 $       5,368 $       5,611 $       -   $       -   Retail $       -   $       -   Building Material/Lumber 812 1,000 Sq Ft $       7,264 $       3,551 $       3,712 Hardware/Paint Store 816 1,000 Sq Ft $       8,250 $       4,034 $       4,216 Nursery (Garden Center 817 1,000 Sq Ft $       7,058 $       3,451 $       3,607 Shopping Center 820 1,000 Sq Ft $       4,620 $       2,259 $       2,361 Quality Restaurant (not national chain) 931 1,000 Sq Ft $       10,948 $       5,353 $       5,595 High Turnover/Sit Down Restaurant 932 1,000 Sq Ft $       11,815 $       5,777 $       6,038 Fast Food Restaurant 934 1,000 Sq Ft $       26,958 $       13,181 $       13,777 Auto Repair Shop 943 1,000 Sq Ft $       4,294 $       2,099 $       2,194 Service Station (less than 1,000 sq ft) 944 Fuel Position $       9,159 $       4,478 $       4,681 Supermarket (stand-alone store) 850 1,000 Sq Ft $       10,667 $       5,215 $       5,451 Convenience Market w/Gas Pumps 853 1,000 Sq Ft $       31,245 $       15,277 $       15,968 Discount Club 861 1,000 Sq Ft $       5,815 $       2,843 $       2,972 Pharmacy/Drugstore w/Drive-Through 881 1,000 Sq Ft $       7,329 $       3,584 $       3,746 Furniture Store 890 1,000 Sq Ft $       517 $       253 $       264 Walk-in Bank 911 1,000 Sq Ft $       15,305 $       7,483 $       7,822 Drive-in Bank 912 1,000 Sq Ft $       21,296 $       10,413 $       10,884  
NA = Not Available 
DU = Dwelling Unit 
Occ. Room = Occupied Room 
For retail uses with no pass-by data, the average (36%) of data for land use codes 816, 820, 850, 881 was used. 
    Land uses that are not specifically listed in the fee schedule shall be assigned the trip rate of the most similar land use. If a similar land use is not listed in this table, then trip generation rates from the most recent edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip Generation Manual ("ITE Manual") shall be used to determine the trip generation of the unlisted land use, and such land use shall be assigned the rate of the land use listed in the fee schedule with the most similar trip generation. If the unlisted land use is not listed in the ITE Manual, then the trip generation rates of the most similar land use in the ITE Manual shall be used to determine the trip generation rate of the unlisted land use. 
(Ord. No. 1419, § 2, 1-16-09) 
Sec. 86-93. - Independent traffic impact fee study. 
Any person: 
(1)  Who believes that any part of the demand component, comprised of trip length, trip rate, and percent new trips, that is used to calculate the impact fee of the applicable land use is incorrect; 
(2)  Who has a unique or restrictive land use that can be verified through the city's building permitting process and believes that this results in different demand characteristics than those of the land use the development is to be assessed at; 
(3)  Whose land use is not listed in the fee schedule or believes the use is incorrectly assigned shall have the option to provide an independent fee study. The independent study is not intended to allow site-specific review of uses, which include; 1) conducting an independent study on the same site that the impact fee is being challenged, or 2) conducting an independent study on sites that may have differing trip characteristics than used in the fee schedule due to specific characteristics of the structure that cannot be tracked by the city's permitting process. For any independent traffic impact fee study, only the demand variables may be challenged, and all three demand variables, including trip length, trip rate, and percent new trips, must be reviewed as part of the independent study. Requests for an independent traffic impact fee study must be received no later than 30 days after the issuance of a building permit. If the independent fee study cannot be completed, reviewed, and finally determined by the city, including any appeals, by the time the certificate of occupancy is issued, the city shall retain the fee paid per the traffic impact fee schedule. If the independent traffic impact fee study is accepted by the city, a refund shall be due to the extent the scheduled fee paid was higher than the fee due pursuant to the independent traffic impact fee study. 
    The independent traffic impact fee study must be prepared by an accredited consultant other than Moore Bass Consulting, Inc. The independent traffic impact fee study is not intended to allow review of the economic effect of the impact fee on site-specific uses or to review land use classifications with specific characteristics that cannot be tracked by the city's permitting process. The city may charge a review fee for the independent traffic impact fee study, which shall be $1,000.00, or the actual cost of review, whichever is less. 
(Ord. No. 1419, § 2, 1-16-09) 
Sec. 86-94. - Refunds. 
    Refunds of traffic impact fees paid hereunder may be allowed upon application therefore when it is determined that no construction has occurred and the building permit issued for such construction has expired or otherwise been canceled. 
(Ord. No. 1419, § 2, 1-16-09) 
Sec. 86-95. - Time of payment. 
    Payment of all traffic impact fees provided in this article shall be made prior to the issuance of the building permit. 
(Ord. No. 1419, § 2, 1-16-09) 
Sec. 86-96. - Use of proceeds. 
    The funds accumulated by reason of the collection of the traffic impact fee shall be used only for the purchase of capital improvements consisting of land, design costs, and construction costs for public roadways per all applicable standards in affect. 
(Ord. No. 1419, § 2, 1-16-09) 
Sec. 86-97. - Trust funds established. 
    All traffic impact fees received by the city shall be deposited in an appropriate trust fund to be referred to as the "transportation improvement trust fund" to be held separately and to be used only for the purposes referred to in section 86-95. Funds from this trust fund may be disbursed in the customary manner in accordance with appropriate law and with the added requirement that the disbursement of such funds shall require the prior approval of the city council upon a finding that the transportation capital expenditure is in accordance with the terms of this article. Before authorizing an expenditure from the trust fund, the city council shall determine that: 
(1)  Such expenditure is for land, design costs, and construction costs to be used for the purpose of such fund; 
(2)  Such expenditure is required by new construction from which such funds were collected; and 
(3)  Such expenditure will result predominantly in a special benefit to new construction, as opposed to pre-existing uses. 
Any funds on deposit in said trust fund which are not immediately necessary for expenditure may be invested by the city and all income derived from such investment shall be deposited in the trust fund. 
(Ord. No. 1419, § 2, 1-16-09) 
Sec. 86-98. - Waivers. 
    The city council may waive the traffic impact fee in the following situations: 
(1)  The owner or developer of any construction has the right of attempting to demonstrate that their construction will have less impact on the need for transportation facilities than is indicated by the fee schedule. Data demonstrating less impact shall be submitted to the administrative services director or designee for review. The administrative services department shall make a recommendation to the city council concerning such requested waiver. The city council shall determine the amount of the fee to be waived, if any. 
(2)  Any waiver provided for in this section shall be subject to approval by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1419, § 2, 1-16-09) 
Sec. 86-99. - Capital improvement plan. 
    The city council shall adopt a capital improvement plan for the trust fund established in this article. Such plan shall be reviewed annually during the budget review process. 
(Ord. No. 1419, § 2, 1-16-09) 
Sec. 86-100. - Review of fees. 
    Any changes to either the construction costs or right-of-way costs or other components of the transportation impact fee shall be adopted by July 31 of each year (with an effective date of October 1) by resolution of the city council, and no change shall be effective until such time as the city council has adopted the resolution. 
    Neither the construction cost indexing nor the right-of-way indexing shall be applied for more than five consecutive years, with a full evaluation of the impact fee calculation and impact fee study no later than five years from the adoption of this article. 
    During the five-year period, construction costs referenced in this section are subject to annual change to account for general increases in the consumer price index each year. Construction costs and right-of-way costs shall be indexed by a factor of three and three-tenths percent each, annually, based upon FDOT for programming construction costs for projects based upon a three-year average annual cost increase in the respective years. The data is from the 2004 report on the FDOT price trends index prepared by the FDOT, office of planning. The city shall utilize these rates to estimate construction costs and right-of-way costs in subsequent years, unless the city adopts a change to the construction costs. 
(Ord. No. 1419, § 2, 1-16-09) 
Secs. 86-101-86-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TRAFFIC IMPACT FEE WAIVER 

Sec. 86-111. - Temporary cessation of assessment. 
    Notwithstanding the current traffic impact fee ordinance, in relation to all applications for building permits made after adoption of this ordinance, there shall be a temporary cessation of the assessment in accordance with section 86-114. 
(Ord. No. 1432, § 2, 9-28-10) 
Sec. 86-112. - Waiver not retroactive. 
    This waiver shall in no way be applied retroactively. 
(Ord. No. 1432, § 2, 9-28-10) 
Sec. 86-113. - Applicability. 
    This waiver shall apply only to projects for which a building permit has been purchased during the waiver period and construction commenced during the waiver period. If construction is not commenced during the waiver period the traffic impact fee as defined in section 86-90 will be due before the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 1432, § 2, 9-28-10) 
Sec. 86-114. - Terms and percentages of traffic impact fee due. 
    There is hereby established a traffic impact fee waiver for a period of approximately three months beginning on the effective date of October 1, 2017 and ending on December 31, 2017. The waiver shall not be applied retroactively to any building permit nor shall it apply to any re-issued building permit that was voluntarily cancelled within 180 days of the effective date of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1432, § 2, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 1487, § 2, 12-10-12; Ord. No. 1596, § 2, 12-14-15; Ord. No. 1624, § 2, 8-14-17) 
Chapter 90 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; public utilities, § 18-34; environment, ch. 30; sanitation in public parks, § 58-1; solid waste and recycling services, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, ch. 74; public service tax, § 82-26 et seq.; land use regulations, ch. 102; subdivisions, § 102-481 et seq. 
State Law reference- Safe Drinking Water Act, F.S. § 403.850 et seq.; water and sewer systems, F.S. ch. 367; municipal public works, F.S. ch. 180. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 90-1. - Findings of fact; purpose and application of chapter; administration and enforcement. 
(a)  The city has, pursuant to applicable Florida Statutes, established a system of utilities consisting of a water producing and distribution system, a sewage collection and disposal system, and a garbage and trash collection and disposal service. 
(b)  It is found and declared that the system of utilities was established and is operated as a benefit to the health, welfare and comfort of all persons residing, working or visiting within the area of service. 
(c)  It is hereby found and declared that each utility, as best it can be managed, should be financially self-supporting, the same as if operated by a private nonprofit utility company, including the ability to accumulate funds necessary to accomplish capital improvements and expansion to better serve the needs of utility service subscribers. Each utility should thus be supported by all persons located within the city to whom the utilities are made available, whether a particular service is subscribed to or not. It is toward these ends that this chapter is directed. 
(d)  This chapter shall apply to the City of Crestview and to persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city publicly owned water treatment works. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the city council shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1983, § 18-1; Ord. No. 888, § 2, 5-28-96) 
Sec. 90-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Consumer means and includes each identifiable unit of permanent or semipermanent housing, such as but not limited to: 
(1)  Each single-family residence. 
(2)  Each family unit in a multiple-family residence. 
(3)  Each apartment in a duplex or apartment complex. 
(4)  Each mobile home (house trailer). 
(5)  Each equipped space in a mobile home park. 
(6)  Each identifiable complex of temporary housing, such as but not limited to: 
a.  Each hotel. 
b.  Each motel. 
c.  Each campground or overnight residence vehicle parking facility. 
(7)  Each building or facility designed, built, used or useful in the pursuit of an identifiable unit of any business, trade, profession or public service, such as but not limited to: 
a.  Each office building. 
b.  Each school. 
c.  Each hospital. 
d.  Each charitable facility. 
e.  Each firm or separate entity occupying space in a shopping mall or center. 
f.  Each firm or separate entity conducting a commercial or industrial enterprise. 
Otherwise, the city clerk is hereby vested with the authority to make the initial determination in defining a consumer, which determination shall be subject to review and final determination by the council, upon appropriate request having been made therefor. 
    Customer means any person who has made or has caused to have been made a physical connection to the city water system for the purpose of obtaining water and to the city sewer system for the purpose of discharging sewage or other permitted waste thereinto, which service contemplates the rendering of a single monthly utility bill, notwithstanding that two or more consumers may be served through the single connection. 
    Delinquent payment means those user fees, deposits, etc. which are past due to the city by a utility customer. 
    Dwelling unit means a single housing unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one (1) housekeeping unit, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. For the purposes of this chapter of the Code of Ordinances of the city a dwelling unit is each single-family residence; each family unit in a multiple-family residence; each apartment in a duplex, triplex, or larger apartment building, or each apartment in an apartment building complex; each mobile home or manufactured home, and each equipped space in a mobile home/manufactured housing park or subdivision. 
(Code 1983, § 18-2; Ord. No. 1073, § 2, 11-26-01; Ord. No. 1076, § 2, 1-14-02) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 90-3. - Annual review of user charges. 
(a)  User charges shall be reviewed on an annual basis during the budgetary process to ensure adequate revenues will be available to fund all operational, maintenance, debt service and replacement costs of the utility system. 
(b)  User charges shall be reviewed on an annual basis during the budgetary process to ensure proportional distribution of operation, maintenance and replacement costs among users shall be implemented. 
(Code 1983, § 18-3; Ord. No. 1073, § 2, 11-26-01) 
Sec. 90-4. - Appropriation of funds collected for utility service. 
    Funds collected for utility service provided by the city shall be appropriated as follows: 
(1)  Funds collected as water tax shall be appropriated into the 1965 excise tax fund. 
(2)  Funds collected to cover depreciation expense shall be appropriated into a renewal and replacement fund with the funds placed therein to be used for capital expansion and improvement of the city utility system. 
(3)  Funds collected to cover nonoperating expense (interest fees, etc.) shall be appropriated into established bond interest and sinking funds. 
(4)  Funds collected from noncity consumers that accrue as a result of the higher rates and charges assessed to them for utility service (33 1/3 percent of total nontax collections) shall be appropriated into the renewal and replacement fund described in subsection (2). 
(5)  Otherwise, funds collected for utility service shall be appropriated into the fund which supports the particular service for which the charge is made. Unspent utility funds shall be carried forward within the individual funds from year to year. 
(Code 1983, § 18-4) 
Sec. 90-5. - Tampering; unauthorized connections. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made any unauthorized connection to the city water or utility system (as distinguished from making a connection to privately owned piping on private property), to restore service without first complying with the provisions set forth in this chapter, or to mutilate, tamper with, or alter, in any intentional manner, any part of the city water or sewer system. 
(Code 1983, § 18-5) 
State Law reference- Trespass and larceny with relation to utility, F.S. § 812.14. 
Sec. 90-6. - Restriction of water use. 
    The city reserves the right to restrict use of water in times of drought or other emergency conditions deemed to be detrimental to the public health, welfare and safety of Crestview water users. Whenever demand for water consumption exceeds capacity and reserves available, the public services department is empowered to issue a moratorium on water use until the normal service can be restored to accommodate users. Furthermore the department may suspend lawn watering at residential, commercial, and industrial locations and invoke any schedule of reduced water use that maintains the integrity of the water system. 
(Ord. No. 888, § 2, 5-28-96) 
Sec. 90-7. - Notification of users. 
    Whenever it is necessary to issue a moratorium restricting water use, the city shall issue a general news release to the media. Any person thereafter refusing to comply with the moratorium may be served with a written notice by the public services department. Failure to comply thereafter shall subject the violator to the penalty provided hereafter. The restrictions shall apply to all residential, commercial and industrial customers of the city. Once the moratorium is issued, conditions of the restriction will be monitored by the city to ensure compliance with the moratorium. 
(Ord. No. 888, § 2, 5-28-96) 
Sec. 90-8. - Penalty. 
    Any violation of the moratorium on water use declared by the city shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 of the City Code and each day that a violation continues it is regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 888, § 2, 5-28-96) 
Secs. 90-9-90-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 90-26. - Authority. 
    The authority for enactment of this article is the Charter and F.S. §§ 166.011 and 403.850 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 768, § 1, 4-27-92; Ord. No. 946, § 2, 6-22-98) 
Sec. 90-27. - Initial connection to city water or sewer system. 
    A person desiring to make an initial connection to the city water or sewer system shall file an appropriate application to the city clerk and shall, at the same time, pay the fees and make the deposit when applicable and as prescribed in this section. 
(1)  Utility deposit. A utility deposit in the amount of $60.00 for residential customers within the city; $250.00 for commercial customers within the city; $90.00 for out-of-city residential customers; and $300.00 for out-of-city commercial customers shall be made to ensure payment of utility bills as they become due, which deposit shall be refundable to the depositor, his heirs or assigns, upon voluntary termination of utility services and payment of all outstanding utility charges due the city. The required deposit shall be deemed to cover water, sewer, recycling and garbage service rendered to each customer, but must be made at the time the initial application is filed and whether or not all utility services are utilized. 
(2)  Identification requirements. All applications for new service will required a photo ID, proof of ownership or a valid lease. Person(s) responsible for the payment should be on the lease or proof of ownership. No person(s) listed as the responsible party may owe any monies to the city. All delinquent bills owed by owner or lessee must be paid before connection is made. In the case of a lease, any monies owed by the owner of the property must be paid prior to connection. 
(3)  Delinquent accounts. Any accounts which are shut off for nonpayment twice in a 12-month time frame shall be required to pay an additional deposit in an amount equal to the initial deposit. This supplemental deposit shall be in addition to any previous deposit, late fees or service fees. Any interest earned by the city on the deposits while held by the city shall be deemed an additional charge for water and sewer service. Failure to pay deposits emanating from this section shall have their services discontinued until paid. 
(4)  Fees. 
a.  Water connection. A combined tap, connection, and service fee, the amount of which shall be determined by the size of the water service connection requested in the application, shall be paid as follows: 
Size of Service 
(I.D. of pipe) Fee 3/4-inch or smaller $  800.00 1-inch  1,000.00 11/2-inch  1,500.00 2-inch  2,000.00 21/2-inch or larger The actual or estimated cost of all materials, including meter, outside service to tap the water main, plus $100.00 for installation.  
b.  Sewer connection. A combined tap, connection and service fee, the amount of which shall be determined by prevailing circumstances and the size of the sewer service connection requested in the application, shall be paid, as follows: 
Size of Service 
(I.D. of pipe) Fee Residential 4-inch 
(ordinary service) $1,020.00 Commercial 4-inch 
(ordinary service)  1,230.00 Commercial 6-inch 
(ordinary service)  1,680.00 Commercial 8-inch 
(ordinary service)  2,160.00  
Note: More than four-inch residential connection or eight-inch commercial connection or connection with unusual requirements: The amount of the fee to be paid in connection with sewer connections to large apartment complexes or, commercial projects such as shopping centers, motels, hospitals, etc., or other installations which require the expenditure by the city of large or unusual sums of money shall be negotiated between the customer and the city council, with full consideration given to the total cost of providing the requested service. 
c.  The combined tap, connection and service fees shall cover the cost of materials and the installation thereof that are necessary to provide a connection between a point at or near the property line of the customer, on the one hand, and on the other, the city water or sewer main, when not more than 40 feet of pipe is required. If more than 40 feet of pipe is required, the city reserves the right to increase the established fee by an amount equal to the actual or estimated cost of the excess pipe required. It shall be the responsibility of the customer to make the connection between the water meter and city sewer line thus installed and the facility to be served thereby. 
d.  Where more than one dwelling unit is constructed on a lot or parcel, the connection fee shall be determined by multiplying the number of dwelling units times the fee for a 3/4-inch or smaller water connection and the fee for a four-inch residential sewer connection as specified in this section. 
e.  A fee of $40.00 shall be paid to the city for services to install a residential backflow prevention device. The fee shall be paid at the time of initial application for service and shall cover the cost of materials and labor. 
f.  Utility costs. The following fees are for various utility costs. These charges are in addition to any actions which may be taken in accordance with section 90-5, tampering/unauthorized connections: 
Description Fee BL Lock Damaged $10.00 CS Curb Stop Damaged $50.00 RD Register Damaged $115.00 PM Pull meter/replace meter (Customer request $100.00 MT Meter Test $50.00  
Meter test fee would only be charged if customer requests and city finds that the meter is working correctly 
(Code 1983, § 18-21; Ord. No. 768, § 2, 4-27-92; Ord. No. 790, § 2, 1-25-93; Ord. No. 827, § 2, 2-28-94; Ord. No. 946, § 2, 6-22-98; Ord. No. 1038, § 1, 10-23-00; Ord. No. 1039, §§ 2, 3, 11-27-00; Ord. No. 1073, § 3, 11-26-01; Ord. No. 1076, § 3, 1-14-02; Ord. No. 1490, § 2, 1-29-13; Ord. No. 1602, § 2, 5-9-16) 
Sec. 90-28. - Service to governmental units. 
(a)  Utility deposits shall not be required of county, state or federal governments, or bona fide agencies or departments thereof. 
(b)  Governments of the county, state or the United States shall have the option of providing materials and installing their own connection to a city water and sewer main, subject to city minimum standard requirements and inspection, and thereby avoid payment of the combined tap, connection and service fees otherwise required. 
(Code 1983, § 18-22; Ord. No. 946, § 2, 6-22-98) 
Sec. 90-29. - Conditional waiver of combined tap, connection and service fees. 
    When an application to make an initial connection to the city water or sewer system involves a situation where the customer is already being billed for the service that is contemplated by the application on the basis of service availability (as opposed to actual use), the combined tap, connection and service fee prescribed in this article shall be reduced by an amount equal to 50 percent of the total charges that were actually paid for the service during the period of time the involved service was available but unused. 
(Code 1983, § 18-23; Ord. No. 946, § 2, 6-22-98) 
Sec. 90-30. - Restoration of water service through existing connection. 
    A person desiring to have water service restored through an existing connection shall file an appropriate application with the city clerk, shall pay a service fee in the amount of $20.00 (which shall not be refundable), and shall make the utility deposit set forth elsewhere in this chapter, provided the person shall not have been a party to an involuntary service discontinuance as described in section 90-139. If the person was a party to such a service discontinuance, water service shall be restored subject to the provisions of section 90-139. 
(Code 1983, § 18-24; Ord. No. 946, § 2, 6-22-98; Ord. No. 1073, § 4, 11-26-01) 
Sec. 90-31. - Transfer of utility services from one location to another. 
    A customer desiring to transfer his utility services from one location to another may do so by making an appropriate request to the city clerk, photo ID, and shall be accompanied by payment of a transfer fee in the amount of $20.00, provided that the utility account of the customer is current, and provided further that the transfer shall require nothing more than a cutoff at the present location, a cut-on at the new location within seven working days, plus an address change in the utility record (no change in service, deposit required, etc. Outside of the seven days, it shall be necessary to complete the termination process at the present location and reapply for service at the new location. 
(Code 1983, § 18-25; Ord. No. 946, § 2, 6-22-98; Ord. No. 1073, § 4, 11-26-01; Ord. No. 1490, § 3, 1-29-13) 
Sec. 90-32. - Temporary connection of utilities. 
    In the event a landlord, homeowner, or real estate agent wishes to connect utilities for a limited time to enable clean up/moving/etc., a non-refundable fee of $30.00 will be collected, payable at the time of application. Proof of ownership or right to admittance to the property must be presented upon application, along with a valid picture ID. The connection will be for a maximum of ten days and will be discontinued at the end of that period, unless requested for earlier cut off by the customer. This will not include garbage service unless requested by the customer (which will result in an additional fee of $19.00). No deposit will be required for this service, unless the time needed extends beyond the ten-day period, at which time a normal deposit will be required to maintain service. A billing address other than the connection address must be supplied. If there are any additional charges other that minimum water or water/sewer the charges will be billed to the address supplied and are subject to all utility provisions provided for in this section. 
(Ord. No. 1490, § 4, 1-29-13) 
Secs. 90-33-90-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWER USE REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 90-51. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act or the act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act (CWA), as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
    Approval authority means the Florida Department of Environmental Regulation (FDER). 
    Authorized representative of an industrial user means an authorized representative of an industrial user, who may be: 
(1)  A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president, if the industrial user is a corporation. 
(2)  A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively. 
(3)  A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates. 
    BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in parts per million (ppm) by weight. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Categorical standards means the national categorical pretreatment standard or pretreatment standard. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Control authority means the "approval authority" as defined in this section. 
    Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
    Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state. 
    Director means the director of the public services department, or his authorized deputy, agent or representative, who is the person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the publicly owned treatment works and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article. 
    Environmental Protection Agency or EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of the agency. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time. 
    Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
    Indirect discharge means the discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any source including, but not limited to, those regulated under section 307(b) or (c) of the act (33 USC 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharge into the system). 
    Industrial user means a source of indirect discharge which does not constitute a "discharge of pollutants" under regulations issued pursuant to section 402 of the act (33 USC 1342). 
    Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial processes, as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    Interference means the inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment processes or operations which contributes to a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with 405 of the act (33 USC 1345) or any criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to title IV of SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW. 
    National categorical pretreatment standard or pretreatment standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the act (33 USC 1347) which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
    National pollution discharge elimination system or NPDES permit means a permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the act (33 USC 1342). 
    National prohibitive discharge standard or prohibitive discharge standard means any regulation developed under the authority of section 307(b) of the act and 40 CFR 403.5. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water. 
    New source means any source, the construction of which is commenced after the publication of proposed regulations prescribing a section 307(c) (33 USC 1317) categorical pretreatment standard which will be applicable to such source if such standard is thereafter promulgated within 120 days of proposal in the federal register. Where the standard is promulgated later than 120 days after proposal, a "new source" means any source, the construction of which is commenced after the date of promulgation of the standard. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
    Pollutant means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical waste, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water. 
    Pollution means the manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water. 
    POTW treatment plant means that portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater. 
    Pretreatment or treatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). 
    Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard, imposed on an industrial user. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means a treatment works, as defined by section 212 of the act (33 USC 1292), which is owned in this instance by the city. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this article, "POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's POTW. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present. 
    Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Sewerage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    Shall is mandatory, and "may" is permissive. 
    SID permit means a state indirect discharge permit issued by the state department of environmental regulation to any person who is a nonmunicipal, nondomestic discharger and who discharges or proposes to discharge pollutants from any source, including those regulated under section 307(b) or (c) of the federal act, into a publicly owned treatment works. 
    Significant industrial user (SIU) means any industrial user of the city's wastewater disposal system who: 
(1)  Has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more per workday; 
(2)  Has a flow greater than five percent of the flow in the city's wastewater treatment system; 
(3)  Has in his wastes toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to section 307 of the act or Florida Statutes and rules; or 
(4)  Is found by the city, FDER or EPA to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality or sludge, the system's effluent quality or air emissions generated by the system. 
    Slug means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
    Standard industrial classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972. 
    Storm drain (sometimes termed "storm sewer") means a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water. 
    Storm sewer or storm drain means a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
    Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
    Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of CWA section 307(a) or other acts. 
    User means any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the city's POTW. 
    Wastewater means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW. 
    Wastewater contribution permit. This term shall have the meaning as set forth in division 2 of this article. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
    Waters of the state means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies of accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
(Code 1983, § 18-41) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 90-52. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner upon public or private property or to discharge in any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(b)  Permits for private sewage disposal facilities. All permits for private sewage disposal facilities shall be issued by the county health department, in accordance with F.S. § 381.272 and Florida Administrative Code section 10D-6. 
(Code 1983, § 18-42) 
Sec. 90-53. - Right of entry of inspectors. 
    The public services director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 18-43) 
Sec. 90-54. - Damage to sewer and appurtenances. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewerage works. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be subject to immediate arrest, and upon conviction shall be punished as provided by section 1-11. 
(Code 1983, § 18-44) 
Sec. 90-55. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this article except section 90-54 shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations, and shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. 
(b)  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond a reasonable time limit, as provided by subsection (a), shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided by section 1-11. 
(Code 1983, § 18-45) 
Sec. 90-56. - Revenue generation system. 
(a)  Sewerage system capital improvement account established. The city hereby establishes a sewerage system capital improvement account into which deposits required for accumulation of the equivalent future value of the grant amount shall be made. The sewerage system capital improvement account shall be segregated from all other accounts in order that the city can monitor and maintain its compliance with section 17-50.017, Florida Administrative Code. 
(b)  Deposits into account. Deposits to the sewerage system capital improvements accounts shall commence not later than the end of each one-year period beginning with the date of initiation of operation of the complete grant funded treatment works. Beneficial occupancy shall be deemed the date of initiation of operation of the complete grant funded treatment works. The number of annual deposits shall be 20, which is the design life of the treatment works as calculated by the city's utilities consulting engineers. Deposits into the sewerage system capital improvement account shall be made annually, or, at the discretion of the city council, more frequently. Deposits shall be made not later than on the last business day preceding the anniversary date of beneficial occupancy. The city does not have any current plans for early termination of deposits into the sewerage system capital improvement account. The city may, however, make prepayments into this fund. Deposits may be terminated once the sum of deposits equals $454,060.00. The aggregate amount of the annual deposits into the sewerage system capital improvement account shall be determined by the following formula: 
D = G × i (1 + i) DL (1 + i) DL - 1  
Where: 
D = required annual deposit G = grant amount actually received by city i = 0.078 DL = 20 years  
Example: 
D = $226,254 × .078 (1 + .078) 20 (1 + .078) 20 - 1  
= $226,254 × .100341 
= $22,703 = Annual deposit 
The source of revenue for the required deposits shall be as follows: 
    Current year surpluses from the revenue fund. If the above sources of revenues are collectively insufficient to make the annual deposit, then the wastewater user charges shall be increased to provide the remaining source of funds necessary for such annual deposits above those required by the city's revenue rate covenant to cover any bonded indebtedness deficiencies in debt service. Deposits into the sewerage system capital improvement account shall be invested in accordance with the city's normal practice for investment of funds but shall be accounted for separately. 
(c)  Use of accrued moneys. Accrued moneys in the sewerage system capital improvement account shall be expended for any permissible purpose, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Capacity expansion of any wastewater system facility. 
(2)  Replacement of any wastewater system component which has reached the end of its design life. 
(3)  Repair and/or replacement of treatment plant pumping station or major transmission facilities in the event that these items are undertaken as part of capacity expansion or upgrade necessary to meet more stringent effluent limitations required by a regulatory agency or are necessitated as the result of manmade or natural disaster. 
(d)  Annual certification. The city shall engage a certified public accounting firm to prepare and submit annually to the state department of environmental regulation a certification that the revenue generation system has been maintained in accordance with chapter 17-50, Florida Administrative Code. 
(Code 1983, § 18-46) 
Secs. 90-57-90-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING SEWER 

Sec. 90-66. - Permit-Required. 
    No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the public services director. 
(Code 1983, § 18-56) 
Sec. 90-67. - Same-Classes. 
(a)  There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: 
(1)  Residential and commercial service, and 
(2)  Service to establishments producing industrial wastes. 
(b)  For either class of building sewer permits described in subsection (a), the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the director. 
(c)  A permit and inspection fee of $15.00 for a residential or commercial building sewer permit and $25.00 for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the city treasurer at the time the application for a building sewer permit is filed. 
(Code 1983, § 18-57) 
Sec. 90-68. - Same-Notice by applicant for inspection and connection. 
    The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the director when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the director or his representative. 
(Code 1983, § 18-58) 
Sec. 90-69. - Expense of connecting to sewer borne by owner. 
    All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Code 1983, § 18-59) 
Sec. 90-70. - Sewer connection for each building; exception; use of old sewers. 
(a)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway. The building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(b)  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the director, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 18-60) 
Sec. 90-71. - Pipe specifications. 
(a)  The building sewer shall be cast iron soil pipe, ASTM specifications A74-42 or equal; vitrified clay sewer pipe, ASTM specification C13-44T or equal; or other suitable material approved by the public services director. Joints shall be tight and waterproof. Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten feet of a water service pipe shall be constructed of cast iron soil pipe with leaded joints. Cast iron pipe with leaded joints may be required by the director where the building sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast iron soil pipe, except that nonmetallic material may be accepted if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the director. 
(b)  The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the director, but in no event shall the diameter be less than six inches. The slope of such six-inch pipe shall be not less than one-eighth inch per foot. 
(Code 1983, § 18-61) 
Sec. 90-72. - Elevation, depth and location; pipe laying. 
(a)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall which might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment in so far as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings. 
(b)  All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the director. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM specification C12-19, except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected. 
(c)  In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Code 1983, § 18-62) 
Sec. 90-73. - Joints and connections. 
(a)  All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. 
(b)  Cast iron pipe joints shall be firmly packed with oakum or hemp and filled with molten lead, Federal specifications QQ-L-156, not less than one inch deep. Lead shall be run in one pouring and caulked tight. No paint, varnish or other coatings shall be permitted on the jointing material until after the joint has been tested and approved. 
(c)  All joints in vitrified clay pipe or between such pipe and metals shall be made with approved hot-poured jointing material or cement mortar as specified in this section. 
(d)  Material for hot-poured joints shall not soften sufficiently to destroy the effectiveness of the joint when subjected to a temperature of 160 degrees Fahrenheit, nor be soluble in any of the wastes carried by the drainage system. The joint shall first be caulked tight with jute, hemp or similar approved material. 
(e)  Cement joints shall be made by packing a closely twisted jute or oakum gasket of suitable size to fill partly the annular space between the pipes. The remaining space shall be filled and firmly compacted with mortar composed of one part Portland cement and three parts mortar sand. The material shall be mixed dry with only sufficient water added to make the mixture workable. Mortar which has begun to set shall not be used or retempered. Lime putty or hydrated lime may be substituted to the extent of not more than 25 percent of the volume of the Portland cement that may be added. 
(f)  Other jointing materials and methods not specified in this section may be used only by approval of the public services director. 
(Code 1983, § 18-63) 
Sec. 90-74. - Connection of building sewer to main sewer. 
    The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such branch is available, at a suitable location. If the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less, and no properly located "Y" branch is available, the owner shall at his expense install a "Y" branch in the public sewer at the location specified by the director. Where the public sewer is greater than 12 inches in diameter, and no properly located "Y" branch is available, a neat hole may be cut into the public sewer to receive the building sewer, with entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about 45 degrees. A 45-degree ell may be used to make such connection, with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same or at a higher elevation than the invert of the public sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the director. 
(Code 1983, § 18-64) 
Sec. 90-75. - Barricades; replacement of excavations. 
    All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Code 1983, § 18-65) 
Sec. 90-76. - Compliance with OSHA regulations. 
    In addition to all requirements spelled out in this article, it is further required that all OSHA specifications and regulations be complied with. 
(Code 1983, § 18-66) 
Secs. 90-77-90-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DISCHARGE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 90-86. - Discharge restrictions. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the director. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon approval of the director, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet. 
(Code 1983, § 18-76) 
Sec. 90-87. - Prohibited discharges. 
    Except as provided in this article, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(2)  Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per million, by weight, of fat, oil or grease. 
(3)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(4)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded (particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension). The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater, shall be subject to the review and approval of the director. 
(5)  Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastic, wood, paunch manure or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewerage works. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewerage works. 
(7)  Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. 
(8)  Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant. 
(9)  Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance. 
(Code 1983, § 18-77) 
Sec. 90-88. - Interceptors. 
(a)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the director, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(b)  Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight. 
(c)  Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspections. At their expense, the owner shall maintain interceptors in efficient operation at all times. The owner shall be responsible for the inspection, service, removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material. The owner shall be required to have the interceptors inspected and serviced by a licensed waste disposal firm, at least once each month, with proof of service being sent to the public services department no later than the tenth day of the following month. 
(Code 1983, § 18-78; Ord. No. 1079, § 2, 2-25-02) 
Sec. 90-89. - Preliminary treatment facilities. 
(a)  The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having a five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 parts per million by weight, or containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended solids, or containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics described in section 90-87(1) through (9), or having an average daily flow greater than two percent of the average daily sewage flow of the city, shall be subject to the review and approval of the public services director. 
(b)  Where necessary in the opinion of the director, the owner shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per million and the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight, or reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in section 90-87, or control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. 
(c)  Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the director and of the state and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until the approvals are obtained in writing. 
(d)  Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(e)  All industrial users must meet all federal pretreatment standards that are applicable. 
(Code 1983, § 18-79) 
Sec. 90-90. - Control manhole. 
    When required by the director, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the director. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Code 1983, § 18-80) 
Sec. 90-91. - Standards for tests and measurements. 
(a)  All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in sections 90-86, 90-87 and 90-89 shall be determined in accordance with Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided for in section 90-90, or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. 
(b)  If no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
(Code 1983, § 18-81) 
Sec. 90-92. - Special agreements. 
    No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern. 
(Code 1983, § 18-82) 
Secs. 90-93-90-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS 

Sec. 90-106. - Restrictions. 
    Except as provided in this division, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Code 1983, § 18-91) 
Sec. 90-107. - Regulations. 
(a)  Any person who has a privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage in the city shall connect to the city sewer in 30 days from notice, if within 200 feet of the city sewer. 
(b)  Any person who shall have an outdoor privy in the city and whose property is beyond 200 feet from the city sewer shall within 30 days from notice construct a sanitary septic tank and connect thereto. 
(c)  It is hereby established as policy by the council that no connections, either water or sewer, may be made by any city employee unless and until such connections outside the city limits have the prior approval of the council. 
(Code 1983, § 18-92) 
Sec. 90-108. - When permitted. 
    Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of state law, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 18-93) 
Sec. 90-109. - Permit; fee; inspection. 
(a)  Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the public services director. 
(b)  Application for a permit to construct a private sewage disposal system shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the public services director. 
(c)  A permit and inspection fee of $15.00 shall be paid to the city clerk at the time the application required by this section is filed. 
(d)  The permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the director. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the director when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of notice by the director. 
(Code 1983, § 18-94) 
Sec. 90-110. - State restrictions. 
    The type, capacities, locations and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state. 
(Code 1983, § 18-95) 
Sec. 90-111. - Connection to sewer; abandonment of facilities. 
    At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in state law, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(Code 1983, § 18-96) 
Sec. 90-112. - Additional requirements. 
    No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the city physician. 
(Code 1983, § 18-97) 
Secs. 90-113-90-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RATES, CHARGES AND BILLING 

Sec. 90-136. - Utility charges shall be assessed when service is available. 
    It shall be the duty of the city clerk to include charges for water, sewer and garbage on each and every utility bill prepared for service within the city, subject to the following exceptions: 
(1)  The charge for a particular service shall be waived in those instances where the particular service is not available at the service location. 
(2)  Where a particular service is made available to an established customer, such as a sewer line extension to serve an established water customer, the charge previously waived shall be included on the first utility bill prepared after 60 days from the date written notice is given the customer that the service is available to him. It shall be the duty of the public services director to prepare and give to the customer the written notice provided for in this section and to furnish a copy thereof to the city clerk for his handling and record. 
(3)  A customer having a dual requirement for water (a portion that is and a portion that is not cycled into the city sewer system) may avoid payment of sewer charges on that portion of his overall water consumption that is not cycled into the city sewer system by installing a separate service to handle the nonsewer water served through an individual connection to the city water main. Application for such connection shall be made to the city clerk in the manner provided by section 90-27, with the further requirement that the applicant certify the basic purpose for which the water will be used and that he will not permit or suffer any of the water thus provided to enter into the city sewer system. Where dual connections, as described in this section, were installed prior to the effective date of this section, customers may avoid payment of sewer charges on that portion of their overall water consumption that is not cycled into the city sewer system by submitting the certification described in this section to the city clerk. 
(Code 1983, § 18-111) 
Sec. 90-137. - Service to noncity customers. 
(a)  The specific rates, charges, fees, deposits, etc., specified in this article shall apply to customers located within the corporate limits of the city, including extensions thereof as they may be made from time to time. Where permitted, upon request and at the sole discretion of the council, utility services may be provided to customers located in areas adjacent to but outside the corporate limits of the city. In such event, the applicable rates, charges, fees, deposits, etc., shall be 150 percent of those specified in this article. 
(b)  In addition and so as to protect the future interest of the city and its citizenry, utility services shall be provided to persons located outside the city only when the person shall voluntarily submit a an annexation agreement in keeping with the following: 
(1)  Annexation agreement. 
a.  If application is made for utility service(s) to property located outside the city boundary, which is contiguous to the existing city boundary or is within an enclave surrounded by the city's boundary. the property owner shall concurrently annex the property into the city as a precondition to the provision of utility service to the property. 
b.  If application is made for utility service(s) to property located outside the city boundary which is not contiguous to the existing city boundary. the property owner shall concurrently submit an annexation agreement in a form acceptable to the city and binding upon the property. This agreement shall give the city the right to annex the property into the city limits when the prerequisites of annexation under general state law are met. 
c.  Upon successful application. to include all completed regular forms as provided by the city and a duly executed and recorded annexation agreement, the city manager or designated administrative official shall approve the utility service(s) connection. 
d.  Failure of the property owner to annex the property pursuant to the annexation agreement shall constitute grounds to terminate utility service(s) to the property. 
e.  The city reserves the right to exercise its right to annex the property at the city's expense at any time the property becomes contiguous through any legal process. 
(Code 1983, § 18-112; Ord. No. 817, § 2, 12-13-93; Ord. No. 1682, § II, 3-25-19) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 180.191(b). 
Sec. 90-138. - Schedule of water and sewer rates and charges per consumer per month. 
(a)  Residential water and sewer rates and charges are as follows: All utility billing charges include applicable state sales tax amounts. 
(1)  Water. 
a.  Minimum charge (includes the first 2,000 gallons of water consumed) ..... $9.15 
b.  Next 3,000 gallons of water consumed, rate per 1,000 gallons ..... 1.90 
c.  Next 5,000 gallons of water consumed, rate per 1,000 gallons ..... 1.95 
d.  Next 10,000 gallons of water consumed, rate per 1,000 gallons ..... 2.15 
e.  Over 20,000 gallons of water consumed, rate per 1,000 gallons ..... 2.45 
(2)  Sewer. 
a.  Minimum charge (includes the first 2,000 gallons of water consumed) ..... $16.80 
b.  Next 14,000 gallons of water consumed, rate per 1,000 gallons ..... 5.10 
c.  Over 16,000 gallons of water consumed rate per 1,000 gallons ..... 0.00 
    To calculate charges for customers involving service of two or more consumers through a single connection, the minimum charge and number of gallons stated in subsection (a)(1) shall be multiplied by the number of consumers being served through the single connection to determine the minimum charge per customer. Charges for water consumed in excess of the minimum amount thus determined shall be assessed at the rate provided for in this subsection. Charges for sewer service in excess of the minimum amount thus determined shall be assessed at the rate provided for in this subsection. 
    Upon initial application for residential sewer service, a fixed monthly sewer rate based on a water consumption of 7,000 gallons will be established. 
    Residential water and sewer rates will have an additional increase as provided below each year for four years beginning on October 1, 2017. The city council shall review the rates adopted in this article annually, and if the council determines the rates should be lowered or increased, adopt an ordinance amending this section of the Code to provide for the changes in the rates. 
6/1/2016 
Rate 10/1/2017 
Rate 10/1/2018 
Rate 10/1/2019 
Rate 10/1/2020 
Rate Residential water rates beginning June 1, 2016 Minimum charge (included the first 2,000 gallons of water consumed $9.15 $9.30 $9.45 $9.60 $9.80 Next 3,000 gallons of water consumed, rate per 1,000 gallons 1.90 1.95 2.00 2.05 2.10 Next 5,000 gallons of water consumed, rate per 1,000 gallons 1.95 2.00 2.05 2.10 2.15 Next 10,000 gallons of water consumed, rate per 1,000 gallons 2.15 2.20 2.25 2.30 2.35 Over 20,000 gallons of water consumed, rate per 1,000 gallons 2.45 2.50 2.55 2.60 2.65 Residential sewer rates beginning June 1, 2016 Minimum charge (includes the first 2,000 gallons of water consumed 16.80 17.15 17.50 17.85 18.20 Next 14,000 gallons of water consumed, rate per 1,000 gallons 5.10 5.20 5.30 5.40 5.50 Maximum rate charge 88.20 89.95 91.70 93.45 95.20  
(b)  Commercial water and sewer rates and charges are as follows: All utility billing charges include applicable state sales tax amounts. 
(1)  Water. 
a.  Minimum charge (includes the first 1,000 gallons of water consumed) ..... $11.20 
b.  Next 4,000 gallons of water consumed, rate per 1,000 gallons ..... 1.90 
c.  Next 5,000 gallons of water consumed, rate per 1,000 gallons ..... 1.95 
d.  Next 10,000 gallons of water consumed, rate per 1,000 gallons ..... 2.15 
e.  Over 20,000 gallons of water consumed, rate per 1,000 gallons ..... 2.45 
(2)  Sewer. 
a.  Minimum charge (no water consumption is included in minimum charge) ..... $18.35 
b.  Rate per 1,000 gallons consumed ..... 5.10 
Any water or sewer charges provided herein, that are for usage greater than the minimum, shall be billed in increments of 1,000 gallons or any portion thereof. 
Commercial water and sewer rates will increase as provided below each year for four years beginning on October 1, 2017. The city council shall review the rates adopted in this article annually, and if the council determines the rates should be lowered or increased, adopt an ordinance amending this section of the Code to provide for the changes in the rates. 
6/1/2016 
Rate 10/1/2017 
Rate 10/1/2018 
Rate 10/1/2019 
Rate 10/1/2020 
Rate Commercial water rates beginning June 1, 2016 Minimum charge (included the first 1,000 gallons of water consumed $11.20 $11.40 $11.65 $11.90 $12.15 Next 4,000 gallons of water consumed, rate per 1,000 gallons 1.90 1.95 2.00 2.05 2.10 Next 5,000 gallons of water consumed, rate per 1,000 gallons 1.95 2.00 2.05 2.10 2.15 Next 10,000 gallons of water consumed, rate per 1,000 gallons 2.15 2.20 2.25 2.30 2.35 Over 20,000 gallons of water consumed, rate per 1,000 gallons 2.45 2.50 2.55 2.60 2.65 Commercial sewer rates beginning June 1, 2016 Minimum charge (no water consumption is included in minimum 18.35 18.70 19.10 19.50 19.90 Rate per 1,000 gallons of water consumed (no maximum) 5.10 5.20 5.30 5.40 5.50  
(c)  Cross-connection-Back flow devices, annual charges. 
(1)  Half-inch to 11/2-inch (repair cost-materials only) ..... $40.00 
(2)  Two-inch to four-inch (repair cost-materials and $10.00 labor fee) ..... 50.00 
(3)  Six-inch to eight-inch (repair cost-materials and $20.00 labor fee) ..... 60.00 
(Code 1983, § 18-113; Ord. No. 801, § 2, 9-27-93; Ord. No. 831, § 2, 6-13-94; Ord. No. 1024, § 2, 3-27-00; Ord. No. 1030, § 2, 7-10-00; Ord. No. 1038, § 2, 10-23-00; Ord. No. 1039, §§ 2, 4, 11-27-00; Ord. No. 1073, § 5, 11-26-01; Ord. No. 1490, § 5, 1-29-13; Ord. No. 1601, § 2, 5-9-16) 
Sec. 90-139. - Billing. 
(a)  All meters shall be read monthly and the rates and charges for water and sewer services shall be billed monthly and all bills for such charges shall be paid on or before the due date on the bill, subsequent to the month for which such services were received. Billing will be conducted on two (2) cycles (A & B) which will effectively split the customer database in half, cycle A will become due and payable on the first Tuesday of each month and cycle B will become due and payable on the third Tuesday of each month. All bills shall provide a net amount based on the rates and charges specified by this article and a gross amount which shall be 110 percent of the net amount. 
(b)  Bills are due upon receipt by the customer in the net amount. Payments of current bills received in the city utility office on or before the first or third Tuesday of each month (depending on billing cycle), or the first working day thereafter in the event of an intervening weekend or recognized holiday, will be accepted as full payment of the net amount reflected on the bill. Payments made and received in the city utility office thereafter shall be due in the gross amount reflected on the utility bill. 
(c)  When any utility bill shall remain unpaid as of the first or third Tuesday of the following month (depending on the billing cycle), the clerk shall deem utility service to have been immediately discontinued and shall issue a cutoff order to the public services department to physically cut off the water supply to the failing customer, after which and within 15 days in any event, the clerk shall appropriate all or any needed portion of the failing customer's utility deposit and shall apply such deposit toward payment of outstanding utility charges due from the failing customer. Should any portion of the utility deposit thereafter remain, it shall, upon request of the failing customer, be refunded to him. 
(d)  Utility service may be restored or continued upon payment of a service charge in the amount of $25.00, payment of any utility charges which may remain outstanding, and depositing the amount necessary to create a utility deposit equal to the deposit requirement for a new customer. 
(Code 1983, § 18-118; Ord. No. 856, § 1, 4-10-95; Ord. No. 1073, § 6, 11-26-01; Ord. No. 1361, § 2, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 1465, § 2, 8-8-11) 
Sec. 90-140. - Adjustment to sewer bill when consumer's water line is broken or leaking. 
    If a consumer has a broken or leaking water line during any monthly billing period, the sewer rate for such monthly period shall not be based on the water usage for that month, but instead shall be the average of the previous 12 months' sewer bills for that consumer at that location. The public services director shall make the determination as to whether or not a consumer has a broken or leaking water line and his decision shall be final and nonreviewable. 
(Code 1983, § 18-119) 
Sec. 90-141. - No service fee. 
    No water nor sewage disposal service shall be furnished or rendered free of charge to any person, excluding the body politic, City of Crestview. 
(Ord. No. 776, § 3(18-120), 8-10-92; Ord. No. 1490, § 6, 1-29-13) 
Secs. 90-142-90-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL 

Sec. 90-161. - Intent and purpose of article. 
    The city water and sewer division, in its operation of a public potable water supply system, is required to ensure protection of public health through the provision of minimum requirements and standards for design, construction, operation and maintenance of its system. It is essential that physical cross connections which create or have the potential to create an imminent and substantial danger to public health be eliminated from the distribution system and plumbing systems of customers. Backflow can result in the potable water system becoming a transmitter of disease, toxic materials and other hazardous liquids. Therefore, it is necessary to establish and maintain a cross connection control to protect the health of water consumers by the control of actual and/or potential cross connections through methods of containment and/or isolation. These minimum requirements and standards for design, construction, operation and maintenance of the city's potable water supply system relating to cross connection control are adopted and implemented pursuant to the requirements of F.S. §§ 403.850-403.864, Florida Safe Drinking Water Act, and rules adopted pursuant thereto by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, Florida Administrative Code, chapter 62-555.360 
(Code 1983, § 18-131; Ord. No. 1080, § 2, 3-25-02) 
Sec. 90-162. - Areas embraced. 
    All territory within the county served by the city water and sewer system shall be embraced by the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 18-132) 
Sec. 90-163. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Air gap separation means any unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the flood rim of the receptacle, and shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the flood level rim of the vessel. In no case shall the gap be less than one inch. This gap shall also be above the established 100-year flood level. 
    Atmospheric vacuum breaker means a backflow prevention device which is operated by atmospheric pressure in combination with the force of gravity. The unit is designed to work in a vertical plan only. The moving part consists of a poppet valve which must be carefully sized to slide in a guided chamber and effectively shut off the reverse flow of water when a negative pressure exists. 
    Auxiliary water supply means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the purveyor's approved public potable water supply. These auxiliary water supplies may include water from another purveyor's public potable water supply or any natural source such as a well, spring, river, harbor, etc., or used waters or industrial fluids. These waters may be polluted, contaminated or may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the water purveyor does not have sanitary control. 
    Back pressure means backflow caused by a pump, elevated tank, boiler or other means that could create pressure greater than the supply pressure. 
    Back siphonage means backflow due to a negative or subatmospheric pressure within a water system. 
    Backflow means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable supply of water from any source other than its intended source. 
    Backflow prevention device means a device to counteract back pressure or prevent back siphonage. 
    Backflow prevention device, approved. The term "approved backflow prevention device" means a device that has met the requirements of one or more of the following standards: 
(1)  AWWA-C-506. Standard for backflow prevention devices, reduced pressure principle and double-check valve types. 
(2)  ASSE-1001. Atmospheric type vacuum breakers. 
(3)  ASSE-1011. Hose connection vacuum breakers. 
(4)  ASSE-1020. Pressure type vacuum breakers. 
(5)  ASSE-1024. Dual check type backflow preventer. 
(Residential use only) 
(6)  ASSE-1013 Reduced pressure principle back pressure backflow preventers. 
(7)  ASSE-1015 Double-check valve type back pressure backflow preventers. 
(8)  USC-FCCC University of Southern California Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research. 
    Containment means a method of controlling potential and/or confirmed cross connections by installation of a double-check valve assembly or a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device. 
    Cross connection means any physical arrangement whereby a public water supply system is connected, directly or indirectly, with any other water supply system, sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture or other device which contains or may contain contaminated water, sewage or other waste or liquid of unknown or unsafe quality, which may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water supply system as a result of backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices, or any other temporary or permanent devices through which or because of which backflow could occur are considered to be cross connections. 
    Double-check valve assembly means an assembly composed of two single, independently acting check valves, including tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and suitable connections for testing the watertightness of each check valve. 
    Health hazard means any condition, device or practice in any water supply system or in its operation which creates or may create a danger to the health and well-being of the water consumer. 
    Industrial fluids system means any system containing a fluid or solution, which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, system, pollution or plumbing hazard if introduced into an approved water supply. This may include, but not be limited to: polluted or contaminated waters; all types ofprocess waters and "used waters" originating from the public potable water system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; chemicals in fluid form; plating acids and alkalies; circulated cooling waters connected to an open cooling tower and/or cooling towers that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural waters such as from wells, springs, streams, rivers, bays, harbors, seas, irrigation canals or systems, etc.; oils, gases, glycerin, paraffins, caustic and acid solutions and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other purposes or for firefighting purposes. 
    Isolation means a method of controlling potential and/or confirmed cross connections by installation of an air gap separation or a vacuum breaker. 
    Pollution means the presence of any foreign substance in water which tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a nonhealth hazard or impair the usefulness of the water. 
    Pressure vacuum breaker. A pressure vacuum breaker is similar to an atmospheric vacuum breaker except that the checking unit poppet valve is activated by a spring. This type of vacuum breaker does not require a negative pressure to react and can be used on the pressure side of a valve. 
    Public water supply means any system of water supply intended or used for human consumption or other domestic use, including source, treatment, storage and distribution, where water is furnished to any community, collection or number of individuals or is made available to the public for human consumption or domestic use, but excluding supplies servicing one single-family residence. 
    Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device means a device incorporating two or more check valves and an automatically operating differential relief valve located between the two check valves, two shutoff valves and equipment with necessary appurtenances for testing. The device shall operate to maintain the pressure in the zone between the two check valves, less than the pressure of the public water supply side of the device even at cessation of normal flow. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve shall operate to maintain this reduced pressure by discharging to the atmosphere. When the inlet pressure is two pounds per square inch or less, the relief valve shall open to the atmosphere, thereby providing an air gap in the device. This air gap shall also be above the 100-year flood level. 
    Water, nonpotable means water that is not safe for human consumption, or which according to recognized standards is of questionable quality. 
    Water, potable means any water that is safe for human consumption as prescribed by the public health authority having jurisdiction. 
    Water, reclaimed means water, which, as a result of treatment of wastewater, is suitable for a direct beneficial use or a controlled use that would not otherwise occur, and is not safe for human consumption. 
    Water, service connections means the terminal end of a service connection from the public potable water system; i.e., where the water purveyor loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the property owners water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connection shall mean the downstream end of the meter. There should be no unprotected connections from the service end of the meter. There should be no unprotected connections from the service line ahead of any meter or backflow prevention assembly located at the point of delivery to the property owner's water system. Service connection shall also include water service connection from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency water service connections from the public potable water system. 
    Water, used means any water supplied by a water purveyor from the public potable water system to a consumer's water system after it has passed through the point of delivery and is no longer under the sanitary control of the water purveyor. 
(Code 1983, § 18-133; Ord. No. 1080, § 2, 3-25-02) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 90-164. - Protection of system by city. 
(a)  Generally; written notice of installation of approved backflow prevention device. The water and sewer division is responsible for the protection of its public potable water distribution system from backflow of contaminants or pollutants through any water service connection. If, in the judgment of the department, an approved backflow prevention device is required at the water service connection to any of its customer's premises for the safety of the users of the water system, the department shall give notice in writing to the customer that an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed at the customer's expense. 
(b)  Failure, etc., to meet installation timetable. Failure, refusal or inability on the part of the customer to meet the water and sewer division's time schedule for installation of the required device or devices shall constitute grounds for discontinuance of water service until such device or devices have been properly installed. Any licensed plumber may install the proper device in the correct manner. 
(c)  Notification in event of known or suspected accidental pollution or contamination of consumers. In the event of any known or suspected accidental pollution or contamination of the consumer's or the department's potable water system, the consumer shall promptly take steps to confine any further spread of pollution or contamination and shall immediately notify the water and sewer division of the situation. 
(Code 1983, § 18-134; Ord. No. 1080, § 2, 3-25-02) 
Sec. 90-165. - Backflow prevention requirements; types and installation of devices. 
(a)  No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the water purveyor unless the water supply is protected as required by state laws and regulations and the city rules and regulations. Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued by the water purveyor if a backflow prevention assembly required by these rules and regulations is not installed, tested and maintained, or if it is found that a backflow prevention assembly has been removed, bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises. Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected. 
(b)  The property owners system should be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of city to determine whether cross-connections or other sanitary hazards, including violations of these regulations, exist. When such a condition becomes known, the city shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing for a physical break in the service line until the property owner has corrected the condition(s) in conformance with state statutes and city ordinances relating to plumbing and water supplies and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(c)  At no time will an approved backflow assembly restrict the flow of water in either a domestic potable water or dedicated fireline service. 
(1)  In the case of both commercial and domestic water services the bore of the backflow assembly shall be no smaller than the full flow bore of the measuring device (meter). 
(2)  In the case of dedicated firelines, the backflow assembly's bore will be the same diameter as the required tap. 
(d)  An approved backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on each service line to a customer's water system at or near the property line, or in a location approved by the city. The device shall be installed before the first branch line leading off the service line wherever the following conditions exist 
(1)  In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply which is not or may not be safe for human consumption and which is not acceptable as an additional source by the public services director or his designee, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved reduced pressure backflow prevention assembly on the service line. 
(2)  In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or any other objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved reduced pressure backflow prevention assembly on the service line. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the utility system which have been subject to deterioration in quality. 
(3)  In the case of premises having internal cross-connections that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled, intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross-connections exist, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved reduced pressure backflow prevention assembly on the service line. 
(e)  The type of protective assembly required under subsection (d)(1), (2) and (3) shall depend upon the degree of hazard which exists as follows: 
(f)  In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply as stated in subsection (d)(1) and it is not subject to any of the following rules, the public water system shall be protected by an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. 
(g)  In the case of any premises where there is water or substance that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health, if introduced into the public water system, an approved reduced pressure principal assembly shall protect the public water system. 
(h)  In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous to health which is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved reduced pressure principal backflow prevention assembly. Examples of premises where these conditions will exist include sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries, plating plants, veterinary offices, film processing labs, hair salons, lumber mills, and any situation determined by the public services director or his designee determines to be a health hazard. 
(1)  In the case of any premises where there are uncontrolled cross-connections, either actual or potential, an approved reduced pressure principal backflow prevention assembly at the service connection shall protect the public water system. 
(2)  In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete in-plant cross-connection survey, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by an approved reduced pressure principal backflow prevention assembly and it shall be installed on each service to the premises. 
(3)  In the case of a dedicated fireline tap whether for fire sprinklers and/or hydrants, an approved double check backflow prevention assembly shall protect the public water system. If a hydrant is to be present on any project, other than single-family residences, the hydrant is to be installed on the dedicated fireline downstream of the backflow assembly. If a dedicated fireline is to have any substance (e.g., antifreeze or dry chemicals) present other than potable water; an immediate upgrade in protection to a reduced pressure assembly is required. 
(4)  In the case of irrigation supplied by a public potable water system as described in section 2.15, the public water system shall be protected with the minimum of an approved double check backflow prevention assembly. If any alternate source of water is cross-connected, an immediate upgrade to an approved reduced pressure backflow prevention assembly is required. If any chemicals are to be injected into the system (e.g., chemigation) an immediate upgrade in protection to a reduced pressure backflow prevention assembly is required. 
(5)  In the case of pools that are protected with an approved air gap, all potable hose bibs will be required to have an ASSE approved hose bib vacuum breaker installed. If the pools air gap does not meet AWWA installation requirements, an immediate repair will need to be performed, or a reduced pressure backflow prevention assembly will be required. 
(6)  In the case of any property(s), other than single-family dwellings, which utilizes reclaimed water for any purpose, an approved reduced pressure backflow prevention assembly will be required either as a new installation or as a retrofit. The assembly will be required to meet all AWWA installation requirements and shall be installed at the point of service on the potable water. 
(7)  The city will furnish and install an in-line dual check backflow prevention device on all residential potable water services which are one inch in diameter or less. There will be a one-time charge to the customer for all dual check backflow devices installed by city. All potable water services and irrigation systems will require a reduced pressure or double check backflow prevention device, depending on the situation. 
(i)  As required by F.S. ch. 489, all backflow assemblies are required to be installed by a licensed contractor with the following exemptions (F.S. § 489.103): 
(1)  "Allows you, as the owner of the property, to act as your own contractor with certain restrictions, even if you do not have a license." 
(2)  "Or an employee of the owner as defined as a person who receives compensation from and is under the supervision and control of an employer who regularly deducts the F.I.C.A. and withholding tax and provides workers compensation, all as prescribed by law." 
(3)  "Any work or operation of a casual, minor or inconsequential nature in which the aggregate contract price for labor, materials and all other items is less than $1,000." 
(j)  The public services director or his designee shall approve the model and size of any backflow prevention assembly required herein. The term "approved backflow prevention assembly" shall mean an assembly that has been manufactured in full conformance with the standards established by the American Water Works Association entitled: AWWA C510-89 Standard for Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention Assembly, and AWWA C 511-89 Standard for Reduced Pressure Backflow Prevention Assembly and have met completely the laboratory and field performance specifications of the Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of California, established by "Specifications of Backflow Prevention Assemblies," section 10 of the most current issue of the Manual for Cross Connection Control. Said AWWA and FCCC&HR standards and specifications have been adopted by city. Final approval shall be evidenced by a certificate of approval issued by an approved testing laboratory certifying full compliance with said AWWA and FCCC&HR standards and specifications. The following testing laboratory has been qualified by city to test and certify backflow preventers: Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research University of Southern California University Park Los Angeles, Ca. 90089. Testing laboratories, other than the laboratory listed above, will be added to an approved list as they are qualified by city. Backflow prevents which may be subjected to backpressure or backsiphonage that have been fully tested and have been granted a certificate of approval by said qualified laboratory and are listed on the laboratory's current list of "approved backflow prevention assemblies" may be used without further qualifications. It is also required that all backflow prevention assemblies will have replaceable seats. The city reserves the right to disapprove any assembly in this purveyor system, which is otherwise approved, but has a chronic and excessively high failure rate. 
(Code 1983, § 18-135; Ord. No. 790, § 3, 1-25-93; Ord. No. 1080, § 2, 3-25-02) 
Sec. 90-166. - Inspections. 
(a)  Advance written notice; refusal of customer to allow inspection. The water and sewer division shall conduct inspections of customers' premises where suspected cross connections or potential cross connections may exist. Customers shall be notified in advance of the inspections and the reasons for the inspections. Should any cross connections or potential cross connections be detected, the customer shall be notified in writing of the appropriate type of backflow prevention device to be installed. Refusal by a customer to allow an inspection shall be considered prima facie evidence of the existence of cross connections, thereby requiring the installation of an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device or the disconnection of service. 
(b)  Existing facilities; questionnaires, surveys. For existing facilities, customers will be asked to complete a questionnaire on their water usage in order to make a preliminary determination of the potential health hazard to the department's water distribution systems. When such information or other knowledge indicates a potential health hazard, a survey of the customer's water system shall be conducted. Such surveys need not be a detailed inspection of the location or disposition of waterlines, but can be confined to establishing the water use on the premises; the existence of any cross connections; the availability of auxiliary water supplies; the use or availability of pollutants, contaminants and other liquid, solid or gaseous substances that may be used industrially for stabilization of water supplies and other procedures for determining the degree of health hazard. 
(c)  Classification of new services. All new services shall be classified at the time of application to indicate the degree of hazard anticipated and, hence, the type of device required. This information shall be given to the applicant in writing. Any later change in water usage may require a change in the type of device. If no realistic evaluation of the proposed water uses can be determined, the consumer, architect, engineer or other appropriate individual should be advised in writing that eventually circumstances may require the installation of additional backflow protection of the water supply serving the premises. 
(d)  Change in water usage; evaluation. All water customers of the water and sewer division shall be required to notify the division, in writing, of any changes in their water usage. These changes will be evaluated to determine if there is an increase in the potential health hazard and if such increase requires the installation of a device. If a device is already in place, it will be determined if this device is adequate or if a different type of device is required. 
(Code 1983, § 18-136) 
Sec. 90-167. - Records. 
    Appropriate records shall be maintained by the water and sewer division of all potential and confirmed cross connections. Installations and tests of backflow prevention devices shall be recorded and filed for future reference. 
(Code 1983, § 18-137) 
Sec. 90-168. - Testing of backflow prevention devices; maintenance. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the property owner at any premises where backflow prevention assemblies are installed to have a certified inspection/test upon installation and operational inspection/ tests made a least once per year thereafter. In those instances where the public services director or his designee deems the hazard to be great enough he may require certified inspections at more frequent intervals. These inspections and tests shall be at the expense of the property owner and shall be performed by the city certified technician with the exception of fireline backflow prevention apparatuses, in an effort to offset the cost involved with maintaining this mandated program a fee will be applied to customer's account upon successful testing. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the public services director or his designee to see that these timely tests are made. The city shall notify the customer(s) in advance and in writing as to when the tests are to be undertaken. These assemblies shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced by the expense of the property owner whenever assemblies are found to be defective. Records of such tests, repairs and overhaul shall be kept and made available to the public services director. 
(c)  All presently installed back/flow prevention assemblies which do not meet the requirements of this section, but were approved assemblies for the purpose described herein at the time of installation, and which have been properly maintained, shall, excerpt for the inspection and maintenance of these rules and regulations, be excluded from the requirements of these rules so long as the public services director or his designee is assured that they will satisfactorily protect the utility system. Whenever the existing assembly is moved from the present location or requires more than minimum maintenance, or when the public services director or his designee finds that the maintenance constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced, at the cost of the property owner, by an approved backflow prevention assembly meeting the requirements of this section. 
(Code 1983, § 18-138; Ord. No. 1080, § 2, 3-25-02; Ord. No. 1483, § 2, 9-24-12) 
Chapter 94 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Duty of driver to report accident after striking a domestic animal, § 10-20; businesses, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, ch. 74; peddling from a vehicle, § 74-3; traffic and vehicles, ch. 86; wrecker qualifications and allocation system, § 86-71 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 94-1-94-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 

Sec. 94-26. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations, and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words not defined in this section shall be given their common and ordinary meaning, or for those so included, the meaning found in section 1-2 of this Code. 
    Occupational license means the method by which this Code grants the privilege of engaging in or managing any business, profession or occupation within the city. 
    Occupational license office means the office of the city clerk, responsible for issuing occupational licenses. 
    Owner means any person having ownership or control of the operation or maintenance of taxicabs, including any person having control of the collection of revenues derived from the operation of taxicabs, and including the purchaser of any taxicab under a conditional sales contract or other title-reserving agreement. 
    Taxicab means a motor vehicle which is engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire, not on a regular schedule or fixed route, the destination of which is controlled by the passenger therein, and which is designed to carry no more than nine persons, including the driver. 
    Taxicab company means any business entity of whatever nature of composition which is licensed by the occupational license office to operate one or more taxicabs and engage in a taxicab service, and may be a corporation, partnership, joint venture, natural person, or other individual, association or combined persons or entities. 
    Taximeter means a meter instrument or device attached to a taxicab which measures mechanically the distance driven and the waiting time upon which the fare is based. 
    Taxi stand means those areas situated on the public streets, avenues, roads and alleys of and in the city which have been designated for the use by taxicabs for the purpose of awaiting or picking up taxicab passengers. 
    Zone method means a method of computation of a fare based on a mileage parameter in lieu of a taximeter. 
(Ord. No. 760, § 3(19-16), 1-13-92; Ord. No. 796, § 2, 8-23-93) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 94-27. - Compliance with article required. 
    The operation of taxicabs by a taxicab company within the city shall be subject to the conditions, regulations and restrictions set forth in this article. It shall be unlawful to operate such a vehicle until and unless the conditions, regulations and restrictions set forth and prescribed by this article have been complied with by the owner of any activity regulated under this article. 
(Ord. No. 760, § 3(19-17), 1-13-92) 
Sec. 94-28. - Display of identification. 
(a)  Each taxicab regulated by this article shall bear on the outside on at least two sides the name of the owner/company in letters not less than three inches high. 
(b)  Each taxicab regulated by this article shall bear on the outside on at least two sides the owner's/company's telephone number in size not less than 21/2 inches high. 
(c)  Any taxicab company operating more than one taxicab within the city shall number each of such taxicabs consecutively starting with the number one or any series of consecutive numbers, provided such numbers are filed in the office of the city clerk. Such number shall be placed on each such taxicab, on at least two sides and the rear of the cab. Such number shall be not less than three inches high. 
(Ord. No. 760, § 3(19-18), 1-13-92; Ord. No. 796, § 3, 8-23-93) 
Sec. 94-29. - Display of license. 
    Each taxicab regulated by this article shall have displayed on the inside of its front windshield, in a clearly visible manner, a full-sized copy of the owner's occupational license. 
(Ord. No. 760, § 3(19-19), 1-13-92) 
Sec. 94-30. - Taximeters. 
    Taxicabs operated under the authority of this article may be equipped with taximeters. When taximeters are utilized, they shall be fastened in front of the passengers, visible to them at all times day and night; after sundown, and the face of the taximeters shall be illuminated. Such taximeter shall be operated mechanically by a mechanism of standard design and construction, driven either from the transmission or from one of the front wheels by a flexible and permanently attached driving mechanism. It shall be sealed at all points and connections that, if manipulated, would effect their correct reading and recording. Each taximeter shall have thereon a plan to denote when the vehicle is employed and when it was not employed; and it shall be the duty of the driver to place the taximeter measuring device into a nonrecording position at the termination of each trip. The police department or designee by contract is hereby authorized, either on complaint of any person or without such complaint, to inspect any meter and, upon discovery of any inaccuracy therein, to notify the person operating such taxicab to cease operation. Thereupon the taxicab shall be kept off of the streets until the taximeter is repaired and is in the required working condition. 
(Ord. No. 760, § 3(19-20), 1-13-92; Ord. No. 796, § 4, 8-23-93) 
Sec. 94-31. - Insurance requirements. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator or driver of any taxicab regulated by this article to drive or operate such taxicab or to permit such taxicab to be driven or operated upon the streets of the city unless such owner, operator or driver shall have first procured and filed with the city clerk a liability insurance policy, upon which the city is listed as an additional insured party, issued by a good and responsible insurance company, or a surety bond issued by a good and responsible surety company; such insurance company or surety company must have authority to do business as such in the state. The minimum amount of liability insurance or surety bond for each taxicab shall be as follows: 
(1)  An amount of not less than $10,000.00 of bodily injury liability insurance for any one person injured by reason of the negligent operation of the taxicab; 
(2)  An amount of not less than $20,000.00 of bodily injury liability insurance for more than one person injured in any one accident; and 
(3)  An amount of not less than $10,000.00 for all property damage in any one accident. 
(b)  In lieu of the requirements of subsection (a), the taxicab company, owner, operator or driver may make application to the state pursuant to F.S. § 324.031, to qualify as a self-insurer in the same amounts as required in subsection (a). Such owner, operator or driver shall file with the city clerk a copy of the application and all documentation filed with the state. Upon approval of such application by the state, a current copy of such approval shall be filed with the occupational license office. Upon filing such grant of approval from the state with the occupational license office, such owner, operator or driver shall be entitled to function as a self-insurer until such time as the approval is revoked, cancelled or otherwise terminated. 
(Ord. No. 760, § 3(19-21), 1-13-92) 
Sec. 94-32. - Prohibited acts. 
    The following conditions apply: 
(1)  False information of any kind shall not be given to the city, its employees or agents. 
(2)  The operation of a taxicab by a driver shall not be allowed who has been convicted, pleads guilty, or pleads nolo contendere to any of the following offenses: 
a.  Driving under the influence of intoxicating beverages or drugs. 
b.  Criminal homicide, rape, aggravated assault, kidnapping, robbery, child molestation, grand theft, criminal solicitation to commit or attempt to commit any of the above listed crimes, unlawful possession, sale or distribution of any controlled substance which is regulated or prohibited by F.S. ch. 893, or a violation of any ordinance of the city governing the conduct of drivers of taxicabs. 
c.  Charge a fare in excess of those fares established and on file in the office of the city clerk. 
d.  Violation of any ordinance or general law, other than minor traffic offenses, in connection with the operation of a taxicab. 
e.  Permit the operation of or to operate a taxicab by an individual who suffers from any mental or physical disorder that affects his ability to drive safely. 
f.  Permit the operation of or operate a taxicab by an individual who has been cited for four or more moving traffic violations in any 12-month period. 
g.  Permit the operation of or operate a taxicab in such a manner that endangers the health, welfare or safety of the public. 
(3)  Any taxicab company which is licensed by another municipality or county to conduct a taxicab business and which registers such occupational license in this city shall not be relieved of the responsibility of complying with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 760, § 3(19-22), 1-13-92; Ord. No. 796, § 5, 8-23-93) 
Sec. 94-33. - Schedule of rates, policies. 
(a)  Any taxicab company regulated by this article shall provide the city with a schedule of rates or fares and the method of computation (taximeter or zone method) by which it will charge for the transportation of passengers. Such schedules, and company policies regarding service provided, shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. All charges thereafter shall be strictly in accordance with such rate schedule filed as matter of public record. 
(b)  Any taxicab company regulated by this article shall file with the city an amended schedule of rates or fares or change in method of computation (e.g., taximeter or zone method). Such amended schedule of rates or change in method of computation shall indicate the date upon which it is effective and any other pertinent data essential to the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 760, § 3(19-23), 1-13-92; Ord. No. 796, § 6, 8-23-93) 
Sec. 94-34. - Display of rate information. 
    Within the interior of the taxicab, the taxicab company shall post in a conspicuous place visible to the passenger for hire a schedule of rates and charges as filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 760, § 3(19-24), 1-13-92) 
Sec. 94-35. - Appropriation of city street for business purposes. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for taxicabs to appropriate any portion of any city street as a location for the conduct of their private business when such taxicabs are not employed in the carriage of persons or property but are awaiting or soliciting such employment, unless the city has established such an area as a taxicab stand. 
(b)  No person shall solicit patronage for a taxicab by verbally advising persons of the availability of a ride in such taxicab in a voice so loud as to affect the peace and quiet of persons present. 
(Ord. No. 760, § 3(19-25), 1-13-92) 
Sec. 94-36. - Maintenance of records. 
    Every taxicab company regulated by this article shall keep and maintain a clear, neat, written record, showing for each day the number of taxicabs operated, the driver of each such vehicle, the origin and destination of all calls and by whom received and trip made by such vehicle, and the amount charged therefor. Such records shall be open at all times to inspection by any member of the police department and shall be preserved for a period of not less than one year. No person shall knowingly make a record of a fictitious entry in recording a bona fide call, nor shall a fictitious address of the point of origin or destination be knowingly reported. 
(Ord. No. 760, § 3(19-26), 1-13-92) 
Sec. 94-37. - Semiannual mechanical inspection. 
(a)  Owners or operators of taxicabs in the city are hereby required to submit to the city clerk once every six months, or at such other times as the city council may from time to time designate, a written statement from an owner or operator of a duly licensed garage in the city, which has been approved by the council, that the motor vehicle equipment used by the owner or operator in the conduct of taxicab operations in the city has been inspected by a qualified or licensed mechanic in the employ of the garage, and that the inspection reveals that the motor vehicle equipment is in good condition and safe to operate as a taxicab. 
(b)  Taxicabs failing to pass the inspection required in this section shall not be operated upon the streets of the city until such time as such taxicabs shall have been placed in good condition and repair. 
(Ord. No. 760, § 3(19-27), 1-13-92) 
Sec. 94-38. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 760, § 3(19-28), 1-13-92) 
Subpart B - LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE 
Chapter 102 - LAND USE REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 897, § 3, adopted Oct. 14, 1996, repealed former ch. 102, which pertained to similar subject matter, and added a new ch. 102 to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; planning board, § 2-61 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; environment, ch. 30; stormwater management, § 30-51; weeds, § 38-3; parks and recreation, ch. 58; solid waste and recycling services, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 90. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 102-1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 102-2. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the Crestview Land Use Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-3. - Jurisdiction. 
    The lands subject to this chapter shall include all area within the corporate limits of the city (and, as applicable, any areas to which the city provides municipal services). 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-4. - Intent. 
    This chapter provides public policy mechanisms and regulations for growth management (development and redevelopment) in order to serve the residents and property owners of the city and maintain and improve the quality of life for all citizens of the city. This chapter is intended to implement the city comprehensive plan and, toward that end, is to be construed liberally in favor of the goals, objectives and policies of the plan. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-5. - Abrogation. 
    This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or interfere with any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions duly recorded in the public records of the city or the county. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Secs. 102-6-102-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 102-21. - Local planning agency. 
    In accordance with the comprehensive plan, the city planning board serves as the local planning agency (LPA) and land development regulation commission. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-22. - General administration procedures. 
    This article sets forth application and review procedures required for obtaining development orders and permits as may be required. Procedures for appealing decisions are provided in section 102-36. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-23. - Withdrawal of applications. 
(a)  An application for development approval may be withdrawn at any time. 
(b)  The withdrawal of any application for development approval which occurs after the publication of any notices which may be required by this chapter or other law will result in the application losing its relative position in priority for plan review and will require the applicant to resubmit its application at the initial step in the development review process required for the particular development. Such resubmittal will require payment of the necessary fees in order to activate the plan review process and reestablish relative position and priority for plan review. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the local planning agency or the city council from delaying action or decision on any application. In the event the LPA or city council votes to delay review or decision on any application, said application will retain its relative position and priority for plan review purposes. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-24. - Authorization for development permit. 
(a)  Generally. No development activity may be commenced without a final development order. 
(b)  Prerequisites to issuance of a development permit. No development order or permit shall be issued unless the proposed development activity: 
(1)  Is authorized by a final development order issued pursuant to this chapter; and 
(2)  Conforms to the building codes and associated mechanical, electrical, plumbing and fire safety codes adopted by the city as the requisite technical construction manuals. 
(c)  Exceptions to the requirement for a final development order. A construction permit may be issued without a development order if any of the following conditions apply: 
(1)  Construction has begun or was approved prior to the adoption of this chapter; 
(2)  Alterations will not alter gross floor area, use of structure or change/add to the impervious surface of the site; 
(3)  The construction or alteration of a one- or two-family dwelling on a lot in a recorded subdivision, approved prior to the adoption of this chapter; 
(4)  The resurfacing of a vehicle use area that conforms to all requirements of this chapter; and 
(5)  A minor replat granted pursuant to procedures in section 102-34(b) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-25. - Preapplication procedures. 
(a)  Generally. Prior to filing for a formal and scheduled review of proposed development plans, if required by this chapter, by the technical review committee established pursuant to policy 14.A.2.6 of the comprehensive plan, the applicant shall request the city code inspector or designee to set a time for discussion of the proposed development. Checklists set forth in article XVII appropriate to the proposed development shall be provided to the applicant by the building inspections department. In addition, the applicant shall be directed to the appropriate city departments or other agencies so that the applicant may obtain information from such departments and/or agencies prior to filing for formal review, if necessary, by the technical review committee. 
No comment made by any persons associated with the city during any preapplication conference or discussion shall be considered either as approval or rejection of the proposed development or development plans. 
(b)  Designation of plans as minor or major developments. For purposes of these procedures, all development plans shall be designated by the planning director, or his designee, as either minor or major development according to the criteria below. Before submitting a development plan for formal review, the applicant shall provide the city with sufficient information to make this determination. The planning director, or his designee, shall support such designation by written findings. 
(1)  Major development. A development plan shall be designated as a major development if it satisfies one or more of the following criteria: 
a.  The activity involves combined land and water area which exceeds five acres. 
b.  The development is a residential project of ten or more dwelling units per acre of land and water area or of 50 or more dwelling units. 
c.  The development involves more than 15,000 square feet of gross floorspace. For the purposes of this criterion hotel and motel dwelling units are considered nonresidential floorspace. 
d.  Any proposed development, redevelopment or additions to existing facilities that will, upon completion, result in 30,000 square feet or more of impervious surfaces on the development site. 
e.  Any proposed development which is part of a larger parcel for which additional development is anticipated and that when aggregated with the project in question exceeds the limits of any of the above criteria. 
f.  The proposed development impacts any environmentally sensitive lands designated pursuant to article XI of this chapter. 
g.  The subdivision or resubdivision of any property which upon such subdivision or resubdivision will result in five or more lots of record. 
(2)  Minor development. A development plan shall be designated as a minor development if it is neither a major development nor a development exempt under section 102-34(b) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-26. - Procedures for development plan review. 
    All major developments, and minor developments which have significant impact, must be submitted to the technical review process delineated in this section. The procedure shall be as follows: 
(1)  The developer shall file completed checklists and development plans with the planning director, or his designee, as a prerequisite to obtaining technical review committee action. 
(2)  Within seven working days of receipt of an application for review, the planning director, or his designee, shall: 
a.  Determine that the application is incomplete and inform the developer, in writing, as to the deficiencies. The developer shall submit an amended application within 30 working days to maintain the application's relative position and priority for plan review; or 
b.  Determine that the submittals are complete as received and proceed with review procedures. 
(3)  The proposal shall be placed on the agenda for the next scheduled meeting of the city technical review committee (city staff) provided required notice can be posted. 
(4)  Notice that a development order is being sought shall also be posted at least 14 days prior to technical review committee (TRC) meeting and remain posted until after city council approval of the development on such lots, parcels, or tracts of land as may be involved in the development. Such notice shall be by a sign no smaller than 24 inches in width by 32 inches in height and such signs shall be placed so as to be no less than 12 inches above the ground. The sign shall be weather-proof and be able to resist water damage and sunlight fading of the information contained on the sign. The format of the sign shall be similar to and shall include all of the information as the sample sign shown in figure 1 below. There shall be at least one posted notice sign facing all adjacent right-of-ways that abut the property(s) involved in the hearing. In addition, if any right-of-way frontage exceeds 1,000 feet in length, a separate notice sign for each 1,000 feet, or portion thereof, is required. Notice signs shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the edge of the property adjacent to the right-of-way that is clear of any vegetation or structures that would obscure the view of the sign from the roadway. In no case shall a notice sign be affixed to a utility pole, utility structure or traffic sign. Proof of posting the notice sign(s) shall be provided to the administrative services department at least five days prior to the TRC meeting. Proof of posting shall consist of copies of a date-stamped photograph(s) showing the sign(s) as posted on the property and a signed affidavit stating the date, time and location(s) that the notice was posted. All costs associated with notice requirements are to be paid by the applicant. 

Figure 1. Sample notice sign for Development Order applications 
(5)  Members of the technical review committee shall receive copies or otherwise obtain information pertinent to their functional areas prior to the scheduled review meeting. 
(6)  The technical review committee shall review the proposal and submit comments, if any, in writing to the acting chairman of the committee, who may be the planning director or designee. The chairman shall assemble comments and forward same with written opinion and policy guidance from the planning director to the planning board. Information provided the planning board shall include but not be limited to the following: 
a.  Characteristics of the site and surrounding area, including important natural and manmade features, the size and accessibility of the site and surrounding land uses. 
b.  Impact on concurrency requirements and level of service standards (LOS). 
c.  The nature of the proposed development, including land use types and densities; the placement of proposed buildings and other improvements on the site; the location, type and method of maintenance of open space and public use areas, if any; the preservation of natural features or protection of sensitive lands, if any; proposed parking areas; internal traffic circulation systems, if any; the approximate total ground coverage of paved areas and structures; stormwater management and water and sewage distribution, collection and treatment systems. 
d.  Conformity of the proposed development with the comprehensive plan, this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
e.  Other applicable factors, rules, regulations or criteria prescribed by the comprehensive plan, this chapter or other law. 
(7)  The planning board upon receipt of the technical review committee report shall: 
a.  Determine conformity of the proposed development with the comprehensive plan, this Code, other applicable requirements and the items enumerated in subsection (6)e. above. 
b.  Hear and address concerns and desires of surrounding landowners and other affected persons. 
c.  Consider any rule, objective or policy of the comprehensive plan or any other criterion applicable to the particular development proposals in formulating its recommendation to either approve or deny the development proposal. 
d.  Forward its recommendation to the city council along with the technical review committee and planning director reports. 
(8)  Following the required public notice and hearing, the city council shall either accept, reject or accept with modifications the planning board's recommendation as follows: 
a.  In the event of acceptance of board's findings, the proposal shall be either approved or denied. If approved, the council shall instruct the planning director to authorize the issuance of a preliminary development order. 
b.  If the proposal is approved with modifications, a preliminary development order may be authorized by the planning director upon receipt of the modifications from the applicant. 
c.  If the proposal is disapproved in the development review process, the developer may resubmit a proposal for technical review within 60 days and retain in-line priority consideration for such services as sewage and water capacity allocations. If the proposal fails to be approved during the second scheduled development review procedure, all earlier submittal dates are voided. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 1375, § 2, 10-22-07) 
Sec. 102-27. - Final development order. 
    Provided the final development plan meets all requirements described in the preliminary development order, as determined by the planning director, or his designee, the city shall issue a final development order to the developer within 20 days of application for said final development order. The final development order is not a construction permit. An approved final development order is required prior to the city's issuance of any construction permit. A final development order shall, as a minimum, include the following: 
(1)  A determination that, where one was required, a valid preliminary development order exists for the requested development; 
(2)  An approved final development plan with findings and conclusions; 
(3)  A determination that all conditions of the preliminary development order have been met; 
(4)  If modifications must be made to the development plan before a final development order may be issued, a listing of those modifications and the time limit for submitting a modified plan (not more than 20 days); 
(5)  Notification that development shall commence within a 12-month period and continue until completion in good faith in accordance with terms and conditions of approval; 
(6)  If necessary to maintain concurrency, a schedule of construction phasing consistent with the availability of capacity of one or more services and/or facilities; 
(7)  If necessary or required, a schedule of public services or public facilities to be provided by the applicant prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy or within specified time periods; 
(8)  Any alternate service impact mitigation measures to which the applicant has committed in a recordable written instrument; 
(9)  A security in the amount of 120 percent of the cost of any public improvements required as a result of the anticipated impact of the development or as may be required by regulations in this chapter or other law, and any additional fees paid at this time, to include impact fee and user fees; and 
(10)  Such other conditions as may be required to assure compliance with this chapter, the comprehensive plan or other law. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-28. - Review of development plans for minor developments. 
(a)  Proposed minor development. The developer of a proposed minor development may choose to submit the proposed development to both a preliminary and final review, or to a single final review as follows: 
(1)  If the developer chooses to submit to both a preliminary and final review, the procedures in subsections (b) and (c) below shall be followed; 
(2)  If the developer chooses to submit to a single final review only the procedures of subsection (b) shall be followed. 
(b)  Preliminary development. The developer of a proposed minor development shall submit a preliminary development plan or a final development plan to the administrative services department. 
(1)  Within five working days of receipt of the plan, the department shall: 
a.  Determine that the plan is complete and proceed with the procedures below; or 
b.  Determine that the information is incomplete and inform the developer in writing of the deficiencies. The developer may submit an amended plan within 30 days without payment of a reapplication fee, but, if more than 30 days have elapsed, the developer must thereafter reinitiate the review process and pay additional fees. 
(2)  The proposed plan shall be placed on the agenda for the next scheduled meeting of the city technical review committee provided required notice can be posted. 
(3)  Members of the technical review committee shall receive copies of the plan or otherwise obtain information pertinent to their functional areas prior to the scheduled review meeting. 
(4)  The technical review committee shall review the proposed development plan pursuant to section 102-26(6) of this article and report its findings to the planning director. 
(5)  The planning director shall review the plan and comments of the technical review committee and determine whether the proposal complies with the requirements of this chapter pursuant to guidance received from the committee. 
(6)  Within five working days of the meeting of the technical review committee, the planning director shall: 
a.  Issue a preliminary development order if it was a preliminary development plan that was reviewed. The preliminary development order shall, as a minimum, contain: 
1.  The approved preliminary development plan with findings and conclusions; 
2.  A listing of conditions that must be met and modifications to the preliminary development plan, if any, that must be made in order for a final development order to be issued. The modifications shall be described in sufficient detail and exactness to permit a developer to amend the proposal accordingly; 
3.  A listing of federal, state or regional permits, if any, that must be obtained in order for a final development order to be issued; 
4.  The time period for which the preliminary development order is valid. This indicates that capacity of public facilities and/or services is available concurrent with the impacts of the proposed development, provided that a complete application for a final development order is submitted prior to the expiration date of the preliminary development order; 
5.  A notice that the preliminary development order does not constitute a final development order and that one or more concurrency determinations subsequently may be required. The notice may include a provisional listing of facilities for which commitments may be required prior to the issuance of a final development order; 
6.  Such other conditions as may be required or necessary in order to comply with regulations in this chapter or other law; 
b.  Issue a final development order complying with section 102-27 of this article if it was a final development plan that was reviewed; or 
c.  Deny the applicant a preliminary or final development order based upon the applicant's failure to meet the requirements of this chapter in the proposed development plan. 
(c)  Approval of final development plans. If the developer (applicant) chose to submit a preliminary development plan for review, a final development plan shall be submitted within six months of approval of the preliminary plan. If this deadline is not met, the preliminary development order expires. Within ten working days the department shall determine whether the final development plan can be approved or denied based on whether the plan conforms to the approved preliminary plan and the conditions, if any, imposed during preliminary review. Upon making such determination, the department shall: 
(1)  Issue a final development order complying with section 102-27 of this article; or 
(2)  Deny the applicant an approved final development order based upon the failure of the proposed final development plan to comply with the conditions or regulations imposed by the preliminary development order and inform the applicant, in writing, that he may resubmit his modified proposed final development plan within five working days in order to maintain his relative position and priority in the plan review and service or facility allocation process. If the applicant fails to meet this deadline all earlier submittal dates are voided and development of the land in question cannot be approved unless a new application is submitted at the first appropriate step in this procedure. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 1375, § 3, 10-22-07) 
Sec. 102-29. - Construction permits. 
    After a final development order has been issued, the applicant may, within 12 months of the issuance of the final development order, apply for the necessary construction permits. The city shall issue the necessary construction permits if the proposed construction is consistent with and approved pursuant to the final development order. If the application for a construction permit deviates from the final development plan the planning director shall notify the applicant within five working days of the construction permit application. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-30. - Post-permit changes. 
    After a construction permit has been issued, it shall be unlawful to change, modify, alter, or otherwise deviate from the terms and conditions of the final development order without first obtaining a modification of the order. Similarly, except for minor field modifications as may be allowed by the building codes and associated mechanical, electrical, gas, plumbing and fire safety codes, it shall be unlawful to change, modify, alter or otherwise deviate from the terms and conditions of the construction permit without first obtaining a city-approved modification to the permit. Construction standard field changes must be made available to the building official for inspection purposes consistent with the Southern Standard Building Code requirements. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-31. - Notice. 
    Unless otherwise provided by law, regulation or decision, addresses for a mailed notice required by this chapter shall be obtained from the records of the county tax collector. The failure of any person to receive notice shall not invalidate an action if a good faith effort was made to comply with the notice requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-32. - Submittals-Applications. 
    Applications for development review shall be available from the administrative services department. A completed application shall be signed by all owners, or their agent, of the property subject to the proposed development plan. Signatures by other parties will be accepted with notarized proof of authorization by the owners. In the case of corporate ownership, the authorized signature shall be accompanied by a notation of the signer's office in the corporation, and embossed with the corporate seal. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-33. - Same-General plan requirements. 
(a)  All preliminary and final development plans submitted pursuant to this chapter shall conform to the standards as set out in this section. 
(b)  All plans shall be drawn to a scale of one inch equals 100 feet, unless the planning director, or his designee, determines that a different scale is sufficient or necessary for proper review of the proposal. 
(c)  For all multifamily residential and all nonresidential development proposals, the trimline sheet size shall be 24 inches by 36 inches. A one-half-inch margin shall be provided on all sides, except for the left binding side, where a two-inch margin shall be provided if multiple sheets are used. 
(d)  If multiple sheets are used, the sheet number and total number of sheets must be clearly indicated on each. 
(e)  The front cover sheet of each plan shall include: 
(1)  A general vicinity or location map drawn to scale showing the position of the proposed development in the section, township and range, together with the principal roads, city limits, and any other pertinent orientation information. 
(2)  A complete legal description of the property. 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the property. Where a corporation or company is the owner of the property, the name and address of the president and secretary of the entity shall be shown. 
(4)  The name, business address and telephone number of those individuals responsible for the preparation of the drawings. 
(f)  Each sheet shall contain a title block with the name of the development, stated and graphic scale, a north arrow and date. 
(g)  The plan shall show the boundaries of the property with a metes and bounds description referenced to a section, township and range and tied to a section or quarter section or subdivision name and lot numbers. 
(h)  The area of the property shown in square feet and/or acres. 
(i)  The applicant shall submit four copies of the proposed plan. 
(j)  Minor developments may submit required information textually, graphically or on a map, plan, aerial photograph, or by other means, whichever most clearly conveys the required information. It is the responsibility of the developer (applicant) to submit sufficient information in a form that allows ready determination of whether the requirements of this chapter have been met. 
(k)  Unless otherwise noted, plans for all major developments and all minor multifamily residential or nonresidential projects shall contain: 
(1)  The location of existing property or right-of-way lines, both for private and public property, streets, sidewalks, airports, railroads, buildings, transmission lines, sewers, bridges, culverts, drainpipes, water mains, fire hydrants, and any other public or private easements. 
(2)  Any land rendered unusable for development purposes by deed restrictions or other legally enforceable covenants or limitations. 
(3)  All watercourses, water bodies, floodplains, wetlands, important natural features, wildlife areas, soil types and vegetative cover on or adjacent to the site. 
(4)  The location of environmentally sensitive lands designated pursuant to article XI of this chapter, if any. 
(5)  Existing land use, the zoning district, and the subject site as depicted on the future land use maps. 
(6)  The location and intensity or density of the proposed development. 
(7)  A general parking and circulation plan. 
(8)  Points of ingress and egress and any planned public or private roads, rights-of-way, pedestrian ways, bicycle paths or transportation facilities. 
(9)  The existing and proposed stormwater management systems on the site and proposed linkage, if any, with existing or planned public stormwater management systems. 
(10)  Proposed location and sizing of potable water and wastewater facilities to serve the proposed development. 
(11)  Proposed open space areas on the development site and types of activities proposed to be permitted on such open space areas. 
(12)  Lands to be dedicated or transferred to a public or private entity and the purposes for which the lands will be held and used. 
(13)  A description of how the plan mitigates or avoids potential conflicts between land uses. 
(14)  Architectural elevations of all buildings sufficient to convey the basic architectural intent of the proposed improvements. 
(15)  A soils map of the site, if required. 
(16)  A recent aerial photograph encompassing the project area and identifying the project area and total land areas. The scale shall be no smaller than one inch equals 800 feet. 
(17)  A map of vegetative cover including the location and identity, by common name, of all protected trees. 
(18)  A topographic map of the site clearly showing the location, identification and elevation of benchmarks, including at least one benchmark for each major water control structure. 
(19)  A map showing the locations of any soil borings or percolation tests as may be required by this chapter. 
(20)  The location of any underground or overhead utilities, culverts and drains on the property and within 100 feet of the proposed development boundary. 
(21)  The 100-year flood elevation boundaries. 
(22)  Area and percentage of total site to be covered by impervious surfaces. 
(23)  Grading plans specifically including perimeter grading. 
(24)  Construction phase lines. 
(25)  Building plans showing the location, dimensions, gross floor area and proposed use of buildings. 
(26)  Building setback distances from property lines, abutting rights-of-way and all adjacent buildings and structures. 
(27)  Minimum floor elevations of buildings within the 100-year floodplain, if any. 
(28)  The location, dimensions, type, composition and intended use of all ancillary structures. 
(29)  The location and specifications of any proposed garbage dumpsters. 
(30)  Cross sections and specifications of all proposed pavement. 
(31)  Typical and special roadway and drain sections and summaries of quantities. 
(32)  Information sufficient to determine compliance with the landscape and tree protection regulations of this chapter. (See article XII of this chapter.) 
(33)  The location, accompanied by all necessary drawings, construction plans, wiring plans, etc., of all proposed signs. 
(34)  The proposed number, minimum area and location of lots, if the development involves a subdivision of land. 
(35)  All lots shall be numbered either by progressive numbers or in blocks progressively numbered or lettered except that blocks in numbered additions bearing the same name may be numbered consecutively throughout several additions. 
(36)  All interior excluded parcels shall be indicated and labeled accordingly. 
(37)  All contiguous property shall be identified by development title, plat book and page, or if the land is unplatted it shall be so designated. 
(38)  Total number and type of residential units categorized according to number of bedrooms. The total number of residential units per gross acre shall be given. 
(39)  Location of onsite wells, if any, and wells within 200 feet of any property line, if any. 
(40)  Restrictions pertaining to the type and use of existing or proposed improvements, waterways, open spaces, buffer strips and the like shall require the establishment of restrictive covenants and such covenants shall be submitted with the final development plan for recordation. 
(41)  If the development includes private streets, an ownership and maintenance association document shall be submitted with the final development plan and the dedication contained on the development plan shall clearly indicate the roads and maintenance responsibility to the association without recourse to the city or any other public agency. 
(42)  If the development is to be phased for any reason, a master plan for the entire project shall be submitted with the development plan for the first phase or phases for which approval is sought. In addition, a schedule indicating approximate development phasing, including the sequence for each phase, shall be included. 
(43)  The manner in which historic and archaeological sites on or near the site will be protected. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-34. - Platting; subdivision or resubdivision. 
(a)  Generally. Where proposed minor or major development includes the subdivision or resubdivision of land, final approval of such subdivision or resubdivision shall be made by the city council in accordance with the regulations contained in this chapter and applicable state statutes. (See article XXI of this chapter.) 
(b)  Minor replats. Where development involves a minor replat as defined in article III, the city may issue a construction permit without requiring an application review process and a final development order. Developers shall be required to record the minor replat in the official county records at no expense to the city and provide three copies to the city for recording on appropriate maps and documents. Prior to approval of a minor replat by the planning director, or his designee, the following standards shall be met: 
(1)  Each proposed lot must conform to the requirements of this chapter and adopted ordinances of the city. 
(2)  If any lot abuts a street right-of-way that does not conform to the design specifications provided in this chapter, the owner may be required to dedicate one-half the right-of-way width necessary to meet the minimum design requirements. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-35. - Guarantees and sureties. 
(a)  Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to all proposed developments in the city, including private road subdivisions. Nothing in this section shall be construed as relieving the developer or applicant of any requirement relating to concurrency or maintenance of level of service as may be required by this chapter or the comprehensive plan. This section does not modify existing agreements between a developer and the city for subdivisions platted and final development orders granted prior to the effective date of this chapter. 
(b)  Improvements, agreements required. The approval of any development plan shall be subject to the developer providing assurance that all required improvements, including, but not limited to, storm drainage facilities, streets and highways, water and sewer lines, parking facilities, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, markers, monuments, open space and recreation facilities, shall be satisfactorily constructed according to the approved development plan. The following information shall be provided: 
(1)  Agreement that all improvements, whether required by this chapter or constructed at the developer's option, shall be constructed in accordance with the standards and provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  The term of the agreement indicating that all required improvements shall be satisfactorily constructed within the period stipulated. The term shall not exceed five years from the recording of the plat or 30 percent occupancy of the development, whichever comes first. 
(3)  The projected total cost for each improvement. Cost for construction shall be determined by: 
a.  An estimate prepared and provided by the applicant's engineer; or 
b.  A copy of the executed construction contract. 
(4)  Specification of the public improvements to be made and dedicated together with the timetable for making improvements. 
(5)  Agreement that, upon failure of the applicant to make required improvements (or to cause them to be made) according to the schedule for making such improvements, the city shall utilize the security provided in connection with the agreement. 
(6)  Provision of the amount and type of security provided to insure performance. 
(7)  Provisions that the amount of the security may be reduced periodically as construction proceeds and improvements are made. 
(c)  Amount and type of security. 
(1)  The planning director, or his designee, shall be responsible for determining the adequacy of the security proposed to be provided by the developer. 
(2)  Security requirements may be met but are not limited to the following: 
a.  Cash in the form of cashier's check or certified check; 
b.  Provision of an interest-bearing certificate of deposit in honor of the city with interest payable to the city; or 
c.  Irrevocable letter of credit. 
(3)  The amount of security shall be 120 percent of the total construction costs for the required developer-installed improvements (public and private). The amount of security may be reduced commensurate with the completion and final acceptance of required improvements. In no case, however, shall the amount of the security be less than 120 percent of the cost of completing the remaining required improvements. 
(d)  Completion of improvements. 
(1)  When improvements are completed, final inspection shall be conducted and corrections, if any, shall be completed before final acceptance by the city. The recommendation for final acceptance shall be made upon receipt of a certification of project completion by the city engineer or code inspector and one copy of all test results, if any. 
(2)  As required improvements are completed and accepted, the developer may apply for release of all or a portion of the security consistent with the requirements in subsection (c)(3) above. 
(e)  Maintenance of improvements. 
(1)  A maintenance agreement and security shall be provided to assure the city that all required improvements shall be maintained by the developer according to the requirements of this chapter relating to roads, streets, stormwater drainage, open space and recreation areas. 
a.  The period of maintenance shall be for a period of 18 months. 
b.  The maintenance period shall begin with the acceptance by the city of construction of the improvements. 
c.  The security shall be in an amount equal to 15 percent of the construction cost of the improvements and shall be in effect for a period of not less than 24 months. Subsection (c) of this section shall apply. 
(2)  Whenever proposed development provides for the creation of facilities or improvements which are not proposed for dedication to the city, a legal entity shall be created to be responsible for the ownership and maintenance of such facilities and/or improvements. 
a.  When the proposed development is to be organized as a condominium under the provisions of F.S. ch. 718, common facilities and property shall be conveyed to the condominium association pursuant to that law. 
b.  When no condominium is to be organized, an owner's association shall be created, and all common facilities and properties shall be conveyed to that association. 
c.  No development order shall be issued for a development for which an owner's association is required until the association is established and proof thereof filed with the planning director. 
(3)  An organization established for the purpose of owning and maintaining common facilities not proposed for dedication to the city shall be created by covenants running with the land. Such covenant shall be included with the final plat. Such organization shall not be dissolved nor shall it dispose of any common facilities or open space by sale or otherwise without first offering to dedicate the same to the city. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 1336, § 2, 6-25-07) 
Sec. 102-36. - Board of adjustment. 
(a)  A board of adjustment is hereby established. The word "board" when used in this section shall be construed to mean the board of adjustment. The appointment, organization, jurisdiction, duties, meetings and procedures of this board shall be as set out in this section. 
(b)  The board of adjustment shall consist of five members who shall be residents of the city. The first three members appointed shall be for a term of three years and the last two appointed for a term of two years. Thereafter, all terms shall be for two years. Each councilman shall recommend one appointment and the appointments shall be made by the council as a whole. If for any reason any member of the board becomes unable to serve, the council can name a replacement for the member. 
(c)  The board once appointed shall elect one of its members as chairman. The administrative services department staff shall serve as secretary to the board. The secretary shall keep minutes of all meetings of the board. 
(d)  The board of adjustment shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of any zoning ordinance. 
(2)  To hear and decide such special exceptions as are specifically authorized under the terms of any zoning ordinance; to decide such questions as are involved in the determination of when special exceptions should be granted; and to grant special exceptions with appropriate conditions and safeguards; or to deny special exceptions when not both specifically authorized and in harmony with the purpose and intent of any zoning ordinance. 
(3)  In granting any special exception, the board of adjustment shall find that such grant will not adversely affect the public interest. 
(4)  In granting any special exception, the board of adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with any zoning ordinance. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the special exception is granted by the board of adjustment shall be deemed a violation of the zoning ordinance. 
(5)  The board of adjustment may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the special exception is required shall be begun or completed or both. 
(6)  To grant upon appeal such variance from the terms of any zoning ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest when owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of such ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship (note: hardship relates to the land, not to the user of the land). In order to grant any variance from the terms of the conditions, the board of adjustment must find: 
a.  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same zoning district. 
b.  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant. 
c.  That granting the variance requested would not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by any zoning ordinance to other lands, buildings, or structures in the same zoning district. 
d.  That literal interpretation of the provisions of any zoning ordinance would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same zoning district under the terms of any zoning ordinance and would work unnecessary and undue hardship on the applicant (note: hardship relates to the land, not to the user of the land). 
e.  That the variance granted would be the minimum variance that would make possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or structure. 
f.  That the grant of the variance would be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of any zoning ordinance and that such variance would not be injurious to the area involved or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
(7)  In granting any variance, the board of adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with any zoning ordinance. Violation of such conditions, and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of the zoning ordinance. 
(8)  The board of adjustment may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be begun or completed or both. 
(9)  Under no circumstances, except as permitted above, shall the board of adjustment grant relief to permit a condition or use not generally or by special exception permitted in the zoning district involved or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of the ordinance in the zoning district. No nonconforming condition or use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same zoning districts shall be considered grounds for the granting of a variance. 
(e)  It shall be the responsibility of the applicant for special exceptions or variances to ordinances to demonstrate and each application shall contain statements of fact establishing the criteria prescribed herein above, as applicable. Each request for special exception or variance, and each decision appealed, shall be the subject matter of a separate application. 
(f)  The board of adjustment shall make objective findings of fact and report in its minutes the findings of fact relied upon in concluding whether or not the criteria described herein above, as applicable, are met, and whether or not the request is consistent with the city's comprehensive plan, and no issuance of any special exception or variance to any city ordinance shall issue unless the applicable criteria and plan compliance are met. 
(g)  In exercising its powers, the board of adjustment may, upon appeal, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of any zoning ordinance, and may make any necessary order, requirements, decision, or determination, and to that end shall have all the powers of the office from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of a majority of all the members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of any such administrative official or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which the board is required to pass under any such ordinance. 
(h)  Appeals to the board of adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, board, or bureau of the city affected by any decision of an administrative official under any zoning ordinance. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days after rendition of the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the board of adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The appeal shall be in the form prescribed by the rules applicable to the board. The administrative official from whom the appeal is taken shall, upon notification of the filing of the appeal, forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment all the documents, plans, papers, or other materials constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(i)  An appeal to the board of adjustment stays all work on the premises and all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the official from whom the appeal was taken shall certify to the board of adjustment that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. 
(j)  The board shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing and give due notice to the parties. Before making any finding in a specific case, the board shall hold a public hearing, after having advertised the hearing once at least ten days prior to the hearing in a newspaper published within the city, at which hearing the public shall be given an opportunity to be heard before the board makes a finding. 
(k)  Any person aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment may apply to the circuit court for Okaloosa County for judicial relief within 30 days after rendition of the decision by the board. Review in the circuit court shall be by petition for a writ of certiorari, which shall be governed by applicable state rules of court. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-36.1. - Board of adjustment rules of procedure. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations and their derivations shall have the following meaning herein given. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning, or for those so included, the meaning found in section 1-2 of the City Code. 
(1)  Applicant means the person(s) filing the application, the representative of the person(s) filing the application, or the attorney representing the person(s) filing the application. 
(2)  Application means the application form and supporting documents and, where the context so requires, the variance requested by the application, or special exception required by the application, or the administrative action or interpretation being reviewed by the application. 
(3)  Board means the Board of Adjustment of the City of Crestview. 
(4)  Chairman means the Chairman of the Board of Adjustment of the City of Crestview. 
(5)  Code means the Codified Ordinances of the City of Crestview, Florida, unless otherwise designated. 
(6)  Legal advisor means the city attorney or other attorney appointed by the city council to serve in the capacity of legal advisor to the Board of Adjustment of the City of Crestview. 
(7)  Site plan means a drawing, to scale, which accurately depicts the property and proposed improvements. 
(8)  Survey means a sketch or survey prepared by a registered land surveyor and certified within the last 90 days prior to the date of application. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  Each request for a variance, special exception, or appeal of an administrative decision as allowed by section 102-36(d) of the Code shall be originated by the filing of an application with the planning director or his or her designee. 
(2)  The form of the application shall be approved by the legal advisor and the board. 
(3)  The application must be supported by the following: 
a.  Letter of request from the applicant which contains the request(s) for variance(s), special exception(s), or appeal(s) of an administrative decision. 
b.  Statements of fact setting out compliance with the criteria established by section 102-36(d)(6) of the Code when required. 
c.  Proof by the applicant of ownership or interest in the land for which the request is sought, if applicable. 
d.  A complete legal description of the parcel of land to which the request is sought. 
e.  A site plan, to scale, showing the proposed improvement or location of the specific request. The site plan shall contain an affidavit that the plan accurately depicts the property, improvements and proposed improvements. The applicant may provide a current survey (not older than 90 days) which provides the same information, in lieu of a site plan. 
f.  Any other documents or requirements which are mandated by the Code or deemed necessary by staff in reference to the specific request made. By way of example and not of limitation, such requirements might be a drawing of the structure of a sign as required by the sign ordinance or, in the case of a swimming pool, a drawing of the location of the pump and filter equipment. 
(4)  The planning director, or his or her designee, shall have the discretion to refuse to accept an application which does not include support documents required by this Code. 
(5)  The application and any supporting materials must demonstrate the need and requirements of section 102-36(d)(2) through (9) of the Code as applicable. Failure to provide complete information will permit the board to continue or dismiss, without prejudice, any application. 
(c)  City staff responsibilities. 
(1)  The city staff, hereinafter referred to as "the Administrative Services Department," has the responsibility for the everyday business of the city, and as regards matters that may come before the board, to ensure compliance with the ordinances of the city. 
(2)  Staff shall provide assistance to the applicant of a technical nature regarding the requirements of the Code and identification of elements of plan noncompliance with the Code. 
(3)  Staff must review all applications for technical completeness and report its opinion to the board. 
(4)  Staff, as designated by the planning director, must review the site plan or survey attached to the application and provide a statement that staff has viewed the property and finds that the site plan accurately depicts the property, to the best of the staff's knowledge. It is understood that staff should not act as a surveyor or in any way guarantee the site plan(s) attached to the application, but should provide the board with information that the site plan(s) does or does not accurately depict the property for the purposes of the specific request and disposition by the board. 
(d)  Public hearings generally. 
(1)  Pursuant to section 102-36(j) of the Code, the board shall fix a reasonable time for hearing the specific request. 
(2)  The public hearing on any application shall be conducted in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order. However, as the hearings held by the board are quasi-judicial, certain additional rules and procedures are proper. These rules are to guarantee that the applicant, the city, and any interested party have due process. In addition, the rules will provide a forum for the hearing which is easy to follow, provides evidence in a logical progression, and provides the board an opportunity to dispose of applications in a reasonable time. 
(3)  The agenda for each regular meeting shall be followed as prepared by the planning director or his or her designee. The chairman may, in the exercise of his or her discretion, or upon majority vote of the board, alter the agenda to dispose of items in a prompt and efficient manner. The chairman may in the exercise of his or her discretion, or upon a consensus of the board, also request, but may not compel, an applicant to postpone, continue or recess a matter to a later time or date. The board may, for good cause, continue a matter to a later time or date. 
(4)  The board secretary is responsible to keep minutes of the public hearings and meetings of the board. These minutes shall include, but are not limited to: the evidence presented by the applicant, the staff and members of the public; deliberation of the board, and the decision of the board. The minutes are not verbatim transcripts of the proceedings. 
(5)  The applicant is responsible for ensuring that a verbatim record of the proceeding is made if required for his or her purposes. 
(e)  Order of proceeding with public hearing. 
(1)  The order of proceeding with the public hearing as specified hereinafter on an application before the board shall be followed, but may be varied from, in the exercise of discretion of the chairman or by majority vote of the board. 
(2)  The chairman, or his or her designee, shall read into the record the notice of the public hearing, unless waived in whole or in part by the interested parties present, and shall examine the proof of publication of the notice and announce that the notice was properly published, indicating the dates published and the newspaper in which such notice occurred. 
(3)  The chairman, or his or her designee, shall read into the record the application, any additional information which the applicant has attached to the application, and shall announce the attachment of any supporting documents with a brief description of each. 
(4)  The chairman, or his or her designee, shall then read into the record any deficiencies which the staff has determined exist in the application. 
a.  If the deficiencies have been cured by the applicant, such should be noted on the record and the public hearing should proceed. 
b.  If the deficiencies have not been cured, and the applicant is unable to cure them within the time of publication of the notice of public hearing, the chairman may ask if the applicant wishes to continue, postpone or recess the public hearing. 
c.  If the deficiencies are a result of the board or staff, the board may continue, postpone, or recess the matter for a reasonable time sufficient to cure the deficiencies. 
d.  If, in the opinion of the legal advisor, the deficiencies are such that no action on the application would cure the deficiencies, then the board may deny the request, after giving the applicant an opportunity to be heard on curing the deficiencies, if applicable. 
(5)  The chairman shall then read into the record any and all comments of the staff. 
(6)  The chairman shall then call upon the applicant. The applicant shall then be given an opportunity to make a statement and present any additional testimony, information and supporting documents. 
(7)  The chairman shall then call upon the staff. Staff shall then be given an opportunity to make a statement and present any additional testimony, information and documents. 
(8)  The chairman shall then call upon the public for any comments, testimony, information and documents in support of granting the application. 
(9)  The chairman shall then call upon the public for any comments, testimony, information and documents against granting the application. 
(10)  The chairman shall then call upon the applicant for any rebuttal. 
(11)  The chairman shall then call upon the staff for any rebuttal. 
(12)  The chairman shall then call upon the public for any rebuttal. 
(f)  Board deliberation. 
(1)  The board shall deliberate upon the application and testimony and other evidence of the applicant, staff and members of the public. 
(2)  The board during deliberation may call upon the applicant, staff or members of the public to answer questions which the board may have regarding the application. 
(3)  The board may postpone, continue or recess deliberation on the application, until a time when the board believes that the matter may be disposed of in a prompt fashion. Such a case may occur when the staff, legal advisor or the applicant are unable to answer questions from the board and require additional time to provide information. 
(4)  Deliberation may continue so long as the board has questions of the applicant, staff or members of the public. 
(5)  Deliberation may be ended in the same manner as for closing debate, which the exception of only a majority vote needed or upon announcement by the chairman without objection from a member of the board. 
(g)  Evidence at the hearing. 
(1)  Variance. The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to meet the criteria required in section 102-36(d)(6) of the Code for the granting of a variance. 
(2)  Special exception. The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to establish evidence to support the granting of a special exception. Once evidence is established supporting the granting of the special exception, the burden of proof shifts to the staff to demonstrate by competent substantial evidence that the special exception requested is adverse to the public interest. 
(3)  Administrative decision appeal. The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to establish by a preponderance of the evidence, an error when such applicant is appealing an administrative decision. 
(4)  Testimony commonly is not under oath; however, by filing the application, preparing the comments or participating in the public hearing, the applicant, staff and members of the public certify the testimony or evidence which they given or proffer is true and correct to the best of their knowledge and belief. However, the chairman, in the exercise of his or her discretion, or on a majority vote of the board, reserves the right to swear in any witness. 
(5)  Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but fundamental due process shall be observed and govern the proceedings. 
(6)  The members of the board, applicant, staff or public shall be free to challenge the testimony or evidence of any party presenting the same. The board shall be free to disregard testimony or evidence that it feels is without merit. 
(7)  All evidence of a type commonly relied upon by a reasonable, prudent person in the conduct of his affairs shall be admissible, whether or not such evidence would be admissible in a trial in the courts of this state. 
(8)  Irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded by the chairman. 
(9)  Any member of the board may question any person presenting evidence or testimony to the board. 
(10)  All questions or challenges to evidence shall be presented to the chairman. The chairman may, in the exercise of his discretion, allow questions directly to the person whose testimony or evidence is being challenged. 
(11)  Any ruling by the chairman may be challenged and overturned by a majority vote of the board. 
(h)  Motion for decision. 
(1)  After deliberation on the application is closed, a motion may be made deciding the action to be taken on the application. 
(2)  The motion shall state the objective findings of fact upon which the board bases its decision. 
(3)  The motion shall briefly state what evidence was relied upon in making the findings of fact. 
(4)  The board may consult with the legal advisor to determine if any additional requirements must be met in order to take action on the application. 
(5)  The motion may contain other factors which the board considered in making its decision, such as, but not limited to: commencing construction without a permit, defective plans, etc. 
(6)  The motion may also contain safeguards or conditions which are required to assure conformity with the ordinances and protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(7)  The motion may also contain time frames within which any activity, pursuant to a variance or special exception, are commenced and completed. 
(8)  The motion may also make the granting of the application contingent upon the applicant complying with certain conditions and safeguards. 
(i)  When the board passes a motion granting or denying the application, the result pronounces the order of the board, for the purposes of granting or denying the relief requested and commences the time for filing an appeal to such order. 
(j)  When the board passes a motion denying the application, or imposing conditions unacceptable to the applicant, the chairman or his designee should advise the applicant of the appeal rights provided in section 102-36(k) of the Code. 
(k)  After the board has passed a motion which either grants or denies the application with or without conditions, and no appeal has been made, the planning secretary shall compile the motion into written form and present the order to the chairman for execution. 
(l)  The board shall on an as need basis, at a time designated by the planning director in the city hall. If there is no business to come before the board, the board shall not meet. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-37. - Zoning board. 
(a)  The zoning board is also known as the planning board and local planning agency and shall consider all requests for changing of zoning of parcels of property within the city. 
(b)  Before any request for a zoning change is considered, a request must be submitted to the administrative services department in writing by the party seeking the change. 
(c)  Before making any recommendation to the council on whether a zoning change should be approved, the zoning board shall hold a public hearing, after having advertised the hearing once at least ten days prior to the hearing in a newspaper published within the city, at which hearing the public shall be given an opportunity to be heard before the zoning board makes a finding and recommendation. 
(d)  After the zoning board has held the public hearing called for in this section and made a finding as to whether or not the zoning change requested should be granted, the zoning board shall either recommend approval or denial of the zoning change to the council in writing. The council shall then have final approval or denial of the requested zoning change. 
(e)  Once a zoning change is approved by the city council, it may not become effective until the comprehensive plan amendment is approved unless the zoning change is authorized within the land use category pursuant to Chapter 163, F.S. All zoning changes shall be confirmed by ordinance as provided for in Section 166.041, F.S. 
(f)  The zoning board shall meet on an as needed basis at a designated time in the City Hall to consider requests for zoning changes. If there are no requests, the zoning board shall not be required to so meet. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-38. - Appeals. 
(a)  When it is alleged that there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by any administrative official, or the city local planning agency (LPA) in the enforcement of any requirement of this chapter, the Code of Ordinances or land use regulations now existing or to be promulgated in the future by the city, the issue in dispute shall be taken before the board of adjustment. Such issue may include but is not limited to a finding of concurrency deficiency, or refusal on the part of the city to issue a final development order. 
(b)  An appeal to the board of adjustment by any citizen with standing in the city must be filed in writing with the Administrative Services Department within 20 calendar days of rendition of the decision in question, and the reasons for such appeal shall be set forth therein. The planning director shall arrange for an appeal hearing before the board of adjustment, and the planning director shall notify the appellant in writing of the date, time and place of the hearing. 
(c)  The appellant shall have the burden of affirmatively demonstrating that the decision of the official in question was in error. The administrative officials involved, or chairman of the local planning agency, shall have the opportunity to present information and argument to support their decision. 
(d)  The board of adjustment shall base its decision on the requirements of the city's comprehensive plan and this chapter and shall make a final decision based upon its usual voting procedures. The decision shall be issued in writing stating the reasoning involved, and it shall be rendered within 60 days of the close of the hearing by the board of adjustment. No further administrative appeal is available beyond this stage. The appellant, however, retains the right of appeal through the judicial system as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-39. - Taking of property-Exhaustion of administrative remedy. 
    Any person alleging a particular public action taken by any council, agency, board or commission of the city involving any land use regulation as applied to the particular property, constituting a temporary or permanent taking of private property without just compensation or an abrogation of vested right, may not pursue such a claim in court or before a quasijudicial body unless the person has first exhausted the administrative remedies provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-40. - Same-Establishment of legal requisites. 
(a)  No public action by any council, agency, board or commission of the city involving any land use regulation shall be construed or applied to constitute a temporary or permanent taking of private property without just compensation or the abrogation of vested rights. 
(b)  It shall be the duty and responsibility of the applicant alleging a temporary or permanent taking of private property without just compensation or an abrogation of vested rights to make application for review and therein affirmatively demonstrate the legal requisites of a taking or abrogation of vested rights. 
(1)  To demonstrate a temporary or permanent taking of private property without just compensation, the burden shall be on the applicant to demonstrate that: 
a.  The public action taken by any council, agency, board or commission of the city involving any land use regulation denies the applicant all beneficial use of the property; and 
b.  No variance, alternative uses or other forms of relief are available which could, if approved, afford the applicant a beneficial use of the property. 
(2)  To demonstrate the abrogation of vested rights, the applicant shall demonstrate that: 
a.  The applicant has relied in good faith upon some act or commission of the city; and 
b.  The applicant has made such a substantial change in position or incurred such extensive obligations and expenses to his detriment that it would be highly inequitable to deny relief. 
(c)  Mere diminution in property value shall not constitute a temporary or permanent taking of private property without just compensation or an abrogation of vested rights. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-41. - Same-Documentation of claim. 
(a)  Any applicant alleging that a particular public action taken by any council, agency, board or commission of the city involving any land use regulation would constitute a temporary or permanent taking of private property without just compensation or an abrogation of vested rights must: 
(1)  File a notice of invoking administrative remedy with the city's staff review committee on a form prescribed by such committee within 15 days of the public action taken. Failure to file the notice of invoking administrative remedy within the time period specified in this section shall constitute an irrevocable waiver of claim. 
(2)  Submit a sworn statement to the city's staff review committee setting forth the facts upon which the claim is based. 
a.  The sworn statement shall be accompanied by copies of any contracts, letters, appraisals, reports, or any other relevant documents, items or things upon which the applicant's claim is based. 
b.  The sworn statement shall also be accompanied by a list of the names and addresses of any witnesses which the applicant shall present in support of the claim and a summary of the testimony of each witness. 
c.  The sworn statement shall be submitted within 60 days of the filing of the notice of invoking administrative remedy. 
d.  Failure to file the sworn statement within the time period specified in this section shall constitute an irrevocable waiver of claim. 
(b)  Claims of a temporary or permanent taking of private property without just compensation or abrogation of vested rights are limited solely to extreme circumstances rising to the level of a potential denial of rights under the constitutions of the United States and the State of Florida. 
(c)  The procedure provided in this article for demonstrating such a taking or abrogation of vested rights is not intended to be utilized routinely or frivolously, but only in the extreme circumstance described in this section. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-42. - Same-Standards to be utilized by applicant or applicant's attorney. 
(a)  The applicant or the attorney for the applicant shall exercise due diligence in the filing and argument of any sworn statement, notice of invoking administrative remedy or other claim for a temporary or permanent taking of private property without just compensation or abrogation of vested rights. 
(b)  The signature of the applicant or the attorney for the applicant upon any document in connection with a claim of a temporary or permanent taking of private property without just compensation or abrogation of vested rights shall constitute a certificate that the person signing has read the document and that to the best of his knowledge it is supported by good grounds and that it has not been presented solely for delay. 
(c)  The applicant and the attorney for the applicant shall have a continuing obligation throughout the proceedings to correct any statement or representation found to have been incorrect when made or which becomes incorrect by virtue of changed circumstances. 
(d)  If a claim of a temporary or permanent taking of private property without just compensation is based upon facts that the applicant or the attorney for the applicant knew or should have known were not true, or frivolous, or filed solely for the purpose of delay, the city shall make such a finding and may pursue any remedy or impose any penalty provided by law or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-43. - Same-Staff review committee. 
(a)  The city shall establish a staff review committee and its members shall include the city clerk, the public services director, and the administrative assistant to the city council. The city attorney shall serve as legal advisor to the committee. 
(b)  It shall be the duty and responsibility of the city's staff review committee to review all sworn statements timely filed pursuant to this chapter and to determine whether the evidence submitted establishes a temporary or permanent taking of private property without just compensation or an abrogation of vested rights. The committee shall have the authority, at any time, to request additional information from the applicant. 
(c)  If the city's staff review committee finds the evidence submitted establishes that the public action taken results in a temporary or permanent taking of private property without just compensation or an abrogation of vested rights, it shall modify or reverse the action. Otherwise, the committee shall affirm the action. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-44. - Same-Administrative appeal. 
(a)  Within 14 days of the city's staff review committee making its findings, the applicant may appeal the findings to the city council. 
(b)  Upon a timely appeal, the city council shall review and consider all relevant evidence submitted to the committee and determine whether the evidence submitted establishes a temporary or permanent taking of private property without just compensation or an abrogation of vested rights. 
(c)  If the city council finds the evidence submitted to the city's staff review committee establishes that the public action taken results in a temporary or permanent taking of private property without just compensation or an abrogation of vested rights, it shall modify or reverse the findings of the committee. Otherwise, the city council shall affirm the findings. 
(d)  Any action taken by the city council under this section shall be deemed final in any court or quasijudicial proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Secs. 102-45-102-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 102-51. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abut means to physically touch or border upon, or to share a common property line. 
    Accessory use means a use of land or structure or portion thereof customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or structure and located on the same parcel. 
    Adjacent to a protected environmentally sensitive area means any location within 500 feet of the boundary of any protected environmentally sensitive area, whether the location is on or off the development site. 
    Adult congregate living facility means a type of residential care facility, defined in F.S. ch. 400. 
    Adverse effects means any modifications, alterations, or effects on waters, associated wetlands, or shorelands, including their quality, quantity, hydrology, surface area, species composition, or usefulness for human or natural uses, which are or may potentially be harmful or injurious to human health, welfare, safety or property, or to biological productivity, diversity, or stability, or which unreasonably interfere with the reasonable use of property, including outdoor recreation. The term includes secondary and cumulative as well as direct impacts. 
    Adversely affected person means any person who is suffering or will suffer an adverse effect to an interest protected or furthered by the local government comprehensive plan, including but not limited to: interests related to health and safety; police and fire protection services; densities or intensities of development; transportation facilities; recreational facilities, equipment, or services; and environmental or natural resources. The alleged adverse effect may be shared in common with other members of the community at large, but must exceed in degree the general interest in community good shared by all persons. 
    Agricultural activity means any farming and forestry operation affecting land or waters such as site preparation, clearing, fencing, contouring, soil preparation, plowing, planting, harvesting, construction of access roads, extraction of stumps and submerged logs, and placement of bridges and culverts. 
    Alter or alteration means work done on a stormwater management system other than that necessary to maintain the system's original design and function. 
    Appurtenant structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured under the federal flood insurance program and where the use is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or VO zone on the flood insurance rate map with base flood depths from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land in a floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
    Associated wetlands means any wetland that is adjacent or contiguous to waters, or which has a direct hydrologic connection to waters. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Basement means that portion of a building having its floor below ground level on all sides. 
    Beneficial functions of a protected environmentally sensitive area means those functions, described in the conservation element of the comprehensive plan, that justify designating an area as environmentally sensitive. 
    Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation system. 
    Building means a structure created to shelter any form of human activity. This may refer to a house, barn, garage, church, hotel, or similar structure. Buildings may refer to a historically or architecturally related complex, such as a courthouse and jail, or a house and barn. Parking lots and garages are hereby deemed to be "buildings." 
    Clearing means the removal of trees and brush from the land, not including the ordinary mowing of grass. 
    Coastal high-hazard area means all areas designated on a flood insurance rate map as V1-30, VE or V. 
    Concurrency means a condition where specified facilities and services have or will have the necessary capacity to meet the adopted level of service standard at the time of impact of the development project. 
    Cultural resource means a site, object, structure, building or district listed on the city's survey of cultural resources or in the historic preservation element of the city comprehensive plan or on the local register of historic places. 
    DBH means diameter at breast height. "Breast height" is defined to be 54 inches above the surface of the ground at the base of the plant or tree. In the case of a tree with multiple main stems, the diameter shall be the sum of the diameters of the stems. 
    Demolition means the tearing down or razing of 25 percent or more of a structure's external walls. 
    Density or gross density means the total number of dwelling units by the total site area, less the public right-of-way. 
    Detention means the collection and storage of surface water for subsequent gradual discharge. 
    Developer means any person, excluding the city and its agencies, who engages in or proposes to engage in a development activity either as the owner or as the agent of an owner of property. 
    Development or development activity means any of the following activities: 
(1)  Construction, clearing, filling, excavating, grading, paving, dredging, mining, drilling or otherwise significantly disturbing the soil of a site. 
(2)  Building, installing, enlarging, replacing or substantially restoring a structure, impervious surface, or water management system, and including the longterm storage of materials. 
(3)  Subdividing land into two or more parcels. 
(4)  A tree removal for which authorization is required under this chapter. 
(5)  Erection of a permanent sign unless expressly exempted by this chapter. 
(6)  Alteration of a historic property for which authorization is required under this chapter. 
(7)  Changing the use of a site so that the need for parking is increased. 
(8)  Construction, elimination or alteration of a driveway onto a public street. 
    Development of regional impact means development that impacts on infrastructure, concurrency, the environment or other considerations beyond the political jurisdiction in which development occurs. 
    Development order means any order issued after the effective date of this chapter granting, denying, or granting with conditions an application for approval of a development project or activity. A distinction is made between development order, which encompasses all orders and permits, and three distinct types of development orders: preliminary development order, final development order and development permit defined as follows: 
(1)  Preliminary development order means any preliminary approval issued after the effective date of this chapter which does not authorize actual construction, mining, or alterations to land and/or structures. A preliminary development order may authorize a change in the allowable use of land or a building, and may include conceptual and conditional approvals where a series of sequential approvals are required before action authorizes commencement of construction or land alteration. For purposes of this chapter preliminary development orders include future land use map amendments, comprehensive plan amendments which affect land use or development standards, preliminary development plan approval, and master plan approval. 
(2)  Final development order means, after the effective date of this chapter, the final authorization of a development project, the authorization which must be granted prior to issuance of a development permit as defined for purposes of this chapter. The final development order authorizes the project, whereas the development permit authorizes specific components of the project, such as building construction, parking lot installation, landscaping, and the like. For purposes of this chapter the final development plan approval is the final development order. 
(3)  Development permit means, for purposes of this chapter, that official city document which is issued after the effective date of this chapter which authorizes the commencement of construction or land alteration without need for further application and approval. Development permits include all types of construction permits. 
    Direct hydrologic connection means a surface water connection which, under normal hydrological conditions, occurs on an average of 30 or more consecutive days per year. In the absence of reliable hydrologic records, a continuum of wetlands may be used to establish a direct hydrologic connection. 
    District means a geographically definable area, urban or rural, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures, objects, or areas, which are united historically or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may be comprised of individual resources which are separated geographically but are linked by association or history. 
    Dripline means the outermost perimeter of the crown of a plant as projected vertically to the ground. 
    Dwelling unit means a single housing unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one housekeeping unit, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
    Existing means for purposes of the stormwater management provisions of this chapter, the average condition immediately before development or redevelopment commences. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from (1) the overflow of inland or tidal waters; (2) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means the map issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency showing floodprone areas. Drawn from United States Geological Survey maps; it does not provide flood elevations and is intended to be used only until the flood insurance rate map is produced by the Federal Emergency Management Agency showing both the area of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones within the city. 
    Floodplain means land which will be inundated by floods known to have occurred or reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur from the overflow of inland or tidal waters and the accumulation of runoff of surface waters from rainfall. 
    Floodway means the channel of a natural stream or river and portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the floodwater or flood flow of any natural stream or river. 
    Floor area ratio (FAR) means a method for determining intensity of land use. FAR is calculated by adding all authorized floor levels minus setback, landscape and parking requirements and then dividing this total by the gross site area. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking facility, loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding and ship repair, or processing seafood. The term does not include longterm storage or related manufacturing uses. 
    Gross density or density means the total number of dwelling units divided by the total site area, less public right-of-way. 
    Gross floor area means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building measured from the exterior face of exterior walls, or from the centerline of a wall separating two buildings, but not including interior parking spaces, loading space for motor vehicles, or any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than six feet. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Impervious surface means a surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water. It includes, but is not limited to, conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots and other similar structures. 
    Improvement means any manmade, immovable item which becomes part of, is placed upon, or is affixed to real estate. 
    Junkyard means premises or portions thereof used for the storage or sale of used and discarded materials, including but not limited to paper, rags, metal, building materials, appliances, household furnishings, machinery, vehicles, equipment, or parts thereof. The storage for a period of two or more months of two or more wrecked or partly dismantled motor vehicles, parts of dismantled motor vehicles, or the sale of parts thereof, not capable of or not intended to be restored to highway operating condition shall also constitute a junkyard. For the purposes of this chapter, such uses as automobile reclaiming businesses, automotive wrecking businesses, automotive salvage businesses and recycling centers shall be considered junkyards. 
    Lot means a designated parcel, tract or area of land established by plat, subdivision or as otherwise allowed by law. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest enclosed floor of a structure, including a basement, but not including the floor of an area enclosed only with insect screening or wood lattice as permitted by the flood damage prevention regulations in this chapter. 
    Maintenance means that action taken to restore or preserve the original design and function of any stormwater management system. 
    Major deviation means a deviation other than a minor deviation from a final development plan. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation, and connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed in use (other than for sale) on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer. 
    Manufactured housing means a structure having the following features or characteristics, which is: 
(1)  Mass-produced in a factory; 
(2)  Designed and constructed for transportation to a site for installation and use when connected to required utilities; 
(3)  Either an independent, individual building or a module for combination with other elements to form a building on the site. 
    Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this chapter, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
    Minor deviation means a deviation from a final development plan that falls within the following limits and that is necessary in light of technical or engineering considerations first discovered during actual development and not reasonably anticipated during the initial approval process: 
(1)  Alteration of the location of any road, walkway, landscaping or structure by not more than five feet. 
(2)  Reduction of the total amount of open space by not more than five percent, or reduction of the yard area or open space associated with any single structure by not more than five percent; provided that such reduction does not permit the required yard area or open space to be less than that required by this chapter. 
    Minor replat means the subdivision of a single lot or parcel of land into two lots or parcels, or the subdivision of a parcel into two or more lots solely for the purpose of increasing the area of two or more adjacent lots or parcels of land, where there is no roadway, drainage or other required improvements, and where the resultant lots comply with the standards of this chapter. 
    Multifamily dwelling means any residential structure containing two or more separate dwelling units. 
    Natural systems means systems which predominantly consist of or are used by those communities of plants, animals, bacteria and other flora and fauna which occur indigenously on the land, in the soil or in the water. 
    New construction means structures or substantial improvements for which the "start of construction" occurred on or after the effective date of this chapter, and any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a structure which is in compliance with these flood damage prevention regulations. 
    Object means a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical, or scientific value that may be, by nature of design, movable, yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
    Ordinary maintenance means work which does not require a construction permit and that is done to repair damage or to prevent deterioration or decay of a building or structure or part thereof as nearly as practicable to its condition prior to the damage, deterioration, or decay. 
    Original appearance means that appearance (except for color) which, to the satisfaction of the director (preservation planner), closely resembles the appearance of either (1) the feature on the building as it was originally built or was likely to have been built, or (2) the feature on the building as it presently exists so long as the present appearance is appropriate, in the opinion of the planning director, to the style and materials of the building. 
    Owner means a person who, or entity which, alone, jointly or severally with others, or in a representative capacity, including without limitation, an authorized agent, attorney or trustee, has legal or equitable title to any property in question, or a tenant, if the tenancy is chargeable under his lease for the maintenance of the property. 
    Parcel means a unit of land within legally established property lines. If, however, the property lines are such as to defeat the purposes of this chapter or lead to absurd results, a "parcel" may be as designated for a particular site by the planning director. 
    Person means any individual, group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity, including state and local governments and agencies. 
    Pollutant means any substance, contaminant, noise, or manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, or radiological integrity of air or water in quantities or at levels which are or may be potentially harmful or injurious to human health or welfare, animal or plant life, or property, or which unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property, including outdoor recreation. 
    Protected environmentally sensitive area means an environmentally sensitive area designated for protection in the conservation element of the city comprehensive plan. 
    Protected wellhead means those wellheads with a permitted capacity of 100,000 gpd or more. 
    Rate means volume per unit of time. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicular type portable structure without permanent foundation, which can be towed, hauled or driven, and primarily designed as temporary living accommodations for recreation, camping, and travel use and including, but not limited to, travel trailers, truck campers, camping trailers, and self-propelled motor homes. 
    Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be unobstructed in order to discharge the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot at any point. 
    Remove means to relocate, cut down, damage, poison, or in any other manner destroy or cause to be destroyed, a tree. 
    Retention means the collection and storage of runoff without subsequent discharge to surface waters. 
    Runoff coefficient means the ratio of the amount of rain which runs off a surface to that which falls on it, a factor from which runoff can be calculated. 
    Sand dunes means naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach. 
    Sediment means the mineral or organic particulate material that is in suspension or has settled in surface waters or groundwaters. 
    Significant adverse effect means any modification, alteration, or effect upon a protected environmentally sensitive area which measurably reduces the area's beneficial functions as delineated in the conservation element of the city comprehensive plan. 
    Single-family dwelling means a structure containing one dwelling unit, and not attached to any other dwelling unit by any means. A single-family unit may contain an accessory apartment pursuant to this chapter. 
    Site means generally, any tract, lot or parcel of land or combination of tracts, lots or parcels of land that are in one ownership, or in diverse ownership but contiguous, and which are to be developed as a single unit, subdivision, or project. 
    Site (archaeological) means the location of a significant event, activity, building, structure, or archeological resource where the significance of the location and any archeological remains outweighs the significance of any existing structures. 
    Start of construction means, for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. 97-348), and includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main building. For substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Stormwater means the flow of water which results from, and that occurs immediately following, a rainfall. 
    Stormwater management system means the system, or combination of systems, designed to treat stormwater, or collect, convey, channel, hold, inhibit, or divert the movement of stormwater on, through and from a site. 
    Stormwater runoff means that portion of the stormwater that flows from the land surface of a site either naturally, in manmade ditches, or in a closed conduit system. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally aboveground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other manmade facilities or infrastructures. 
    Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building (including electrical, gas, plumbing and heating/air conditioning), taking place during a two year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building. The market value of the building should be: 
(1)  The appraised value of the building prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
(2)  In the case of damage, the value of the building prior to the damage occurring. 
    This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage of the actual repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the code enforcement official, which have been caused for issuance of a citation or condemnation, and which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
    Surface water means water above the surface of the ground, whether or not flowing through definite channels, including the following: 
(1)  Any natural or artificial pond, lake, reservoir, or other area which ordinarily or intermittently contains water and which has a discernible shoreline; 
(2)  Any natural or artificial stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, street, roadway, swale or wash in which water flows in a definite direction, either continuously or intermittently, and which has a definite channel, bed or banks; or 
(3)  Any wetland. 
    Tree protection zone means a circular zone around each protected tree defined as follows: 
(1)  If the dripline is less than six feet from the trunk of the tree, the zone shall be that area within a radius of six feet around the tree. 
(2)  If the dripline is more than six feet from the trunk of the tree, but less than 20 feet, the zone shall be that area within a radius of the full dripline around the tree. 
(3)  If the dripline is 20 feet or more from the trunk of the tree, the zone shall be that area within a radius of 20 feet around the tree. 
    Vehicle use area means an area used for circulation, parking, and/or display of motorized vehicles, except junkyards or automobile salvage yards. 
    Water or waters means, but is not limited to, water on or beneath the surface of the ground or in the atmosphere, including natural or artificial watercourses, streams, rivers, lakes, ponds, or diffused surface water and water percolating, standing, or flowing beneath the surface of the ground. 
    Water body means any natural or artificial pond, lake, reservoir, or other area with a discernable shoreline which ordinarily or intermittently contains waters. 
    Watercourse means any natural or artificial channel, ditch, canal, stream, river, creek, waterway or wetland through which water flows in a definite direction, either continuously or intermittently, and which has a definite channel, bed, banks or other discernible boundary. 
    Water's edge and wetland's edge means the water's or wetland's edge shall be determined by whichever of the following indices yields the most landward extent of waters or wetlands: 
(1)  The boundary established by the average annual high-water mark; 
(2)  The landward boundary of hydric soils; or 
(3)  The landward boundary of wetland vegetation, based on the wetland vegetation index. 
    Wellhead protection area means a diameter of 200 feet around a well site where no other land use is permitted. 
    Wetland means land that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does or would support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. The term includes but is not limited to swamp hammocks, hardwood swamps, riverine cypress, cypress ponds, bayheads and bogs, wet prairies, freshwater marshes, tidal flats, salt marshes, mangrove swamps and marine meadows. 
    Zone of exclusion means all land within a 200-foot radius of an existing or designated protected wellhead. No development activities shall take place in the zone of exclusion. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Secs. 102-52-102-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC PARTICIPATION 

Sec. 102-61. - Public participation. 
(a)  The procedures in this article apply to consideration of all draft and final documents required for preparation of the comprehensive plan and its elements, the formal adoption process of the comprehensive plan, amendments to the comprehensive plan, preparation and adoption of the evaluation and appraisal report, rezonings, planned unit development (PUD) or planned mixed development district (PMDD) approvals, annexations, right-of-way vacations, variances, special exceptions and any other matters deemed appropriate by the city council. 
(b)  The terms "citizen participation" and "public participation" are synonymous and apply to affected persons, substantially affected persons and aggrieved or adversely affected parties as defined in F.S. §§ 163.3213(1), 163.3213(2)(a) and 163.3215(2), respectively. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 1376, § 2, 10-22-07) 
Sec. 102-62. - Notice procedures. 
(a)  All public hearings or meetings shall be held after 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. Workshops may be held at other times deemed appropriate. 
(b)  Prior to taking action on any matter listed in section 102-61, the city council shall hold public hearing(s) as required by Florida Statutes. The public hearing(s) shall be held following the publication of public notice(s) (advertisement), which public notice (advertisement) shall conform to the criteria set forth in Chapter 163, Part II, Florida Statutes and/or Chapter 166, Florida Statutes, as appropriate. Workshops are exempt from this requirement. 
(c)  A notice of all such public hearings, public meetings, and workshops to consider any matters described in section 102-61 will be posted in a conspicuous place in city hall at least seven days prior to the hearing, meeting or workshop. Notice will also be given to the appropriate media representatives at least 24 hours before all such public hearings, public meetings and workshops are held. 
(d)  A notice will also be provided of any public hearing, public meeting, or workshop to consider any matters described in section 102-61, to any group, agency or government that registers with the city to receive such notice at least 24 hours prior to such hearing, meeting or workshop. The group, agency or government receiving such notice shall be responsible for notifying their membership of the particulars involved. 
(e)  In addition to the public notice advertising requirements specified above, notice of the public hearings for comprehensive plan amendments that change the future land use of a property, rezonings, planned unit developments (PUD) or planned mixed development districts (PMDD), and annexations shall be provided, in writing, to property owners within 300 feet of the property involved in the public hearing. However, any comprehensive plan amendments required by an adopted and sufficient evaluation and appraisal report on the comprehensive plan, are exempt from the requirement of this sub-part, but must conform to the public notice and public participation requirements delineated in Florida Statutes. Notice of the public hearing for a request of right-of-way vacation shall be provided to all property owners adjacent to the right-of-way involved in the public hearing. Notice of the public hearing requesting a variance or special exception to be heard by the board of adjustment shall be provided to all adjacent property owners and those property owners across the street therefrom. The time, place, and purpose of such hearing(s) shall be mailed not less than three weeks before the scheduled hearing(s) by the applicant, certified return receipt, to the last known address of the owners of the property involved and the owners of the property within 300 feet of the property involved in the hearing(s). One written notice may be used for multiple hearings. For example, notice of the local planning agency and city council hearings may be sent in one notice. Last known addresses will be provided by the administrative services department to the applicant within two weeks of submitting an application initiating the proposed change. Proof of notification (copies of returned receipts and/or returned mailings) shall be provided to the administrative services department at least five days prior to the first public hearing. All costs associated with notice requirements are to be paid by the applicant. 
(f)  Notices shall also be posted at least 14 days prior to a public hearing and remain posted until after the final public hearing on such lots, parcels, or tracts of land as may be involved in the hearing. Such notice shall be by a sign no smaller than 24 inches in width by 32 inches in height and such signs shall be placed so as to be no less than 12 inches above the ground. The sign shall be weather-proof and be able to resist water damage and sunlight fading of the information contained on the sign. The format of the sign for comprehensive plan amendments that change the future land use of a property, rezonings, planned unit developments (PUD) or planned mixed development districts (PMDD), annexations and right-of-way vacations shall be similar to and shall include all of the information as the sample sign shown in figure 1. The format of the sign for variances and special exceptions shall be similar to and shall include all of the information as the sample sign shown in figure 2. There shall be at least one posted notice sign visible from all rights-of-way that are adjacent to the property(s) involved in the hearing. Signs for right-of-way vacations must be posted at each end of the right-of-way involved in the hearing, or at the closest points to the right-of-way involved in the public hearing on adjacent streets. In addition, if any right-of-way frontage exceeds 1,000 feet in length, a separate notice sign for each 1,000 feet, or portion thereof, is required. Notice signs shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the edge of the property adjacent to the right-of-way that is clear of any vegetation or structures that would obscure the view of the sign from the roadway. In no case shall a notice sign be affixed to a utility pole, utility structure or traffic sign. Proof of posting the notice sign(s) shall be provided to the administrative services department at least five days prior to the first public hearing. Proof of posting shall consist of copies of a date-stamped photograph(s) showing the sign(s) as posted on the property and a signed affidavit stating the date, time and location(s) that the notice was posted. All costs associated with notice requirements are to be paid by the applicant. 

Figure 1. Sample notice sign for comprehensive plan amendments that change the future land use of a property, rezonings, Planned Unit Developments (PUD) or Planned Mixed Development Districts (PMDD), annexations and right-of-way vacations 

Figure 2. Sample notice sign for variances and special exceptions 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 1376, § 3, 10-22-07; Ord. No. 1423, § 2, 5-26-09) 
Sec. 102-63. - Local planning agency (LPA) procedures. 
    The local planning agency shall hold at least one public hearing or meeting regarding any matter described in section 102-61 and such public hearing or meeting shall be conducted prior to city council approval, adoption and/or enactment. The LPA public hearing shall be advertised so as to encourage and afford members of the public reasonable opportunity to present their views on any matter under consideration and notice of the public hearing shall be provided as specified in section 102-62 of this article. The chairman may, at his or her discretion, rule out-of-order public comments deemed repetitious or not germane to the matter under discussion. An agenda for the meeting shall be posted in or near the meeting room and generally available to those in attendance. Procedures for such meetings shall be as follows: 
(1)  The sequence of activities at such planning agency's meeting regarding the matters under consideration shall be as follows: 
a.  Announcement of the matter for consideration by the chairman. 
b.  Presentation of staff reports/comments, if any, whether written or verbal. 
c.  Receipt of comments from the proponents and opponents of the matter in as nearly equal proportions as possible. 
d.  Close public input except for direct questions as may be initiated by the members of the local planning agency. 
e.  Local planning agency discussion, debate and recommendation by a majority of the members present and voting prior to considering the next matter or adjournment. 
(2)  The local planning agency shall transmit its written recommendation on each matter decided to the city council as soon as possible. Included in this recommendation shall be a response to the substantive public comments received during consideration of the matter. 
(3)  The local planning agency shall conclude consideration of the agenda no later than 11:00 p.m. No agenda item may be initiated after 10:30 p.m. unless a majority vote of the members present and voting agrees to do so. Agenda items not considered at this date will be placed first on the agenda for the next available date that meets applicable notice requirements. 
(4)  As soon as practical, minutes shall be prepared and filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 1376, § 4, 10-22-07) 
Sec. 102-64. - City council procedures. 
(a)  After the local planning agency makes a recommendation regarding any matter described in section 102-61, the city council shall hold at least one public hearing to consider the recommendation. Such hearing or any hearing regarding any matters described in section 102-61 above may be continued, if needed, to an announced time certain upon a majority vote. An agenda for the hearing shall be posted in, or near, the meeting room and be generally available to those in attendance. 
(b)  Any city council public hearing regarding any matters described in section 102-61 shall encourage and afford members of the public reasonable opportunity to present their views on any matter under consideration and notice of the public hearing shall be provided as specified in section 102-62 of this article. The president of the council may, at his or her discretion, rule out-of-order public comments deemed repetitious or not germane to the matter under discussion. 
(c)  The sequence of activities regarding matters under consideration shall be as follows: 
(1)  Announcements of the matter for consideration. 
(2)  Presentation of staff reports/comments, if any, whether written or verbal. The recommendation of the local planning agency shall also be presented in written form. 
(3)  Receipt of comments from the proponents and opponents of the matter in as nearly equal proportions as possible. 
(4)  Close public input except for direct questions as may be initiated by the members of the city council. 
(5)  City council discussion, debate and approval, adoption or enactment, as appropriate for the specific matter, by a majority vote of the members present and voting prior to considering the next matter of adjournment. 
(d)  The city council shall conclude consideration of the matters no later than 11:00 p.m. No new agenda item may be initiated after 10:30 p.m. unless a majority of the members present and voting agrees to do so. Agenda items not considered at this hearing will be placed first on the agenda of the next date available that meets applicable notice requirements. 
(e)  As soon as practical, minutes shall be prepared and filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 1376, § 5, 10-22-07) 
Secs. 102-65-102-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 102-81. - Title. 
    This document is the land use regulations for the city and may be referred to also as "this chapter" or "LUR." It follows in structure and format the Crestview Comprehensive Plan, 2000. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-82. - Authority. 
    This chapter (LUR) is developed pursuant to F.S. § 163.3202, the Crestview Comprehensive Plan, 2000, the city Charter and the general powers provided local government in F.S. ch. 166. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-83. - Applicability. 
(a)  Generally. The provisions of this chapter apply to all development in the city. It takes precedent over any other ordinance, resolution or procedure affecting land use and no development may be undertaken without prior authorization pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Development permits. Amendments to this chapter shall not affect the validly of a lawfully issued development permit if the following conditions are effective: 
a.  The permitted development activity has commenced prior to the effective date of the amendment; and 
b.  The development activity continues without interruption until the development is complete. If the development permit expires, any further development on that site shall occur only in conformance with the requirements of the amendment. 
(2)  Consistency with plan. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize development that is inconsistent with the city comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-84. - Guide for users. 
(a)  Unified land development regulations. This chapter was enacted to provide a single consolidated reference source for land development regulations in the city. It replaces and updates certain ordinances that are outdated or redundant. In other cases, it supplements ordinances previously enacted pertaining to land development. Where no regulatory instruction mandated by the Comprehensive Planning Act of 1985 has been previously addressed or codified by city ordinance, this chapter provides the requirements in accordance with the Crestview Comprehensive Plan, 2000. In all cases, therefore, where there may be a conflict between this chapter and existing ordinances, this chapter shall take precedence. In summary, this chapter establishes a single set of site design criteria and provides procedures for the expeditious processing of development projects and permit applications. 
(b)  Checklists for preparation and review of development proposals. Article XVII of this chapter provides checklists that must be completed and submitted by developers before a formal review and approval process of construction activity may begin. The following checklists are provided to indicate to developers the areas for consideration prior to submitting an application for a construction permit. 
I. Land use: type, density and intensity. _____In what land use district is the development site located? _____What uses are allowed in the district? _____In residential districts, what is the maximum allowable density? _____In commercial districts, what is the allowable intensity (floor area ratio) of the development? II. Restricted zones. Certain sites designated for development may pose additional restrictions either under existing conditions or in future land use. Policies for such sites are found in the comprehensive plan. Support documents identify locations and special provisions. _____Is the site a historic landmark or within a designated historic district? _____Does the proposed development involve the construction in a conservation area, floodplain, or wetlands? _____Is the site within the cone of influence of deep wells (200 feet)? III. Consistency and concurrency management. This checklist is to help ensure that proposed development is consistent with the city comprehensive plan and meets concurrency requirements. _____Is the development consistent with the comprehensive plan? _____Is the general concurrency requirement met with regard to the following considerations? _____Will the proposed development use potable water? _____Will development create wastewater? _____Will development increase traffic on surrounding streets? _____Will development change the amount, nature, and patterns of stormwater runoff? _____Will development create solid waste? IV. Resource protection standards. Certain flora and fauna and environmentally sensitive areas may be affected by development. The following checklist should be considered prior to initiating development actions. _____Does the site contain protected trees? _____Does the site contain wetlands, or other environmentally sensitive lands described in the comprehensive plan? _____Is the site near a wellfield or wellhead? _____Does the site contain habitat of threatened or endangered species? _____Does the site contain land in the 100-year floodplain? V. Development design and improvement standards. Standards for controlling the development are intended to provide maximum public benefits. This checklist should be reviewed to determine the following requirements: impervious surface ratio, access, building setback, parking, sidewalk and biking, and landscaping. _____Will the development involve land subdivision? _____Will development contain buildings or other impervious surfaces? Other design and improvements standards include: _____Will the development involve the installation of utilities? _____Will development affect the quality or quantity of stormwater runoff? _____Does the site require that a buffer be installed? _____Does the development require unique conformance design standards such as for recreational vehicle parks, junkyards, or fuel farms? VI. Accessory structures and uses. _____Is a satellite dish antenna to be installed? _____Is a storage building, utility building or greenhouse to be installed? _____Is a swimming pool, hot tub or similar structure to be installed? _____Is a fence to be installed? _____Is an accessory apartment to be created? _____Is a home occupation to be started? _____Is an employee dining room, fitness center or other amenity part of industrial/commercial development or does a residential development include a recreation/meeting center? VII. Signs. _____Are planned signs exempt from city regulation? _____Are planned signs prohibited? VIII. Noxious performance standards. _____Will the development create exceptional noise? _____Will exceptional vibration be created? _____Will air pollution be created? _____Will odor be created? _____Will risk of fire or explosion be created? _____Will there be a risk of electromagnetic interference? IX. Hardship relief (variance, special exceptions). _____Is the development in an existing location that does not conform to land use regulations? _____Is relief sought from the strict application of a development design standard? _____Is relief sought from the resource protection standards?  
X.  Boards and agencies. If a decision is made by a developer to proceed with development after the required checklist forms are completed, procedures for development review established by the city must be followed. Persons, departments, boards and agencies involved in that review are as follows: 
a.  The planning director serves as the developer's initial point of contact with the city. 
b.  The technical review committee composed of city staff is headed by the planning director. 
c.  The board of adjustment hears and makes final decisions regarding requests for variances and special exceptions. 
d.  The local planning agency, comprised of the membership of the planning board, is the agency responsible for the development, implementation, and interpretation of the comprehensive plan. Its recommendations to the city council are advisory. 
e.  The city council is the final authority on all decisions affecting land use in the city with the exception of those delegated to the board of adjustment under section 102-36. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Secs. 102-85-102-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CONCURRENCY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 

Sec. 102-101. - Concurrency management system. 
    This article is intended to ensure the availability of public facilities and the adequacy of those facilities at adopted level of service (LOS) concurrent with the impacts of development. This intent will be implemented by means of a concurrency management system which shall measure the potential impact of a final development permit application upon the adopted minimum acceptable level of service for a roadway, solid waste, potable water, sanitary sewage, stormwater or park facility as provided in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan for the city. All other development orders shall be deemed preliminary and shall be conditioned upon and subject to findings of adequate public facility capacity before the approval of a final development order. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-102. - Concurrency implementation strategies. 
(a)  The city shall annually review the concurrency implementation strategies that are incorporated in the capital improvements element. A form entitled "Crestview Annual Capacity Report" provided at the end of this article shall be used to monitor levels of service (LOS) annually. 
(b)  Standards for level of service are phased to reflect the city's financial ability to increase public facility capacity, and resulting level of service, from year to year. Standards for level of service are phased to specific fiscal years in order to provide clear, unambiguous standards for issuance throughout the city. 
(c)  Standards for levels of service are applied according to the timing of impacts of development on public facilities. Building permits which impact public facilities are issued subject to the availability of public facilities concurrent with the impacts of the development. Other development orders are issued conditioned upon and subject to the availability of public facilities in the same fiscal year as the impact on public facilities of the proposed development. 
(d)  Capacity shall be allocated on a first come, first served basis, i.e., reservation of capacity goes to the developer that first obtains approval to perform construction on the site. The allocation of capacity, however, shall be subject to the following sunset provisions: 
(1)  Capacity approved and assigned by the city to an approved development project shall be withdrawn by the city if construction activity has not begun within a one-year period after the date of the issuance of a final development order. If construction is not commenced within one year after allocation of capacity for reasons beyond the control of the developer, capacity assigned may be retained by the developer for a period not to exceed six months. 
(2)  In cases where construction is phased by the developer over a period of time exceeding one year, vested capacity for any, or all, phases shall be retained by the developer so long as construction has proceeded in accordance with the schedule on which capacity allocation was originally based. If construction activity ceases, or if phased development falls behind scheduled phases by a period of one year following the issuance of a final development order, capacity allocation for succeeding phases, if any, shall be withdrawn by the city and made available to other developers on a first come, first served basis. 
(3)  In the event of withdrawal of capacity following the issuance of a final development order or a building permit, it shall be incumbent upon the developer to reapply for capacity allocation if a continuation of the project is desired. 
(e)  Levels of service are compared to adopted standards on an annual basis. Annual monitoring is used for the following reasons: 
(1)  To correspond to annual expenditures for capital improvements during the city's fiscal year. 
(2)  To provide the city staff, public, and developers information on which to base future growth decisions in comparison to available capacity. 
(3)  Case-by-case monitoring shall still be required in accordance with section 102-101 and the checklists provided in article XVII. Such monitoring is necessary to assure adopted LOS are not inadvertently degraded. 
(f)  Public facility capital improvements required by development applications are prioritized according to the criteria in section 102-101 and policy 14.A.2.6 of the comprehensive plan for the city. If any capital improvements required by development applications must be deferred to a future fiscal year because of insufficient capacity of public facilities during the current fiscal year, the improvements to be deferred will be selected by the city council. 
(g)  De minimis development, that is, minor development such as a single-family house on a vacant lot in already developed neighborhoods, or development constituting a minor replat (see article II, section 102-34(b)) may be excluded from concurrency evaluation in accordance with article II, section 102-24(b). However, if roadways used by such development are classified as constrained or backlogged facilities, they shall not be degraded more than the level, if any, established by the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-103. - Annual capacity report. 
    The city annual capacity report summarizes the existing current capacity of public facilities, and forecasts the capacity of public facilities for each of the five succeeding fiscal years. The forecast reflects the most recently updated schedule of capital improvements in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. The level of service is calculated based on population estimates. Capacities shown shall constitute prima facie evidence of the availability of public facilities for the purpose of issuing development orders. The annual report also forecasts capacities and level of service for comparison to the standards adopted in the comprehensive plan. The annual report shall be updated each year in conjunction with the development of the capital improvements program. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-104. - Monitoring of development orders. 
(a)  Final development orders. A separate record shall be maintained during the fiscal year to indicate the cumulative impacts of all final development orders approved during the fiscal year to date on the capacity of public facilities as set forth in the most recent annual capacity report. The record of such monitoring activity as it pertains to traffic circulation shall be transmitted to the metropolitan planning organization (MPO) on a quarterly basis for coordination and information purposes. Table 1, Roadway LOS, is to be used for traffic circulation monitoring. 
(b)  Other development orders. All development orders not approved for a final order shall be maintained on file for use in planning facility expansion and to assign priority for development projects based upon application dates. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-105. - Procedures (policy 10.A.1.4). 
(a)  Submission requirements. The city shall use the procedures specified in this article, article II and relevant checklists contained in article XVII to determine compliance of an application for development order. At the time of application for a development order, wherein a developer certifies concurrency, a concurrency review shall be made by the technical review committee (policy 14.A.2.5) to determine and/or verify the availability of public facilities required by the proposed development. The applicant must supply a completed checklist provided by section 102-326. The application review fee listed in article XVIII shall also be paid upon submittal. 
(b)  Exceptions. If the applicant is the owner of an individually owned lot for which a single residential building permit is requested, the impacts will be as determined by staff and no additional information pertinent to concurrency will be requested from the applicant. 
(c)  Methodology for level of service determination. The LOS for all six city facilities must be determined adequate before a final development order can be issued. Adequate support of the impacts of development shall mean that the necessary facilities are: 
(1)  Under construction or will be under construction during the fiscal year the application is made; 
(2)  The subject of an executed contract for the commencement of construction during the fiscal year the application is made; 
(3)  Included in the capital improvements element of the city, county or the state for the period set in the comprehensive plan; or 
(4)  Provided for in an enforceable development agreement approved by the city council. 
(d)  Facilities. 
(1)  Transportation. The LOS shall be determined from table 1 appended to the annual capacity report. If traffic count data is not given in table 1 for roadways impacted by the development, an appropriate traffic count for that roadway link shall be prepared by the applicant in a manner approved by the planning director. The traffic count will be subtracted from the capacity at LOS D (or LOS C for I-10) as shown in the table to determine available capacity. 
The estimated number of trips generated by the proposed development shall be subtracted from the available capacity shown in table 1 to determine whether the roadway capacity is adequate to support the development and whether the final development order can be issued. Following each approval of a development order, the cumulative total must be entered onto table 1. Projects shall be listed in the order of approval dates of the application as shown on table 1 during the fiscal year. 
The impact on the roadway network at the nearest point of connection to the system shall be determined by using the trip generation standards set forth in the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Manual, fourth edition, set both in chapter 5 of the comprehensive plan and foundation document. For nonresidential or mixed use developments a 100 percent buildout and occupancy will be assumed. ITE also provides a formula for passerby capture as a percentage of total trips on the pertinent roadway. The total number of captured trips from all adjacent roadways shall not exceed 25 percent of the subject property's total external trip potential. Any capture of trips from passing traffic in excess of these percentages and internal capture rate must be justified with supporting documentation to the satisfaction of the city planner. The 1985 Highway Capacity Manual and the 1988 Florida Department of Transportation Generalized Level of Service Tables shall be used to determine maximum service flow rates and levels of service. These may be found in chapter 6 of the foundation document. 
Notwithstanding the above, for the purpose of issuing development orders, if the number of trips generated by the development as determined by the above calculations would degrade the level of service by a roadway listed in table 1, then a detailed traffic study may be required by the planning director to determine if the impact will be significant. The impact of a proposed development shall be determined insignificant if the number of trips generated on a roadway is: 
a.  Less than 25 average daily trips on a road segment; 
b.  If the development has its first point of contact with a roadway within one-quarter mile of the deficient roadway, or a potentially deficient road segment, and would generate less than one percent of the total capacity of any such road segment. A deficient roadway is one that is operating at or above 95 percent of the maximum service volume. A failing roadway is one that is operating at a service level of "F" as determined by the FDOT Transportation Generalized Level of Service; or 
c.  If the proposed development has its first point of contact with a roadway beyond one-quarter mile of a deficient road segment or a potentially deficient road segment and would generate less than five percent of the capacity of any such road segment; 
d.  In any case where a deficient roadway is degraded from a service level of "D" to a service level of "F," all development shall be considered significant and prohibited until capacity is restored to the adopted level of service for the roadway involved. 
(2)  Potable water. The levels of service and the available reserve capacity for potable water shall be as shown in the annual capacity report. The impact on the water treatment facilities shall be calculated using the appropriate standards as shown in the annual capacity report. The estimated number of gallons generated by the proposed development shall be subtracted cumulatively from the available capacity shown in the annual capacity report to determine whether the potable water capacity is adequate to support the development and whether the final development order can be issued. 
(3)  Wastewater. 
a.  The levels of service and the available reserve capacity for wastewater shall be shown in the annual capacity report. The impact on the wastewater treatment plant shall be calculated using the appropriate standards as shown in the annual capacity report. The estimated number of gallons generated by the proposed development shall be subtracted cumulatively from the available capacity shown in the annual capacity report to determine whether the wastewater capacity is adequate to support the development and whether the final development order can be issued. 
b.  Where septic tanks are to be utilized (see policy 11.A.2.3), the county health department shall utilize the standards of chapter 10 D-6, F.A.C., to determine suitability. The applicant shall submit evidence of health department certification that the site is or can be made suitable for an onsite sewage disposal system as provided under section 102-327 of this chapter (checklists). 
(4)  Recreation and open space. 
a.  The levels of service and the available reserve capacity for recreation and open space shall be determined from the annual capacity report for neighborhood and community parks. Capacity is based on the recreation demand of one acre per 1,000 (policy 12.A.3.2). 
b.  The impact of a proposed residential development shall be determined by calculating the population to be housed using average household size data as maintained by the county planning commission or as provided in table 6-11 of the foundation document. The estimated acres of parkland required by the proposed development shall be subtracted cumulatively from the available capacity shown in the annual capacity report to determine whether the quantity of parkland is adequate to support the development and whether the final development order can be issued. 
(5)  Solid waste. The city is responsible for the collection of solid waste and the county provides disposal capacity. However, industrial refuse and certain commercial refuse may be privately collected, conveyed and disposed of by producers of such refuse. The adopted level of service of 5.0 pounds/capita/day (policy 10.B.1.5) is a regulatory level and will be reviewed and maintained as part of the city's annual budget process. 
(6)  Stormwater management. The stormwater management level of service is also a regulatory standard and will be reviewed and maintained by the city during the review of each development order issued by the city. 
_____
1990 PROJECTIONS-ANNUAL CAPACITY REPORT CONCURRENCY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 
LOS Standard 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 City limits population 
Service area population 9,545 9,728 9,914 10,104 10,297 Roadways Level D (See table 1) Stormwater (drainage) Current (See policy 10.C.2.3, comprehensive plan) MGD MGD MGD MGD MGD Potable water: Total average daily demand 125 gpd 
per capita 1,193 1,216 1,239 1,263 1,287 Rated system capacity 3.5 3.5 3.5 3.5 3.5 Growth capacity 2.30 2.28 2.26 2.24 2.21 MGD MGD MGD MGD MGD Wastewater: Total average daily flow 1,031 1,051 1,071 1,091 1,112 Treatment capacity 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 Growth capacity 0.469 0.449 0.429 0.409 0.388 TPD TPD TPD TPD TPD Solid waste: Total average daily demand 5 pounds 
per capita 24.00 24.32 24.80 25.30 25.70 Capacity 26.00 26.00 26.00 26.00 26.00 Growth capacity 2.00 1.68 1.20 0.70 0.30 Acres Acres Acres Acres Acres Parks-neighborhood acres: Available acres 1 acre per 1,000 11.1 11.1 11.1 11.1 11.1 Demand 9.5 9.7 9.9 10.0 10.3 Growth capacity 1.60 1.40 1.20 1.10 1.08 Parks-community acres: Available acres 1 acre per 1,000 38.4 38.4 38.4 38.4 38.4 Demand 18.7 19.04 19.38 19.72 20.06 20.40 Growth capacity 19.36 19.02 18.68 18.34 18.00 _____ 
TABLE 1. ROADWAY LOS-1990 
Development Project Name:  _____ Technical Committee Review Date:  _____ Date of Final Development Order:  _____  
Road/Segment Number of Lanes Segment Length 1989 
AADT Average AADT Maximum Volume Existing LOS Volume Added by Project Cumulative Total to Date New LOS SR 10: SR 85 to Fairchild Road (end of 4 lanes) 4  3.5  6,725  6,725 34,900 A _______________SR 10: Fairchild Road to Walton County line 2  7.6  2,681 
 1,874  2,277 94,000 A _______________SR 8 (I-10): Santa Rosa County line to SR 85 4 13.8 11,466 
12,860 12,163 37,600 A _______________SR 8 (I-10): SR 85 to Walton County line 4 10.7  8,643 
10,514  9,578 37,600 A _______________Chestnut Avenue: SR 85 to Edney Avenue SE 2 - 70% Antioch Road    639 11,600 C _______________Valley Road from U.S. 90 to Stillwell Boulevard 2  0 140% Old Bethel Road  4,676 11,600 C _______________Stillwell Boulevard from SR 85 to Valley Road 2  1.0 140% Old Bethel Road  4,676 11,600 C _______________Farmers Street from Stillwell Boulevard to Third Avenue 2  0 90% Poverty Creek    450 11,600 C _______________Third Avenue from SR 85 to Farmers Street 2  0 90% Poverty Creek    450 11,600 C _______________Fairchild Road from U.S. 90 to Crestview Aerospace 2  0 65% Valley Road  3,039 11,600 C _______________South Airport Road from Fairchild Road to John Givens Road 2  0 80% Poverty Creek    400 11,600 C _______________C 393 from U.S. 90 to SR 85 2 0    500    500  9,500 C _______________Steel Mill Creek Road: C 393 to C 85A 2  0    519    519  9,500 C _______________ 
    See chapter 5 of the comprehensive plan, traffic circulation tables 5-7 and 5-8, for 1995 and 2000 projections. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
_____
Sec. 102-106. - Proportionate fair-share mitigation. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to establish a method whereby the impacts of development on transportation facilities can be mitigated by the cooperative efforts of the public and private sectors, to be known as the proportionate fair-share program, as required by and in a manner consistent with F.S. § 163.3180(16). 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  The proportionate fair-share program shall apply to all developments in the city that have been notified of a lack of capacity to satisfy transportation concurrency on a transportation facility in the city CMS, including transportation facilities maintained by FDOT or another jurisdiction that are relied upon for concurrency determinations, pursuant to the requirements of section 102-106(c). 
(2)  The proportionate fair-share program does not apply to: 
a.  Developments of regional impact (DRIs) using proportionate fair-share under F.S. § 163.3180(12). 
b.  Developments exempted from concurrency as provided in section 102-102(g) and section 102-105(d)(1) of these regulations and/or F.S. § 163.3180, regarding exceptions and de minimis impacts. 
c.  Transportation improvements required for public safety, on-site roadway improvements, or off-site improvements otherwise required by these regulations for non-deficient roadway segments as determined by a traffic analysis. 
(c)  General requirements. 
(1)  An applicant may choose to satisfy the transportation concurrency requirements of the city by making a proportionate fair-share contribution, pursuant to the following requirements: 
a.  The proposed development is consistent with the comprehensive plan and applicable land development regulations. 
b.  The five-year schedule of capital improvements in the city CIE or the long-term schedule of capital improvements for an adopted long-term CMS includes a transportation improvement(s) that, upon completion, will satisfy the requirements of the city transportation CMS. The provisions of section 102-106(c)(2) may apply if a project or projects needed to satisfy concurrency are not presently contained within the local government CIE or an adopted long-term schedule of capital improvements. 
(2)  The city may choose to allow an applicant to satisfy transportation concurrency through the proportionate fair-share program by contributing to an improvement that, upon completion, will satisfy the requirements of the city transportation CMS, but is not contained in the five-year schedule of capital improvements in the CIE or a long- term schedule of capital improvements for an adopted long-term CMS, where the following apply: 
a.  The city adopts, by resolution or ordinance, a commitment to add the improvement to the five-year schedule of capital improvements in the CIE or long-term schedule of capital improvements for an adopted long-term CMS no later than the next regularly scheduled update. To qualify for consideration under this section, the proposed improvement must be reviewed by the city and determined to be financially feasible pursuant to F.S. § 163.3180(16)(b)1, consistent with the comprehensive plan, and in compliance with the provisions of this section. Financial feasibility for this section means that additional contributions, payments or funding sources are reasonably anticipated during a period not to exceed ten years to fully mitigate impacts on the transportation facilities. 
b.  If the funds allocated for the five-year schedule of capital improvements in the city CIE are insufficient to fully fund construction of a transportation improvement required by the CMS, the city may still enter into a binding proportionate fair-share agreement with the applicant authorizing construction of that amount of development on which the proportionate fair-share is calculated if the proportionate fair-share amount in such agreement is sufficient to pay for one or more improvements which will, in the opinion of the governmental entity or entities maintaining the transportation facilities, significantly benefit the impacted transportation system. 
The improvement or improvements funded by the proportionate fair-share component must be adopted into the five-year capital improvements schedule of the comprehensive plan or the long-term schedule of capital improvements for an adopted long-term concurrency management system at the next annual capital improvements element update. 
(3)  Any improvement project proposed to meet the developer's fair-share obligation must meet design standards of the city for locally maintained roadways within the municipality, those of the county for county-maintained roadways and those of the FDOT for the state highway system. 
(d)  Intergovernmental coordination. Pursuant to policies in the intergovernmental coordination element of the city comprehensive plan and applicable policies in the county, the city shall coordinate with affected jurisdictions, including FDOT, regarding mitigation to impacted facilities not under the jurisdiction of the local government receiving the application for proportionate fair-share mitigation. An interlocal agreement may be established with other affected jurisdictions for this purpose. 
(e)  Application process. 
(1)  Upon notification of a lack of capacity to satisfy transportation concurrency, the applicant shall also be notified in writing of the opportunity to satisfy transportation concurrency through the proportionate fair-share program pursuant to the requirements of section 102-106(c). 
(2)  Prior to submitting an application for a proportionate fair-share agreement, a pre-application meeting shall be held to discuss eligibility, application submittal requirements, potential mitigation options, and related issues. If the impacted facility is on the SIS, then the FDOT will be notified and invited to participate in the pre-application meeting. 
(3)  Eligible applicants shall submit an application to the city that includes an application fee of $350.00 and the following: 
a.  Name, address, e-mail and phone number of owner(s), developer and agent; 
b.  Property location, including parcel identification numbers; 
c.  Legal description and survey of property; 
d.  Project description, including type, intensity and amount of development; 
e.  Phasing schedule, if applicable; 
f.  Description of requested proportionate fair-share mitigation method(s); 
g.  Copy of concurrency denial. 
(4)  The concurrency administrator shall review the application and certify that the application is sufficient and complete within 15 business days. If an application is determined to be insufficient, incomplete or inconsistent with the general requirements of the proportionate fair-share program as indicated in section 102-106(c), then the applicant will be notified in writing of the reasons for such deficiencies within 30 business days of submittal of the application. If such deficiencies are not remedied by the applicant within 30 days of receipt of the written notification, then the application will be deemed abandoned. The city council may, in its discretion, grant an extension of time not to exceed 60 days to cure such deficiencies, provided that the applicant has shown good cause for the extension and has taken reasonable steps to effect a cure. 
(5)  Pursuant to F.S. § 163.3180(16)(e), proposed proportionate fair-share mitigation for development impacts to facilities on the SIS requires the concurrency of the FDOT. The applicant shall submit evidence of an agreement between the applicant and the FDOT for inclusion in the proportionate fair-share agreement. 
(6)  When an application is deemed sufficient, complete, and eligible, the applicant shall be advised in writing and a proposed proportionate fair-share obligation and binding agreement will be prepared by the city, or the applicant with direction from the city, and delivered to the appropriate parties for review, including a copy to the FDOT for any proposed proportionate fair-share mitigation on a state road, no later than 60 days from the date at which the applicant received the notification of a sufficient application and no fewer than 14 days prior to the city council meeting when the agreement will be considered. 
(7)  The city shall notify the applicant regarding the date of the city council meeting when the agreement will be considered for final approval. No proportionate fair-share agreement will be effective until approved by the city council. 
(8)  A public hearing shall be required for any proportionate fair share improvement that is suggested for addition to the capital improvement program. 
(f)  Determining proportionate fair-share obligation. 
(1)  Proportionate fair-share mitigation for concurrency impacts may include, without limitation, separately or collectively, private funds, contributions of land, and construction and contribution of facilities 
(2)  A development shall not be required to pay more than its proportionate fair-share. The fair market value of the proportionate fair-share mitigation for the impacted facilities shall not differ regardless of the method of mitigation 
(3)  The methodology used to calculate an applicant's proportionate fair-share obligation shall be as provided for in F.S. § 163.3180(12), as follows: 
"The cumulative number of trips from the proposed development expected to reach roadways during peak hours from the complete build out of a stage or phase being approved, divided by the change in the peak hour maximum service volume (MSV) of roadways resulting from construction of an improvement necessary to maintain the adopted LOS, multiplied by the construction cost, at the time of developer payment, of the improvement necessary to maintain the adopted LOS." 
or 
Proportionate Fair-Share = S{[(Development Trips;sub \sub;)/(SV Increase;sub \sub;)] × Cost;sub \sub;} 
Where: 
Development Trips;sub \sub; = Those trips from the stage or phase of development under review that are assigned to roadway segment "i" and have triggered a deficiency per the CMS; 
SV Increase;sub \sub; = Service volume increase provided by the eligible improvement to roadway segment "i" per section E; 
Cost;sub \sub; = Adjusted cost of the improvement to segment "i." Cost shall include all improvements and associated costs, such as design, right-of-way acquisition, planning, engineering, inspection, and physical development costs directly associated with construction at the anticipated cost in the year it will be incurred. 
(4)  For the purposes of determining proportionate fair-share obligations, the city shall determine improvement costs based upon the actual cost of the improvement as obtained from the CIE, the MPO/TIP or the FDOT work program. Where such information is not available, improvement cost shall be determined using one of the following methods: 
a.  An analysis by the city of costs by cross section type that incorporates data from recent projects and is updated annually and approved by the city council; or 
b.  The most recent issue of FDOT Transportation Costs , as adjusted based upon the type of cross-section (urban or rural); locally available data from recent projects on acquisition, drainage and utility costs; and significant changes in the cost of materials due to unforeseeable events. Cost estimates for state road improvements not included in the adopted FDOT work program shall be determined using this method in coordination with the FDOT district; or 
In order to accommodate increases in construction material costs, project costs, as determined from Florida DOT or local agency construction cost estimates, shall be adjusted based on the following formula: 
Cost n = Cost 0 × (Cost growth 3yr )n 
Where: 
Cost n = The cost of the improvements in year n; 
Cost 0 = The cost of the improvement in the current year; 
Cost growth 3yr = The growth rate of costs over the last three years; 
n = The number of years until the improvement is constructed. 
The three-year growth rate is determined by the following formula: 
Cost growth 3yr = [Cost growth -1 + Cost growth -2 + Cost growth -3 ]/3 
Where: 
Cost growth 3yr = The growth rate of costs over the last three years; 
Cost growth -1 = The growth rate of costs in the previous year; 
Cost growth -2 = The growth rate of costs two years prior; 
Cost growth -3 = The growth rate of costs three years prior. 
(5)  If the city has accepted an improvement project proposed by the applicant, then the value of the improvement shall be determined using one of the methods provided in this section. 
(6)  If the city has accepted right-of-way dedication for the proportionate fair-share payment, credit for the dedication of the non-site related right-of-way shall be valued on the date of the dedication at 115 percent of the most recent assessed value by the county property appraiser or, at the option of the applicant, by fair market value established by an independent appraisal approved by the city and at no expense to the city. The applicant shall supply a drawing and legal description of the land and a warranty deed at no expense to the city. If the estimated value of the right-of-way dedication proposed by the applicant is less than the city estimated total proportionate fair-share obligation for that development, then the applicant must also pay the difference. Prior to purchase or acquisition of any real estate or acceptance of donations of real estate intended to be used for the proportionate fair-share, public or private partners should contact the FDOT for essential information about compliance with federal law and regulations. 
(g)  Impact fee credit for proportionate fair-share mitigation. 
(1)  Proportionate fair-share contributions shall be applied as a credit against impact fees to the extent that all or a portion of the proportionate fair-share mitigation is used to address the same capital infrastructure improvements contemplated by the local government's impact fee ordinance. 
(2)  Impact fee credits for the proportionate fair-share contribution will be determined when the transportation impact fee obligation is calculated for the proposed development. Impact fees owed by the applicant will be reduced per the proportionate fair-share agreement as they become due per the city impact fee ordinance. If the applicant's proportionate fair-share obligation is less than the development's anticipated road impact fee for the specific stage or phase of development under review, then the applicant or its successor must pay the remaining impact fee amount to the city pursuant to the requirements of the city impact fee ordinance. 
(3)  Major projects not included within the local government's impact fee ordinance or created under section 102-106(c)(2) (a) and (b) which can demonstrate a significant benefit to the impacted transportation system may be eligible at the local government's discretion for impact fee credits. 
(4)  The proportionate fair-share obligation is intended to mitigate the transportation impacts of a proposed development at a specific location. As a result, any road impact fee credit based upon proportionate fair-share contributions for a proposed development cannot be transferred to any other location unless provided for within the local impact fee ordinance. 
(h)  Proportionate fair-share agreements. 
(1)  Upon execution of a proportionate fair-share agreement (agreement) the applicant shall receive a certificate of concurrency approval and all trips attributable to the development shall be considered vested and shall be added to the concurrency management tracking system for the impacted facilities. Should the applicant fail to be approved by the city council for a development order within 12 months of the execution of the agreement, then the agreement shall be considered null and void, the trips shall be removed from the CMS, and the applicant shall be required to reapply. 
(2)  Payment of the proportionate fair-share contribution is due in full prior to issuance of the final development order or recording of the final plat and shall be non-refundable. If the payment is submitted more than 12 months from the date of execution of the agreement, then the proportionate fair-share cost shall be recalculated at the time of payment based on the best estimate of the construction cost of the required improvement at the time of payment, pursuant to section 102-106(f) and adjusted accordingly. 
(3)  All developer improvements authorized under this section involving dedications to the city must be completed prior to final acceptance of the improvements and receipt of a defect security, or as otherwise established in a binding agreement that is accompanied by a security instrument that is sufficient to ensure the completion of all required improvements. 
(4)  All developer improvements authorized under this section not involving dedications to the city must be completed prior to recording of the plat for residential developments or prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for non-residential development. 
(5)  Dedication of necessary right-of-way for facility improvements pursuant to a proportionate fair-share agreement must be completed prior to issuance of the final development order or recording of the final plat. 
(6)  Any requested change to a development project subsequent to a development order may be subject to additional proportionate fair-share contributions to the extent the change would generate additional traffic that would require mitigation. 
(7)  Applicants may submit a letter to withdraw from the proportionate fair-share agreement at any time prior to the execution of the agreement. The application fee and any associated advertising costs to the city will be non refundable. 
(8)  The city may enter into multiparty proportionate fair-share agreements for selected corridor improvements to facilitate collaboration among multiple applicants on improvements to a shared transportation facility. 
(i)  Appropriation of fair-share revenues. 
(1)  Proportionate fair-share revenues shall be placed in the appropriate project account for funding of scheduled improvements in the city CIE, or as otherwise established in the terms of the proportionate fair-share agreement. At the discretion of the local government, proportionate fair-share revenues may be used for operational improvements prior to construction of the capacity project from which the proportionate fair-share revenues were derived. Proportionate fair-share revenues may also be used as the 50 percent local match for funding under the FDOT TRIP. 
(2)  In the event a scheduled facility improvement is removed from the CIE, then the revenues collected for its construction may be applied toward the construction of another improvement within that same corridor or sector that would mitigate the impacts of development pursuant to the requirements of section 102-106(c)(2)(b). 
(3)  Where an applicant constructs a transportation facility that exceeds the applicant's proportionate fair-share obligation calculated under section 102-106(f), the city shall reimburse the applicant for the excess contribution using one or more of the following methods: 
a.  An impact fee credit account may be established for the applicant in the amount of the excess contribution, a portion or all of which may be assigned and reassigned under the terms and conditions acceptable to the city. 
b.  An account may be established for the applicant for the purpose of reimbursing the applicant for the excess contribution with proportionate fair-share payments from future applicants on the facility. 
c.  The city may compensate the applicant for the excess contribution through payment or some combination of means acceptable to the city and the applicant. 
(j)  Proportionate share program for TCEAs, TCMAs and MMTDs . If the city has implemented the concept of transportation concurrency management areas, as described in F.S. § 163.3180(7), or multimodal transportation districts, as described in F.S. § 163.3180(15), or transportation concurrency exception areas, as described in F.S. § 163.3180(5), then the city may establish a proportionate fair share assessment within said district(s), based on the expected costs and transportation benefits of all the programmed improvements within that district, and based on the expected trip generation of the proposed development. 
(k)  Cross jurisdictional impacts. 
(1)  In the interest of intergovernmental coordination and to reflect the shared responsibilities for managing development and concurrency, the city may enter an agreement with one or more adjacent local governments to address cross jurisdictional impacts of development on regional transportation facilities. The agreement shall provide for application of the methodology in this section to address the cross jurisdictional transportation impacts of development. 
(2)  A development application submitted to the city subject to a transportation concurrency determination meeting all of the following criteria shall be subject to this section: 
a.  Using its own concurrency analysis procedures, the city concludes that the additional traffic from the proposed development would use five percent or more of the adopted peak hour LOS maximum service volume of a regional transportation facility within the concurrency jurisdiction of the adjacent local government ("impacted regional facility"); and 
b.  The impacted regional facility is projected to be operating below the level of service standard, adopted by the adjacent local government, when the traffic from the proposed development is included. 
(3)  Upon identification of an impacted regional facility pursuant to 102-106(k)(2)a. or b., the city shall notify the applicant and the affected adjacent local government in writing of the opportunity to derive an additional proportionate fair-share contribution, based on the projected impacts of the proposed development on the impacted adjacent facility. 
a.  The adjacent local government shall have up to 90 days in which to notify the city of a proposed specific proportionate fair-share obligation, and the intended use of the funds when received. The adjacent local government must provide reasonable justification that both the amount of the payment and its intended use comply with the requirements of F.S. § 163.3180(16). Should the adjacent local government decline proportionate fair-share mitigation under this section, then the provisions of this section would not apply and the applicant would be subject only to the proportionate fair share requirements of the city. 
b.  If the subject application is subsequently approved by the city, the approval shall include a condition that the applicant provides, prior to the issuance of any building permit covered by that application, evidence that the proportionate fair-share obligation to the adjacent local government has been satisfied. The city may require the adjacent local government to declare, in a resolution, ordinance, or equivalent document, its intent for the use of the concurrency funds to be paid by the applicant. 
(4)  Where an impacted regional facility has been designated as a regionally significant transportation facility in an adopted regional transportation plan as provided in F.S. § 339.155, the city may coordinate with other impacted jurisdictions and agencies to apply proportionate fair-share contributions and public contributions to seek funding for improving the impacted regional facility under the FDOT TRIP. Such coordination shall be ratified by the city through an interlocal agreement that establishes a procedure for earmarking of the developer contributions for this purpose. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 2, 10-9-06) 
Secs. 102-107-102-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - LAND USE, TYPE, DENSITY, INTENSITY, ZONING AND REGULATORY CONTROLS 

Sec. 102-116. - General. 
    This article implements the goals, objectives and policies set forth in the comprehensive plan relating to land use in the city. Provisions set forth as to type of land use, density and intensity permitted are correlated with the districts shown on the future land use map. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-117. - Land use districts, density and intensity. 
    Land use categories and adopted densities and intensities are as described below. "Density" is the number of residential dwelling units permitted per acre; "intensity" is a measurement of how much of a building site can be utilized by structures in nonresidential developments. Density is determined by dividing the total number of dwelling units by the total site area less right-of-way. Intensity is determined by calculating floor area ratios (FAR). FAR is the relationship between the total floor area of a proposed structure or building and the gross area of the building site. Maximum FAR's are obtained by subtracting setback, parking and landscaping requirements from a building site (net area) and then dividing this number by the gross area of the building site. An example of calculating FAR is found in the future land use chapter of the foundation documents. 
LDR means low density residential development up to and including 6.0 dwelling units per gross acre. 
MDR means medium density residential development up to and including 15.0 dwelling units per gross acre. 
HDR means high density residential development up to and including 22.0 dwelling units per gross acre. 
MU means mixed use development with residential uses up to and including 25.0 dwelling units per gross acre and non-residential use intensity defined by a floor area ratio of 1.0. 
C means intensity of use within the commercial land use category shall be defined by a floor area ratio of 1.08. 
IN means intensity of use within the industrial land use category shall be defined by a floor area ration of 1.2. 
PL means public lands/institutional development and is limited to development of recreation, schools, churches, utilities, and government facilities. The intensity of use shall defined by a floor area ratio of 0.8. 
CON means conservation land use category. No development is allowed in this category. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 1323, § 2, 4-9-07) 
Sec. 102-118. - Performance standards, density and intensity bonuses. 
(a)  Generally. Innovative arrangements of development are encouraged to achieve more efficient densities and intensities provided the arrangement is compatible with the established character of a community. Planned development units (PUD's), for example, are usually land areas where development is planned as one integral whole with a mix of housing, commercial and institutional land uses designed in such a manner as to maximize open space through buffering techniques and combine living, shopping and working space. PUD's and other innovative land development technique approaches to mixed use development are, therefore, promoted and encouraged (policy 7.A.8.2). 
Developers who wish to obtain density and intensity bonuses may so qualify if the application submitted for a development order establishes that the proposed development will exceed minimum zoning requirements and implement adopted policies of the comprehensive plan. As an incentive to implement goals, objectives and policies of the comprehensive plan, bonus points may be awarded under the following categories as set out in this section. For reference, applicable comprehensive plan goals, objectives or policies implemented by this section are indicated in parentheses. Other implementation regulations are provided under articles specifically addressing the involved subject matter. 
(b)  Environmentally sensitive lands (policies 7.A.1.2, 11.A.3.3). Donation of environmentally sensitive land to an appropriate regulatory or conservation agency which contains a conservation easement in perpetuity. One point per acre donated. 
(c)  Water conservation (objective 11.A.2). 
(1)  Appropriate use of low water demand plants in all required buffers or landscaped areas. Two points per site or one point per acre in development site. 
(2)  The use of drip irrigation or other low water use methods shall qualify for one point per site. 
(3)  The use of treated wastewater or grey water for irrigation shall qualify for one point per site or one point per acre irrigated. 
(d)  Proximity to services and facilities (policies 7.A.2.2 and 7.A.2.3). 
Facility/Service Distance Points Public school 1 mile or less 2 Public school 2 miles or less 1 Hospital 5 miles or less 1 Multiple-use, designated activity center 3 miles or less 1 Shopping center (150,000+ square feet) 3 miles or less 1 Fire station 5 miles or less 1 Community recreation facility 1 mile or less 2 Community recreation facility 1 mile to 3 miles 1  
(e)  Special housing (policies 9.A.1.4 through 9.A.1.8). 
(1)  Ten percent of dwelling units for low to moderate income* families: Three points. 
(2)  Twenty percent of dwelling units for low to moderate income* families: Six points. 
No more than 20 percent of units of a conventional housing development shall be credited for bonus points. 
*  Low to moderate income as defined by the requirements of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development CDBG program. 
(f)  Access to transportation facilities (policy 7.A.2.2). 
(1)  Provision of separate pedestrian or bicycle accessways from a residential development to designated activity centers containing commercial, office, service, or recreation activities and located within one-half mile of the development: Two points. 
(2)  Where adjacent nonresidential developments share a common access driveway to reduce the number of accesses to arterial or collector roads: Two points per shared access. 
(3)  Provision of parallel frontage and/or service roads on major arterials or collector roads: One point per 100 linear feet up to ten points. 
(g)  Redevelopment (objective 7.A.2 through policies 7.A.2.5). Projects to redevelop or renew blighted or underutilized areas: Three points. 
(h)  Light and wind dynamics. Projects designed so as to provide a varied skyline to provide for light and wind dynamics on adjacent properties and natural systems: Two points. 
(i)  Protection of historic resources (policies 7.A.4.4 and 7.A.4.5). Donation of land of known archaeological or historic value to an appropriate regulatory or conservation agency which contains a conservation easement in perpetuity: One point per acre or site donated. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 1323, § 3, 4-9-07) 
Sec. 102-119. - Application of density/intensity bonuses. 
(a)  Each five points earned for residential development shall qualify for a two percent increase in the maximum density allowed in residential development. 
    Example: 
Maximum DU's allowed/acre* 15 Bonus points awarded 12 DU's increase factor 12 ° 5 = 2.4 Bonus percentage factor 2.4 × 0.02 = 5% New maximum DU's allowed 1.05 × 15 = 15.75 DU's/acre  
(b)  Each five points earned for nonresidential development shall qualify for an 0.10 additional FAR. The city has a maximum floor area ratio of 1.08 in commercial districts and 1.2 in industrial districts. 
    Example: 
Maximum intensity/acre 1.08 (FAR) Bonus points awarded 12 FAR increase factor 12 ° 5 = 2.4 Bonus percentage factor 2.4 × 0.10 = 0.24 New maximum FAR 0.24 + 1.08 = 1.32 FAR/acre  
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 1323, § 4, 4-9-07) 
Sec. 102-120. - Redevelopment (objective 7.A.2). 
    The city shall continue to promote redevelopment of areas meeting the program requirements promulgated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. Any such project to redevelop or renew any blighted or underutilized areas shall be considered for density and intensity bonuses in accordance with section 102-118(g). 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-121. - Protection and preservation of archeological and historic resources (policy 7.A.4.5). 
(a)  The department of state, division of historic resources, has identified sites within the city of historic significance. The sites have been identified and documented as being significant in American history, architecture, archaeology, engineering or culture. They reflect the prehistoric occupation and historical development of the nation, state and local community. Their protection and preservation, therefore, is essential. Any time a proposed development may impact a historic or archeological site within the city, the regulations as set out in this section shall apply. 
(b)  Historic structures shall be exempted from the provisions of the Standard Building Code, if any modification, repair or restoration activity would jeopardize their historical integrity. 
(c)  Land alteration or development of land where such would contribute to the destruction of historic resources shall be prohibited. 
(d)  A project classified as a development of regional impact (DRI), shall contain a description of historical or archaeological sites within the proposed development and suggested mitigation measures for such resources if present. DRI's shall be submitted to the compliance and review section in the department of state's bureau of historic preservation. 
(e)  An archaeological and historic review summary shall be submitted to the city with applications seeking approvals or permits for the following activities: parking lots, grading, earth moving, excavation and fill, drainage, and utilities placement; permits for tree removal; park and recreation area construction; and subdivision and planned unit developments; site and development plan reviews and comprehensive plan amendments. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 1323, § 5, 4-9-07) 
Sec. 102-122. - Land use regulations. 
(a)  This chapter incorporates by reference the following chapters of the city Code of Ordinances which contain land use regulations consistent with the comprehensive plan: 
(1)  General provisions, chapter 1. 
(2)  Buildings and building regulations, chapter 14. 
(3)  Landscape development, chapter 42, as amended. 
(4)  Utilities, chapter 90. 
(5)  Stormwater management and conservation, chapter 30, art. III. 
(b)  Where there is conflict between this chapter and the cited ordinances above, this chapter shall take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-123. - Implementation of chapter. 
(a)  Implementation of the comprehensive plan requires the establishment of minimum regulatory criteria to achieve the following results: 
(1)  Regulation of the subdivision of land; 
(2)  Insure the compatibility of adjacent land uses depicted on the future land use maps; 
(3)  Provide for open space; 
(4)  Protect potable water wellfields and sources; 
(5)  Regulation of areas subject to seasonal or periodic flooding; 
(6)  Provide for drainage and stormwater management; 
(7)  Regulation of signage; 
(8)  Implementation of concurrency management; and 
(9)  Insure adequate, safe and convenient onsite traffic flow and parking. 
(b)  Criteria applicable under the above subject areas are addressed under articles of this chapter corresponding with the relevant and applicable chapters of the comprehensive plan. For example, minimum criteria for the protection of potable water wellfields and sources are found under article X, infrastructure. Adequate, safe and convenient traffic flow and parking is found in article VIII, traffic circulation. Future land use is discussed in chapter 7 of the comprehensive plan, therefore, this article implements minimum criteria applicable to the first three subject areas listed above (regulation of the subdivision of land; insure compatibility of adjacent land uses; provide for open space). 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-124. - Reserved. 
Sec. 102-125. - Insure the compatibility of adjacent land uses depicted on the future land use maps (policy 7.A.3.3). 
(a)  The provisions of this article are intended to ensure functional and attractive development by requiring that all future development is consistent with accepted planning practices and principles as well as natural area limitations (policy 7.A.3.2). Compatibility is generally interpreted as meaning consistency of land use within specified districts and/or the orderly and harmonious transition of land use from one district to another. Nonconforming development is development that does not conform to the general character of a particular district or is contrary to the use regulations and/or development design standards provided by this chapter or by the codified ordinances. The following provisions are intended to eliminate expansion of nonconforming land uses which are inconsistent with: 
(1)  The future land use map; 
(2)  Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code, appendix A (objective 7.A.2). 
(b)  Regulations prescribed shall not be construed to require the removal or change to any existing structure completed or begun prior to the adoption of this chapter. Nonconforming uses, however, are otherwise prohibited. This extends to and includes the following circumstances: 
(1)  Nonconforming uses declared by this chapter to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved shall not be extended or enlarged. 
(2)  Nonconforming uses shall not be moved in whole or in part to any portion of a lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use." 
(3)  No additional structure shall be erected in connection with nonconforming uses of land. 
(4)  Reconstruction of nonconforming uses destroyed by fire or other calamity to a degree equalling or exceeding 50 percent of its replacement cost is prohibited. 
(5)  If any nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than six months, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this chapter and the codified ordinances. 
(6)  The extraction of natural resources from any district in the city shall be considered nonconforming until such time as applicable state and federal permits are obtained. No development incompatible with adjacent land uses shall be permitted by the city (policy 7.A.4.2). 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-126. - Reserved. 
Sec. 102-127. - Zoning regulatory controls. 
    Specific districts. Zoning districts established for the city, with permitted principal uses and structures, permitted accessory uses and structures, special exception uses and structures, prohibited uses and structures and permitted signs are provided under section 102-129. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-128. - Nonconforming uses and structures. 
(a)  Intent. 
(1)  Within the districts established by this chapter, or amendments that may later be adopted, there exist: 
a.  Lots; 
b.  Structures; 
c.  Uses of land; and 
d.  Characteristics of use; 
which were lawful before this chapter was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this chapter or future amendment. It is the intent of this chapter to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this chapter that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, or be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
(2)  Nonconforming uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. A nonconforming use of structure and land in combination shall not be extended or enlarged after the effective date of this chapter, or by the addition of other uses of a nature which would be prohibited generally in the district involved. 
(b)  Lots. 
(1)  In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record in a recorded subdivision or a lot in an unrecorded plat which was the subject of a contract to purchase or article of agreement executed prior to the effective date of this chapter, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this section. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district. Variance of yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the board of adjustment. 
(2)  Refer to article XXI, subdivisions and the foundation documents for requirements for subdivisions and exceptions. 
(c)  Uses of land (or land with minor structures only). Where, at the time of passage of this chapter, lawful uses of land exist which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this chapter, and where such use involves no individual structure with a replacement cost exceeding $1,000.00, the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided: 
(1)  No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter. 
(2)  No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter. 
(3)  If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than six months, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such land is located. 
(4)  No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this chapter shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land. 
(d)  Structures and lots. Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter that could not be built under the terms of this chapter by reason of restrictions of area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot, or other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformity. 
(2)  Should such nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50 percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in the exact dimensions as it existed on the date of its destruction with due diligence, provided, however, if and when the principal place of residence of a citizen of the city is destroyed by accidental fire, hurricane, tornado or other act of God, the homeowner may rebuild such residence to original type and size of such structure; or the homeowner or mobile homeowner may rebuild or replace with a superior type of material; provided the new construction conforms to dimensions previously existing. 
(3)  Should such structure be moved for any reason to any district whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
(4)  No such nonconforming lot may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity, but any lot or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformity. 
(e)  See article XXII, mobile and manufactured housing, of this chapter. 
(f)  Uses of structures and premises in combination. If lawful use involving individual structures with a replacement cost of $1,000.00 or more, or of structures and premises in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this chapter, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located. 
(2)  Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this chapter, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building. 
(3)  If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure or structure and premises may as a special exception be changed to another nonconforming use provided that the board of adjustment, either by general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the board of adjustment may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six consecutive months (except when government action impeded access to the premises), the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(5)  Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. Destruction for the purpose of this subsection is defined as damage to an extent of more than 50 percent of the replacement cost at the time of destruction. 
(g)  Repairs and maintenance. 
(1)  On a nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding 25 percent of the current replacement cost of the nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of the structure as the case may be, provided that the cubic content existing when it became nonconforming shall not be increased. 
(2)  If a nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs and maintenance, and is declared by any duly authorized official to be unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be restored, repaired or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(3)  Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. 
(h)  Uses under special exception provisions not nonconforming uses. Any use which is permitted as a special exception in a district under the terms of this chapter (other than a change through board of adjustment action from a nonconforming use to another use not generally permitted in the district) shall not be deemed a nonconforming use in such district, but shall without further action be considered a conforming use. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 980, § 2, 6-14-99) 
Sec. 102-129. - Districts and boundaries. 
(a)  In order to classify and regulate the uses of land and buildings, the height and bulk of buildings, the area and other open spaces about buildings and the intensity of land uses, the city is divided into 12 districts known as follows: 
A Agricultural district R-1A A one (single) family district R-1 A one (single) family district R-2 Multiple-family district (medium density) R-3 Multiple-family district (high density) C-1 Commercial district C-2 Downtown commercial district M-1 Industrial district P Public land district E Conservation district PUD Planned unit development district PMDD Planned mixed development district  
(b)  A (agricultural). This district is established within the city to preserve open space areas for coastal and water conservation, recreational, ecological and scenic benefits. Within the limits of this chapter, residential and agricultural use is permitted. 
(1)  Permitted use. 
a.  Single-family detached homes on lots with a minimum of 42,000 square feet of open space. 
b.  Wildlife and vegetation conservation. 
c.  The following recreational facilities: passive recreation, bike trails, jogging trails, tennis courts, swimming pools, ballparks. 
d.  Marine agriculture permitted by the state. 
e.  Private airstrips when licensed by the state. 
f.  Public or private fishing and hunting clubs when located on a parcel of land with a minimum area of ten acres dedicated exclusively to such use. 
(2)  Permitted accessory uses and structures. 
a.  Home occupations. 
b.  Telecommunications towers and facilities. 
(3)  Special exceptions. After review of an application and plans by the planning director or designee, and subsequent approval by the planning board and board of adjustment, the following may be approved as special exceptions: 
a.  Athletic fields or stadiums (200,000 square feet, minimum lot). 
b.  Horse or dog racetracks (200,000 square feet, minimum lot). 
c.  Festival site (200,000 square fee minimum lot). 
d.  Commercial agriculture provided that buildings or structures used for fowl or animals, storing grain, feed or fertilizer, or the processing of products including dairy operations, shall not be located closer than 100 feet of any property line or public right-of-way. 
e.  Noncommercial agriculture, and poultry, horse and livestock raising provided that any structure used for such shall not be closer than 100 feet to any property line or public right-of-way. 
f.  Telecommunications towers and facilities. 
(4)  Building height regulation. No dwelling or accessory building shall exceed 45 feet in height. 
(5)  Front, rear and side yard requirements. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 30 feet in depth. 
b.  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than 25 feet in depth. 
c.  Side yard. There shall be a side yard of not less than ten feet except churches, libraries, educational and recreational buildings and community buildings, which shall maintain a 25-foot side yard. Side yards of utility structures shall be not be less than five feet. 
d.  Corner lots. On corner lots the side yard shall be not less than 15 feet, except where the corner lot faces a different street than the remaining lots in the block, then a setback of 30 feet, or greater shall be maintained on both streets. 
e.  Fireplaces, chimneys and bay windows. Fireplaces, chimneys and bay windows may be allowed to extend into side and rear setbacks provided they do not exceed 30 inches in depth and six feet in width, and in no case shall such extension result in a feature being closer than seven and one-half feet from any dwelling unit or other habitable structure. 
(6)  Lot coverage. Forty percent of the lot area is the maximum that may be covered by principal and accessory buildings located thereon. Swimming pools are excepted from this provision. 
(7)  Prohibitions. Construction and demolition landfills are prohibited. 
(c)  R-1A and R-1 (single-family dwelling district). 
(1)  Uses permitted. Within any R-1A and R-1 single-family dwelling district, no building, structure, land and water shall be used except for one or more of the following uses: 
a.  Single-family dwelling and their customary accessory uses, when located on the same lot as the principal use. 
b.  Golf courses, swimming pools, tennis courts with customary attendant facilities and accessory buildings, country clubs and their customary accessory uses, stadiums in conjunction with school facilities. 
c.  Parks and playgrounds, when owned or operated by the city, county, state or federal government. 
d.  Home occupations are generally approved by the planning board where no stock in trade is kept in bulk, nor commodity sold, on the premises; no person employed other than members of the immediate family residing on the premises; and provided that not more than 25 percent of the total floor area in any dwelling unit is devoted to such use. 
Other requirements shall be: 
1.  There shall be no visible evidence of the conduct of a home occupation from the exterior of the building. 
2.  Home occupations shall not generate atmospheric pollution, light flashes, glare, odors, noise, vibration, or truck or other heavy traffic. 
3.  Persons engaged in home occupations may not advertise the availability of services or products at the residence in which the occupation is conducted. 
4.  Parking for any home occupation must be on the same property as the home occupation. Parking in the street or right-of-way is prohibited. 
5.  Only the following home occupations, or others deemed similar, may be approved: accountant, agent, architect, artist, attorney, beautician, bookkeeper, broker, chiropractor, contractor (office only), consultant, counselor, draftsman, engineer, interior decorator, musician, seamstress, tailor, teacher, writer-editor. 
6.  Family day care homes. Repair, or other occupations performed by handicapped persons which do not constitute a public nuisance as defined by section 102-166(b). 
e.  Micro telecommunications facilities (no towers). 
(2)  Special exceptions. After review of an application and plans by the planning director or designee, and subsequent approval by the planning board and board of adjustment, the following may be approved as special exceptions: 
a.  City owned or operated recreation and community buildings and libraries. 
b.  Churches and their accessory uses. 
c.  Utility structures and substations including telephone exchanges. 
d.  Elementary, junior, senior high schools, and colleges or universities. 
e.  Child care centers and kindergartens licensed by the state department of health and rehabilitative services. 
f.  Property defined as a lot, parcel or tract containing five acres or more may keep a noncommercial horse(s) provided that: 
1.  At least one acre space is dedicated to the dwelling. 
2.  At least one acre space is dedicated to the maintenance of each animal; 
3.  Related accessory buildings are located in the rear yards of a one-family detached dwelling or structure and that said accessory buildings are at least 100 feet from any property line. 
4.  That the special exception use is not detrimental to surrounding properties. (Note: this special exception is available in any zoning district permitting single-family residential use.) 
g.  Macro telecommunications facilities (no towers). 
Any review of an application or plan shall consider the character of the neighborhood in which the proposed use is to be located, with reference to the effect of the proposed development on surrounding properties and the public benefit and need for such use in the neighborhood, and further, a consideration of site area, open spaces, buffer strips, and off-street parking facilities as defined in the minimum requirements in the following sections: 
(3)  Building height. 
a.  No dwelling shall exceed 45 feet in height. 
b.  Churches, libraries, community center buildings, country clubs, educational and recreational buildings and utility structures may not exceed 45 feet in height. Church steeples shall be excepted from the 45-foot limitation. 
(4)  Building site area. 
a.  Each single-family dwelling shall be located on a lot, parcel or tract of land having an area of not less than 8,000 square feet in the R-1A district and 6,000 square feet in the R-1 district and said lots, parcels or tracts shall have minimum width of 75 feet and 50 feet, respectively, measured at the building line. 
b.  Educational and recreational buildings, churches and their accessory uses, and community buildings shall have a minimum site of one acre and such lot shall have a minimum width of 150 feet. 
c.  Child care centers, nursery schools and kindergartens in which more than five children are present at any given time shall comply with state department of health and rehabilitative services standards. 
d.  All other special exceptions, such as utility structures, shall provide minimum areas as determined following review and recommendation of the administrative services department and subsequent approval of the board of adjustment. 
(5)  Front, rear and side yard requirements. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 30 feet in depth in the R-1A district and of not less than 25 feet in the R-1 district. 
b.  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than 25 feet in depth in each district, except that rear yard set back requirements for accessory/utility structures in each district shall be not less than three feet. 
c.  Side yard. There shall be a side yard of not less than ten feet in the R-1A district and of not less than seven and one-half feet in the R-1 district, except churches, libraries, educational and recreational buildings and community buildings, which shall maintain a 25-foot side yard, except that setback requirement for accessory/utility structures in the R-1A district and R-1 district shall be not less than three feet. 
d.  Corner lots. On corner lots the side yard shall be not less than 15 feet, except where the corner lot faces a different street than the remaining lots in the block, then a setback of 30 feet or greater shall be maintained on both streets in the R-1A district or 25 feet or greater shall be maintained on both streets in the R-1 district. 
e.  Fireplaces, chimneys and bay windows. Fireplaces, chimneys and bay windows may be allowed to extend into side and rear setbacks provided they do not exceed 30 inches in depth and six feet in width and, in no case shall such extension result in a feature being closer than seven and one-half feet from any dwelling unit or other habitable structure. 
(6)  Lot coverage. Forty percent of the lot area is the maximum that may be covered by principal and accessory buildings located thereon. Swimming pools are excepted from this provision. 
(7)  Prohibitions. Construction and demolition landfills are prohibited within R-1 and R-1A single family dwelling districts. 
(d)  R-2 (one- or multiple-family dwelling district). 
(1)  Uses permitted. Within any R-2 one- or multiple-family dwelling district no building, structure, land or water may be used except for one or more of the following uses: 
a.  Any use permitted in the R-1 single-family dwelling district. 
b.  Two-family dwellings or multiple-family dwellings. 
c.  Townhomes. 
d.  Garage apartment located on the rear of a lot having a one-family or duplex principal structure. 
e.  Home occupations are permitted but must comply with requirements of home occupations for R-1A and R-1 (single-family dwelling district), subsection 102-129(c)(1)d. 
(2)  Building height. 
a.  No dwelling shall exceed 45 feet in height. 
b.  Churches, libraries, community center buildings, country clubs, educational, recreational buildings and other structures may not exceed 45 feet in height. Church steeples shall be excepted from the 45-foot limitation. 
(3)  Building site area regulations. 
a.  Each single-family dwelling shall be located on a lot with a minimum of 6,000 square feet of area and each lot shall have a minimum lot width of 50 feet when measured from the building setback line. 
b.  Each two-family or multi-family dwelling shall be located on a parcel at least 8,000 square feet in size, and each such parcel shall have a minimum lot width of 75 feet when measured from the building setback line. 
c.  Educational and recreational buildings, churches and their accessory uses, and community buildings shall have a minimum site of one acre and such lot shall have a minimum width of 150 feet. 
(4)  Front, rear and side yard requirements. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 25 feet. 
b.  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than 20 feet, except that rear yard set back requirements for accessory/utility structures shall be not less than three feet. 
c.  Side yard. There shall be a side yard of not less than seven and one-half feet for one- and two-family dwellings. Churches, libraries, educational, recreational and community buildings shall maintain a 25-foot side yard, except that setback requirement for accessory/utility structures shall be not less than three feet. 
d.  Corner lots. On corner lots, the side yard shall be not less than 15 feet, except where the corner lot faces a different street than the remaining lots in the block, then a setback of 25 feet or greater shall be maintained on both streets. 
e.  Fireplaces, chimneys and bay windows. Fireplaces, chimneys and bay windows may be allowed to extend into side and rear setbacks provided they do not exceed 30 inches in depth and six feet in width and, in no case shall such extension result in a feature being closer than seven and one-half feet from any dwelling unit or other habitable structure. 
(5)  Lot coverage. Forty percent of the lot area is the maximum that may be covered by principal and accessory buildings located thereon. Swimming pools are excepted from this provision. 
(6)  Townhomes. Townhomes, attached single-family dwellings sharing a common wall, may be built in this zoning district subject to the following regulations: 
a.  Front, rear, side, and building separation requirements. 
1.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 25 feet. 
2.  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than 20 feet. 
3.  Side yard. There shall be a side yard of not less than ten feet when any single-family district or use, otherwise the side setback is seven and one-half feet. Where the townhomes share a common wall, the side setback is zero feet. 
4.  Corner lots. On corner lots the side yard shall be not less than 15 feet, except where the corner lot faces a different street than the remaining lots in the block, then a setback of 25 feet or greater shall be maintained on both streets. 
5.  Fireplaces, chimneys and bay windows. Fireplaces, chimneys and bay windows may be allowed to extend into side and rear setbacks provided they do not exceed 30 inches in depth and six feet in width, and in no case shall such extension result in a feature being closer than seven and one-half feet from any dwelling unit or other habitable structure. 
6.  Building separation. There shall be a minimum building separation of 15 feet between adjacent townhome buildings. 
b.  Building site area regulations. Townhouse developments shall be on a parcel at least 8,000 square feet in size, and each such parcel shall have a minimum lot width of 75 feet when measured from the building setback line. 
c.  Lot coverage. There is no maximum lot coverage for principal and accessory buildings located thereon except that the development must meet all city code requirements for setbacks, buffer zones, landscaping, parking and other requirements as necessary. 
d.  Building group regulations. A townhouse building group shall contain no more than five attached dwelling units. 
e.  Building height. No townhouse dwelling shall exceed 45 feet in height. 
f.  Development area and dwelling unit restrictions. 
1.  Use of the regulations in this section are restricted to developments of one acre in size or less, and containing no more than 15 dwelling units. Developments that exceed these restrictions must be developed using the planned unit development regulations found in section 102-130. 
2.  Adjacent properties owned or controlled in whole or in part by the same individuals, corporations, or other legal entities may not be developed using the regulations in this section if the total acreage or dwelling unit numbers exceed one acre or 15 dwelling units. The regulations outlined in this section are not to be used to circumvent the PUD development process in section 102-130. 
(7)  Prohibitions. Construction and demolition landfills are prohibited. 
(e)  R-3 (one-, two- or multi-family dwelling district) 
(1)  Uses permitted: Within the R-3 district no building, structure, land or water may be used except for one or more of the following uses: 
a.  Any use permitted in the R-1 or R-2 districts, including single-family dwellings, duplex and triplex dwellings. 
b.  Multi-family dwellings. 
c.  Congregated living facilities, rooming or boarding houses, community residential homes are allowed but subject to the siting and limitation procedures delegated to local government pursuant to F.S. ch. 419. 
d.  Nursing or convalescent homes, medical facilities and professional offices. 
e.  Churches and similar places of worship, church and clergy residences, public parks, playgrounds, community buildings and similar public service facilities serving residents of the district. 
f.  Privately operated day nurseries, pre-schools and kindergartens, provided that any play area is enclosed on all sides to a height of at least four feet. 
g.  Neighborhood serving commercial uses, provided such uses are part of an approved PUD. 
h.  Home occupations are permitted but must comply with requirements of home occupations for R-1A and R-1 (single-family dwelling district), subsection 102-129(c)(1)d. 
(2)  Permitted accessory uses and structures: Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted principal uses and structures. 
(3)  Prohibited uses and structures: Any use not of a character indicated under permitted principal or accessory uses or structures. The keeping and caring for livestock or farm animals or other commercial agricultural activity. 
(4)  Building site area requirements. 
a.  Each single family dwelling shall be located on a lot with a minimum of 6,000 square feet of area and each lot shall have a minimum lot width of 50 feet when measured from the building setback line. 
b.  Duplex, triplex and townhouse developments shall be on a parcel at least 8,000 square feet in size, and each such parcel shall have a minimum lot width of 75 feet when measured from the building setback line. 
c.  Multi-family residential dwellings, including apartments and condominiums with a maximum density of up to 22 units per acre if the development is in an HDR land use category. 
There is no minimum parcel size, but the parcel shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the proposed development, the required open space and landscaping, parking, storm water management and other facilities or features required by this Code or the comprehensive plan. 
(5)  Setbacks (front, side and rear yard requirements): On every parcel in this district, the following minimum setbacks (yard requirements) apply: 
a.  Single-family detached dwelling units: 
25 feet front 
71/2 feet side 
20 feet rear 
15 feet corner, except where the corner lot faces a different street than the remaining lots in the block, then a setback of 25 feet or greater shall be maintained on both streets. 
b.  Duplex and multi-family structures: 
25 feet front 
10 feet side when adjacent to any single-family district or use, otherwise the side setback is seven and one-half feet 
10 feet rear 
15 feet corner, except where the corner lot faces a different street than the remaining lots in the block, then a setback of 25 feet, or greater shall be maintained on both streets. 
10 feet between buildings 
c.  Nonresidential structures: 
25 feet front 
25 feet side 
20 feet rear 
10 feet between buildings 
d.  For any residential structure exceeding 35 feet in height, the minimum side setback shall be 20 feet (25 feet for nonresidential) and the side setback shall be increased by two feet on each side for every ten feet above 35 feet (i.e. a 55-foot residential building would be required to have 24-foot side yards at a minimum). 
e.  For any structure exceeding 35 feet in height, the rear setback shall be 25 feet. If the rear yard is adjacent to a single-family home(s) or adjacent to property in the low density residential future land use category, the rear setback shall be increased by two feet for each ten feet of height above 35 feet. 
f.  For all structures 40 feet, or more, in height, the distance between structures on the same lot or parcel shall be increased by two feet for each ten feet above the first 40 feet, with a maximum of 50 feet between structures being required. 
g.  Fireplaces, chimneys and bay windows may be allowed to extend into side and rear setbacks provided they do not exceed 30 inches in depth and six feet in width and, in no case shall such extension result in a feature being closer than seven and one-half feet from any dwelling unit or other habitable structure. 
h.  All required setbacks shall be unobstructed for access and shall be finished with landscaping as approved by the city. 
(6)  Townhomes. Townhomes, attached single-family dwellings sharing a common wall, may be built in this zoning district subject to the following regulations: 
a.  Front, rear, side, and building separation requirements. 
1.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 25 feet. 
2.  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than ten feet. 
3.  Side yard. There shall be a side yard of not less than ten feet when adjacent to any single-family district or use, otherwise the side setback is seven and one-half feet. Where the townhomes share a common wall, the side setback is zero feet. 
4.  Corner lots. On corner lots the side yard shall be not less than 15 feet, except where the corner lot faces a different street than the remaining lots in the block, then a setback of 25 feet or greater shall be maintained on both streets. 
5.  Fireplaces, chimneys and bay windows. Fireplaces, chimneys and bay windows may be allowed to extend into side and rear setbacks provided they do not exceed 30 inches in depth and six feet in width and, in no case shall such extension result in a feature being closer than seven and one-half feet from any dwelling unit or other habitable structure. 
6.  Building separation. There shall be a minimum building separation of ten feet between adjacent townhome buildings. 
b.  Building site area regulations. Townhouse developments shall be on a parcel at least 8,000 square feet in size, and each such parcel shall have a minimum lot width of 75 feet when measured from the building setback line. 
c.  Lot coverage. There is no maximum lot coverage for principal and accessory buildings located thereon except that the development must meet all city code requirements for setbacks, buffer zones, landscaping, parking and other requirements as necessary. 
d.  Building group regulations. A townhouse building group shall contain no more than five attached dwelling units. 
e.  Building height. No townhouse dwelling shall exceed 45 feet in height. 
f.  Development area and dwelling unit restrictions. 
1.  Use of the regulations in this section are restricted to developments of one acre in size or less, and containing no more than 15 dwelling units. Developments that exceed these restrictions must be developed using the planned unit development regulations found in section 102-130. 
2.  Adjacent properties owned or controlled in whole or in part by the same individuals, corporations, or other legal entities may not be developed using the regulations in this section if the total acreage or dwelling unit numbers exceed one acre or 15 dwelling units. The regulations outlined in this section are not to be used to circumvent the PUD development process in section 102-130. 
(f)  C-1 (commercial district). Within any C-1 commercial district, no building, structure, land or water shall be used except for one or more of the following uses: 
(1)  Uses permitted. 
a.  Apothecary shops and pharmacies. 
b.  Apparel and dry goods shops. 
c.  Art, antique and gift shops. 
d.  Beauty salons and barbershops. 
e.  Boardinghouses and rooming houses. 
f.  Book and stationery stores; newsstands. 
g.  Churches and accessory uses. Schools for primary and secondary education, kindergartens and nursery schools. 
h.  Filling (service) stations selling gasoline and lubricants primarily. Only minor repairs such as tire patching but not recapping, also battery recharging, car wash and polish, but no body repairs. 
i.  Finance, investment and insurance offices and banks. 
j.  Florists. 
k.  Furniture, interior decorating and home furnishing stores. 
l.  Hospitals, clinics, nursing and convalescent homes. 
m.  Hotels, motels, guest cottages. 
n.  Grocery stores. 
o.  Laundry and dry cleaners. 
p.  Mortuary. 
q.  Music and dancing schools, art studios. 
r.  Offices for businesses and professions, but not including fortunetellers or psychics. 
s.  Photographic supplies and studios. 
t.  Private clubs and lodges. 
u.  Recreational facilities and parks under the operation or ownership of the city. 
v.  Restaurants. 
w.  Shoe repair and hat cleaning, dressmaking and tailor shops. 
x.  Utility structures and substations including telephone exchange. 
y.  Animal hospitals. 
z.  Automotive agencies with repair garages as an accessory use. Junked cars held for salvage of parts are disallowed in this district. 
aa.  Bakery, the products of which are produced primarily for retail sale on the premises. 
bb.  Bus terminals and taxicab stations, car rentals. 
cc.  Commercial amusements, including theaters (but not drive-in theaters) ballrooms, skating rinks, billiard parlors, bowling alleys, amusement parks, miniature golf courses and others of a similar nature. 
dd.  Self-storage and mini-warehouses with all storage to be within the structure. Self-storage or mini-warehouses in commercial districts shall have on-site offices. For the purposed of this zoning category, on-site shall mean on the premises or on another parcel within one-half mile of the self-storage or mini-warehouse. Also, any business that operates a self-storage or mini-warehouse within the city limits, even if their business office is located outside of the city, must have a valid City of Crestview occupational license. 
ee.  Gasoline service stations, automobile/motorcycle repair garages. 
ff.  Radio and television stations with towers and studios. 
gg.  Shops for painters, plumbers, paper hangers, electricians, upholsterers and others of a similar nature. Outdoor storage yards are permitted when accessory to the above uses, provided all equipment and merchandise are enclosed behind a screen consisting of plantings or a closed or semi-closed type fence not less than five feet in height. 
hh.  Shops for business services, such as addressing and mailing, advertising and distributing, multigraphing, blueprinting, printing and photography. 
ii.  Used car lots. 
jj.  Vocational and private schools operated as commercial enterprises. 
kk.  Terminals for small package distribution to include loading and unloading of semi-tractor trailers to local delivery vans or other small vehicles, provided that all operations are conducted within a building with no outside storage. 
ll.  Mobile/manufacturing home sales. 
mm.  Signs may be placed on a commercial lot in accordance with article XVI. 
nn.  Accessory uses necessary to the foregoing, including warehouses and storage yards, when located on the same lot as the principal uses or on another parcel within one-half mile of the principal uses. Also, any business that operates a warehouse or storage yard within the city limits, even if their principal use is located outside of the city, must have a valid City of Crestview occupational license. Furthermore, storage yards are for the storage of business vehicles, construction materials, bulk merchandise or other items too large for on-site storage at the location of the principal use. Storage yards are not the same as scrap or junk yards which are prohibited in this zoning category. 
oo.  All sales, services and commercial activities must be conducted within a structure, and no outdoor display of merchandise or products will be permitted in connection with any of the foregoing uses except for automobile dealerships, tractor and farm equipment sales, mobile/manufactured homes and other prefabricated buildings. 
pp.  Applications for uses similar to the foregoing in character but not specifically enumerated and which are not excluded from this section by their specific inclusion in the M-1 zone that follows shall be reviewed by the board of adjustment, which, after finding as a fact that said use or uses are consistent with the general zoning plan and in the public interest, may grant an approval thereof. 
(2)  Permitted accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures which are customarily and clearly incidental, secondary or subordinate to permitted principal uses and structures. Dwelling or lodging units in conjunction with the operation of a principal use only, provided that such dwelling or lodging unit shall be located above or behind the principal use structure in such way that there is no interruption of commercial frontage. Such dwelling units shall be considered separate from the commercial use for the purposes of impact and connection fees. 
(3)  Prohibited uses and structures. Junkyards and scrap yards. 
(4)  Building height regulations. None. 
(5)  Building site regulations. None. 
(6)  Yard regulations. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 25 feet. 
b.  Side yard. None are required, except, where rear access is not available from a public street or alley, a side yard of not less than ten feet will be provided on one side. 
c.  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than 20 feet, except, where the rear of the property is bounded by a public alley or street, the rear yard may be decreased by one-half the width of such alley or street up to ten feet, but in such event there shall be provided a rear yard of not less than ten feet exclusive of the alley. 
d.  Corner lots. On corner lots the side yard shall be not less than 15 feet on the side street. 
(7)  Mobile/manufactured home sales. Mobile/manufactured homes under the custody, control and care of a properly licensed dealer will be required to skirt the foundation area, or install an acceptable alternative, to accomplish a visual barrier of all units facing public highways and city streets. Minimum setback and separation between units will be determined by the state building codes and city landscaping buffer requirements. 
(g)  C-2 (downtown commercial district). 
(1)  Uses permitted. 
a.  Any use permitted in the C-1 general commercial district except the following which are prohibited: 
1.  Automobile/motorcycle repair shops. 
2.  Vehicle paint and body shops. 
3.  Churches and their accessory uses. 
4.  Filling/gasoline stations. 
5.  Self storage and mini-warehouses. 
6.  New or used car lots. 
7.  Tractor or farm equipment sales or service. 
8.  Terminals for small package distribution. 
9.  Mobile/manufactured home sales unless such sales are done with no on-site model homes. 
10.  Junkyards and scrap yards. 
b.  Outdoor display of merchandise and outdoor storage of merchandise or materials is strictly prohibited on public property. 
(2)  Permitted accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures which are customarily and clearly incidental, secondary or subordinate to permitted principal uses and structures. Dwelling or lodging units in conjunction with the operation of a principal use only, provided that such dwelling or lodging unit shall be located above or behind the principal use structure in such way that there is no interruption of commercial frontage. Such dwelling units shall be considered separate from the commercial use for the purposes of impact and connection fees. 
(3)  Building height regulations. None. 
(4)  Building site regulations. None. 
(5)  Yard regulations. 
a.  Front yard. None are required except that a minimum setback of 25 feet shall apply on any property adjacent to (fronting) State Route 85 or James Lee Blvd. (US 90). 
b.  Side yard. None are required, except, where rear access is not available from a public street or alley, a side yard of not less than ten feet will be provided on one side. 
c.  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than ten feet. A clear-zone free of accessory structures and stored materials of at least ten feet in depth shall be maintained in the rear setback of the principal structure to facilitate fire department access in the event of an emergency. 
d.  Corner lots. On corner lots no side yard is required on the street side provided the building footprint does not cause a vision triangle problem as described in subsection 102-149(h). 
e.  In no case shall the yard regulations listed above be construed as allowing a permanent structure to be built over or within a drainage, utility, or other easement. 
(6)  Landscaping regulations. Landscaping shall be provided to the fullest extent possible in the C-2 zoning district. Because of the space limitations inherent in a downtown area, hardscaping, xeriscaping, planters, hanging planters or baskets, and other similar beautification techniques may be used in place of traditional landscaping techniques and shall receive credit toward the landscaping requirements in this Code. If landscaping requirements can not be met, or are not met to the satisfaction of the city council, the landscaping requirements can be satisfied by contributing to the tree replacement reserve account as defined in section 102-578. 
(7)  Public facilities, sales, and solicitation. Sidewalk sales, outdoor food vendors and outdoor games are allowed only as part of a city sponsored special event in the downtown commercial district unless a vendors license is applied for and approved by the city. Persistent and ongoing solicitation on public property for products or services by commercial, charitable or private organizations or individuals is strictly prohibited. Signage, as approved in this chapter, shall not be construed as solicitation. 
(h)  M-1 (industrial district). 
(1)  Uses permitted. 
a.  Any use permitted in the C-1 general commercial district. 
b.  Any other use of a wholesale, commercial, warehousing or manufacturing nature, including storage yards, and truck terminals, providing that no use constitutes a nuisance because of the emission of excessive amounts of dust, dirt, gas odors, smoke, fumes, noise or vibrations. Uses possessing an abnormal explosion hazard will not be permitted without approval of the city council. 
c.  Storage of junk, waste, scrap or salvage materials shall be permitted providing the operation is conducted within a closed building or the operation is conducted within an enclosed area with a minimum of five acres and shall have an eight-foot high chain link fence surrounding the property with gate. There shall be a minimum of 20-foot green belt around the borders of the property planted with evergreen trees and shrubbery to provide a visual screening of the property. There shall be a minimum 30-foot setback from all property lines which shall remain clear of all structures and storage of any junk or storage of materials of any kind. 
d.  Public utilities and sewer facilities (sewage treatment plants, solid waste stations, etc.). 
(2)  Permitted accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures which are customarily and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted principal uses and structures. Dwelling or lodging units in conjunction with the operation of a principal use only, provided that such dwelling or lodging unit shall be located above or behind the principal use structure in such way that there is no interruption of commercial frontage. 
(3)  Special exceptions. After review of an application and plans by the planning director or designee, and subsequent approval by the planning commission and board of adjustment, the following may be approved as special exceptions: 
a.  Construction and demolition landfills. 
(4)  Building height regulations. None. 
(5)  Building site area regulations. None. 
(6)  Yard regulations. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 20 feet. 
b.  Side yard. None are required, except, where rear access is not available from a public street or alley, a side yard of not less than ten feet will be provided on one side; or when the side of the lot abuts a residential district, there shall be a side yard of not less than 30 feet on that side. 
c.  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than ten feet, except when the rear of the lot abuts a residential district, there shall be a rear yard of not less than 30 feet. 
d.  Corner lots. On corner lots the side yard shall be not less than 15 feet on the side street. 
(7)  Off-street parking regulations. See section 102-151. 
(8)  Special requirements. Any tract of land granted a special exception use for construction and demolition landfills must be fenced or have a barrier installed, landscaped and meet all stormwater requirements of the city code. Further, the owner or operator must obtain a permit and pay an annual user fee as determined by the city council. 
(i)  P (public land district). 
(1)  Uses permitted. 
a.  Federal, state, county, or city government property and facilities. 
b.  Federal, state, county, or city owned or operated recreation and community buildings and libraries. 
c.  Parks and playgrounds when owned or operated by the city, county, state or federal government. 
d.  Churches and their accessory uses. 
e.  Utility structures and substations including telephone exchanges. 
f.  Elementary, middle, junior, senior high schools, and colleges or universities. 
(2)  Permitted accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures which are customarily and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted principal uses and structures. 
(3)  Prohibited uses and structures. Any use not of a character indicated under permitted principal or accessory uses or structures. 
(4)  Building site area. Developments in the public land district shall have a minimum site of one acre and such lot shall have a minimum width of 150 feet. 
(5)  Front, rear and side yard requirements. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 30 feet in depth. 
b.  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than 25 feet in depth except that rear yard setback requirements for accessory/utility structures shall be not less than three feet. 
c.  Side yard. There shall be a side yard of not less than 25 feet in except that setback requirements for accessory/utility structures shall be not less than three feet. 
d.  Corner lots. On corner lots the side yard shall be not less than 25 feet, except where the corner lot faces a different street than the remaining lots in the block and the remainder of the block is located in an A, R-1A, or P district, then a setback of 30 feet or greater shall be maintained on both streets. 
e.  Fireplaces, chimneys and bay windows. Fireplaces, chimneys and bay windows may be allowed to extend into side and rear setbacks provided they do not exceed 30 inches in depth and six feet in width and, in no case shall such extension result in a feature being closer than seven and one-half feet from any dwelling unit or other habitable structure. 
(6)  Off-street parking regulations. See section 102-151. 
(j)  E (conservation district). 
(1)  Purpose. Placing lands in the conservation district is intended to result in the conservation, preservation, protection and management of environmentally sensitive lands and other important resources such as archaeological, cultural, and historical resources. 
(2)  Uses permitted. 
a.  Passive recreation or education uses that are compatible with the conservation purpose of the district. 
b.  Facilities designed to enhance the conservation purpose and that are compatible with the conservation purpose of the district. 
(3)  Prohibited uses and structures. Any use not of a character indicated under permitted uses. 
(4)  Building site area. Development in a conservation district is strictly regulated and shall not create an impervious surface coverage of greater than five percent. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 935, § 2, 9-28-98; Ord. No. 980, § 3, 6-14-99; Ord. No. 990, §§ 2-4, 1-10-00; Ord. No. 1101, § 2, 10-28-02; Ord. No. 1120, § 2, 7-14-03; Ord. No. 1163, §§ 2, 3, 1-24-05; Ord. No. 1248, §§ 4, 5, 4-10-06; Ord. No. 1323, § 6, 4-9-07; Ord. No. 1418, § 2, 7-13-09; Ord. No. 1473, § 1, 11-28-11; Ord. No. 1466, § 2, 7-25-11) 
Sec. 102-130. - Planned unit development (PUD) district and planned mixed development (PMDD) district. 
Planned unit development (PUD) 
(a)  Intent and purpose, permitted uses. 
(1)  Intent and purpose. It is the purpose of this section to permit PUD's which are intended to encourage the development of land as planned neighborhoods, encourage flexible and creative concepts of site planning; preserve the natural amenities of the land by encouraging scenic and functional open areas; accomplish a more desirable environment that would not be possible through the strict application of the minimum requirements of this Code; provide for an efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of streets and utilities where access to regional systems is impractical and thereby lowering development and housing costs; and provide a stable environmental character compatible with surrounding areas. 
(2)  Permitted uses. The uses permitted within this district shall include the following: 
a.  Residential units, including single-family attached and detached dwellings, two-family dwellings, and multiple-family dwellings. 
b.  Churches, schools, community or club buildings and similar public and semi-public facilities. 
c.  Nonresidential uses, including commercial or retail uses, (as secondary uses primarily serving the development) offices, clinics and professional uses. Nonresidential uses shall not occupy more than 20 percent of gross acreage of the development site or 30 percent of the gross floor area of all buildings within the development site, except for open space and recreation uses which may occupy as much of the site as may be approved by the city council. NOTE: There is no requirement to include nonresidential uses, other than open-space and common amenities. 
(b)  Definitions. In addition to the definitions contained elsewhere in this Code, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the following meaning: 
(1)  Common open space. An area of land, or an area of water, or combination of land and water within the area of a PUD which is designed and intended for the use or enjoyment by residents of the PUD in common. Common open space may contain such recreation structures and improvements as are desirable and appropriate for the common benefit and enjoyment of residents of the PUD. 
(2)  Gross acreage. The total number of acres within the perimeter boundaries of a PUD development site. 
(3)  Land owner. The legal or beneficial owner or owners of all the land proposed to be included in a PUD; the holder of an option or a contract to purchase; or a person having possessory rights of equal dignity will be deemed to be a land owner for the purpose of this section, so long as the consent to the PUD of the owners of all other interests in the land concerned is obtained. 
(4)  Net acreage. The total number of acres within the perimeter boundaries of a PUD excluding areas devoted to streets, rights-of-way, easements, lakes, public and private open space and recreation areas. 
(5)  Planned unit development (PUD). An area of land devoted by its owner to development as a single entity for a number of dwelling units, and commercial uses in accordance with a plan which does not necessarily comply with the provisions of this ordinance with respect to lot size, lot coverage, setbacks, off-street parking, bulk or type of dwelling, density and other regulations. 
(6)  Plan. Plans for development of land approved for PUDs shall be processed in accordance with procedures for subdividing and for re-zoning property within the city. Approval of a PUD by the city council constitutes a re-zoning of the property and, therefore all requirements for re-zoning must be followed. 
The preliminary development plan is to be submitted to the administrative services director, or his designee, with the preliminary plat. The final development plan is submitted in the same manner for final plat approval. 
All terms, conditions and stipulations made at the time of approval for PUDs shall be binding upon the applicant or any successors in interest. Deviations from approved plans not approved as a minor or substantial change as set forth in this article or failure to comply with any requirement, condition or safeguard shall constitute a violation of these zoning regulations. 
(c)  Procedure for approval of a planned unit development. The procedure for obtaining a change in zoning district for the purpose of undertaking a PUD shall be as follows: 
(1)  Preliminary planned unit development and master plan approval. The applicant shall submit to the administrative services department, his application for the PUD zoning classification and shall submit the following exhibits at the same time. 
a.  A statement of objectives describing the general purpose and character of the proposed development including type structures and uses. 
b.  A vicinity map showing the location of the proposed development. 
c.  Boundary survey and legal description of the property. 
d.  A topographic survey. 
e.  A master plan. A master plan, drawn at a scale suitable for presentation, showing and/or describing the following: 
1.  Proposed land uses including type, size and location of structures: 
2.  Lot sizes. 
3.  Building setbacks: proposed building setbacks shall be noted and shall define the distance buildings will be setback from: 
(a)  Surrounding property lines. 
(b)  Proposed and existing streets. 
(c)  Other proposed buildings. 
(d)  The center line of channels, streams or rivers. 
(e)  The mean high water line of waterbodies. 
(f)  Other man-made or natural features which would be affected by building encroachment. 
(g)  Any jurisdictional areas (i.e. wetlands) on or adjacent to the site. 
4.  Proposed maximum height of buildings. 
5.  Open spaces: 
(a)  Developed recreation. 
(b)  Common open space. 
(c)  Natural areas. 
(d)  Location of any protected trees with a 12 inch diameter at breast height (four feet above grade). 
6.  Collector and residential access streets. 
7.  Screening, buffering and landscaped areas (a landscaping plan). 
f.  A table showing acreage for each category of land use. 
g.  A table of proposed maximum and average densities for residential land uses. 
h.  A preliminary utility service plan including sanitary sewers, storm drainage, potable water supply, and re-use water for irrigation. 
i.  A statement indicating the type of legal instruments that will be created to provide for management of common areas, streets and infrastructure. 
j.  Applicants are encouraged to include building elevations, color preferred, as well as other graphic representations, in both hard copy and digitally. 
k.  Electronic copies of the master plan and preliminary utility service plan. Also include building elevations, if possible. Applicants should coordinate with the city prior to submittal so as to insure compatibility between computer files (PDF, TIFF, JPEG and AUTOCAD are preferred). 
l.  Other information which may be determined necessary by the city in order to fully understand and document the proposal. Such other information shall not be unreasonable and shall be required only due to unique circumstances associated with the development site, the neighborhood or the proposal. 
(2)  Processing the planned unit development zoning application and preliminary master plan submittals. When the administrative services director, or designee, has received the application and submittals, and is satisfied that the application and submittals are complete, the application shall be processed as any other zoning application in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
(3)  Final development plan. If rezoning approval for the PUD is granted, the applicant shall submit a final planned unit development plan covering all or part of the approved master plan within 12 months, to the administrative services department. The final development plan shall include the following exhibits. 
a.  A statement of objectives. 
b.  A topographic map showing contours at intervals of two feet. 
1.  The location of existing buildings, water courses, transmission lines, sewers, bridges, water mains and any public utility easements. 
2.  Wooded areas, streams, lakes, jurisdictional wetlands, and any other physical conditions affecting the site. 
c.  A development plan showing: 
1.  The boundaries of the site. 
2.  Width, location and names of surrounding streets. 
3.  Surrounding land use. 
4.  Proposed streets and street names and other vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems including off-street parking. 
5.  The use, size and location of all proposed building sites including type structures and showing proposed elevations. 
6.  Location and size of common open spaces and public or semi-public areas, including anticipated recreational facilities (type, size and number). 
d.  A utility service plan showing: 
1.  Existing and proposed drainage and sewer lines. 
2.  The disposition of solid waste, sanitary waste and stormwater. 
3.  The source of potable water. 
4.  Re-use water for irrigation. 
5.  Location and width of all utility easements rights-of-way. 
6.  Department of transportation, department of environmental protection and/or U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or other regulatory agency permits required for the development, if any. 
e.  All landscaped areas: 
1.  Landscaped areas. 
2.  Location, height and material for walks, fences, walkways, and other man-made landscape features. 
3.  Location and diameter at breast height of trees to be removed and location and species of trees to be planted. 
f.  The substance of covenants, grants, easements or restrictions to be imposed on the use of the land, buildings and structures, including proposed easements for public and private utilities. All such legal documents, including homeowners associations and deed restrictions, must be approved by the city attorney before final approval of the plan. 
g.  Electronic copies of the master plan, utility service plan and landscape plan. Also include building elevations, if possible. Applicants should coordinate with the city prior to submittal so as to insure compatibility between computer files (PDF, TIFF, JPEG and AUTOCAD are preferred). 
(4)  Approval required for issuance of permit. No permit shall be issued for any portion of a proposed PUD until the final development plan has been approved. 
(5)  Revision of a planned unit development. Any proposed major and substantial change in the approved preliminary planned unit development master plan which affects the intent and character of the development, the density or land use pattern, the location or dimensions of arterial or collector streets, or similar substantial changes, shall be reviewed by the city council in the same manner of the initial zoning application. A request for a revision of the preliminary planned unit development master plan shall be supported by a written statement and by revised plans. Minor changes, and/or deviations from the preliminary planned unit development master plan, which do not affect the intent or character of the development, shall be reviewed by the administrative services director, or his designee. Upon approval of the revisions, both minor and major, the applicant shall make revisions to the plans and submittals and file with the city within 30 days. 
Examples of substantial and/or minor changes are: 
Substantial changes: Perimeter changes, including building reorientation or shifts in location when such building(s) are located adjacent to any perimeter landscaped or buffer areas; 
Change in alignment, location, direction, or length of roads or streets; 
Change in building height, density, or land use pattern; 
Increase in impervious areas; 
Minor changes: Adjustments or minor shifts in dwelling unit mixes, not resulting in increased overall density; 
Reorientation or slight shifts in building locations of interior structures; 
Changes in plant mix for landscaped areas provided that such changes do not result in a change in function (i.e. buffering from adjacent properties) of said landscaped areas. 
If the administrative services director is uncertain as to whether a proposed change is minor or substantial, the proposed change shall be submitted to the city council for a determination as to the acceptability of the proposed change. 
(6)  Planned unit development time limitations. If substantial construction, as determined by the city, has not begun within two years after approval of the PUD by the city council, the approval of the PUD will lapse. 
The administrative services director may extend the period for beginning construction by not more than six months, if it is demonstrated that such an extension will result in the development of the approved PUD and that delays were beyond the control of the applicant. The burden of proof for obtaining the extension is on the applicant. 
If the PUD lapses under this provision, the city shall cause the PUD district to be removed from the official zoning map, mail a notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, of revocation to the applicant and owner or owners and reinstate the zoning district which was in effect prior to the approval of the PUD. If the applicant is other than the owner, the notice shall be sent to the person or entity listed in the county property appraiser's records as owning the subject property. 
(d)  Development standards for planned unit developments. 
(1)  Relation to zoning districts. An approved PUD shall be considered to be a separate zoning district in which the development plan, as approved, establishes the restrictions and regulations according to which the development shall occur. Upon approval, the official zoning map will be changed to indicate the area as PUD. 
(2)  Density. The density of any approved PUD shall not exceed the maximum density established in the adopted comprehensive plan by the future land use category imposed on the property to be developed as a PUD. 
(3)  Dimensional and bulk regulations. The location of all proposed building sites shall be shown on the final development plan. 
(4)  Common open space. Common open spaces shown on a final development plan shall be usable, common open space owned and operated by the developer or dedicated to a homeowner's association or similar group. 
(5)  Access and parking. All streets, thoroughfares and access ways shall be paved and designed to effectively relate to the major thoroughfares of the city and the county. Adequate off-street parking shall, at a minimum, meet the off-street parking requirements as set forth in this Code for similar uses unless otherwise approved or required by the city council. 
(6)  Perimeter requirements. The city council, upon the recommendation of the administrative services director, may impose the requirement that structures, buildings and streets located at the perimeter of the development be permanently screened, buffered, re-oriented or modified to insure compatibility with adjacent existing uses. 
(e)  PUD (zoning) application and submittal checklist. 
_____1. Statement of objectives _____a. The general purpose of the proposed development. _____b. The general character of the proposed development. _____2. A vicinity map showing the location of the proposed PUD. _____3. A boundary survey and legal description of the property. _____4. Topographic survey. _____5. Master plan. _____a. Proposed land uses including type, size and location of structures. _____b. Lot sizes. _____c. Building Setbacks. _____1. Surrounding uses and property lines. _____2. Proposed and existing streets. _____3. Other proposed buildings. _____4. The centerline of rivers, streams, and canals. _____5. The high water line of lakes. _____6. Other manmade or natural features, including wetlands, which would be affected by building encroachment. _____d. Maximum height of buildings. _____e. Open spaces. _____1. Developed recreation. _____2. Common open space. _____3. Natural areas. _____f. Arterial and collector streets and thoroughfares. _____g. Screening and buffering areas and concepts. _____h. Landscaped areas and concepts. _____6. A table showing acreage for each category of land use. _____7. A table of proposed maximum and average densities for residential land uses. _____8. Preliminary utilities service plan, including sanitary sewers, storm drainage, and potable water supply. _____9. A statement indicating the type of legal instruments that will be created to provide for the management of common areas. _____10. Electronic copies of the Master Plan, Preliminary Utility Service Plan, Landscape Plan and, when possible, building elevations.  
Planned Mixed Development District (PMDD) 
(f)  Intent and purpose, permitted uses. 
(1)  Intent and purpose. It is the purpose of this section to permit planned mixed use developments as planned neighborhoods and business and commercial centers; encourage flexible and creative concepts of site planning; preserve the natural amenities of the land by encouraging functional open areas; accomplish a more desirable environment that would not be possible through the strict application of the minimum requirements of these regulations; provide for an efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of streets and utilities where access to regional systems is impractical and thereby lowering development and housing costs; and providing a stable environmental character compatible with surrounding areas. 
Among other development scenarios, this district is intended to permit development with mixed uses in a single building or in one or more buildings within a development area. For example, a development might include a four story building(s), with commercial uses on the first floor and residential uses on the upper floors. Various combinations and scenarios are possible. 
(2)  Permitted uses. The uses permitted within this district shall include the following: 
a.  Residential units, including single-family attached and detached dwellings, two-family dwellings and multiple-family dwellings. 
b.  Churches, schools, community or club buildings and similar public and semi-public facilities. 
c.  Nonresidential uses, including commercial or retail uses; offices, clinics and professional uses. 
d.  There is no minimum requirement regarding the mix of land uses within the development site, but a mix of residential and non-residential is encouraged. If there is no residential component to a proposed mixed use development, the applicant shall be required to justify why the development could not be permitted under the commercial zoning district regulations. To accept or reject such justification is a policy decision of the city council and shall be based on the council's determination as to the best interests of the city. 
(g)  Definitions. In addition to the definitions contained in this Code, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the following meaning: 
(1)  Common open space. An area of land, or an area of water, or combination of land and water within the area of a planned mixed use development which is designed and intended for the use of enjoyment of residents or users of the development in common. Common open space may contain such structures and improvements as are desirable and appropriate for the common benefit and enjoyment of residents or users of the mixed use development. 
(2)  Gross acreage. The total number of acres within the perimeter boundaries of a planned mixed use development. 
(3)  Land owner. The legal or beneficial owner or owners of all the land proposed to be included in a planned mixed use development: the holder of an option or a contract to purchase; or a person having possessory rights of equal dignity (such as a lease) will be deemed to be a land owner for the purpose of this section. 
(4)  Net acreage. The total number of acres within the perimeter boundaries of a planned mixed use development excluding areas devoted to streets, rights-of-way, easements, lakes, public and private open space and recreation areas. 
(5)  Planned mixed development district (PMDD). An area of land devoted by its owner to development as a single entity for a number of dwelling units, and/or commercial uses in accordance with a plan which does not necessarily comply with the provisions of this ordinance with respect to lot size, lot coverage, setbacks, off-street parking, bulk or type of dwelling, density and other regulations. 
(6)  Plan. Plans for development of land approved for planned mixed developments shall be processed in accordance with procedures for subdividing and for re-zoning property within the city. Approval of a PMDD by the city council constitutes a re-zoning of the property and, therefore all requirements for re-zoning must be followed. 
The preliminary development plan is to be submitted to the administrative services director, or designee, with the preliminary plat, if any. The final development plan is submitted in the same manner for final plat approval. A preliminary development plan is required even if the proposal does not include a platting or re-platting of land in which case no plat is required. 
(h)  Procedure for approval of a planned mixed use development. When a parcel of land is zoned for planned mixed development district, such parcel shall not be subdivided into smaller parcels without first complying with the provisions of this section for master planning. The procedure for obtaining approval for the purpose of undertaking a planned mixed use development shall be as follows: 
(1)  Preliminary planned mixed use development and master plan approval. The applicant shall submit to the administrative services director, or designee, an application for the approval of the planned mixed development and shall submit the following exhibits at the same time. 
a.  A statement of objectives describing the general purpose and character of the proposed development including type structures and uses. 
b.  A vicinity map showing the location of the proposed planned mixed development. 
c.  Boundary survey and legal description of the property. 
d.  A topographic survey. 
e.  A master plan, drawn at a scale suitable for presentation, showing and/or describing the following: 
1.  Proposed land uses including type, size and location of structures. 
2.  Lot sizes, if any. 
3.  Building setbacks: Proposed building setbacks shall be noted and shall define the distance buildings will be setback from: 
(a)  Surrounding uses and property lines. 
(b)  Proposed and existing streets and highways. 
(c)  Other proposed buildings. 
(d)  The center line of rivers, streams, and canals. 
(e)  Jurisdictional areas, including wetlands, on or adjacent to the site. 
(f)  The mean high water line of waterbodies. 
(g)  Other man-made or natural features which would be affected by building encroachment. 
4.  Proposed maximum height of buildings. 
5.  Open spaces: 
(a)  Developed recreation. 
(b)  Common open space and amenities. 
(c)  Natural areas. 
(d)  Location of any protected trees with a 12-inch diameter at breast height (four feet above grade). 
6.  Collector and access streets. 
7.  Screening, buffering and landscaped areas (a landscaping plan). 
f.  A table showing acreage for each category of land use. 
g.  A table of proposed maximum and average densities for residential land uses and intensities (FAR) for non-residential uses. 
h.  A preliminary utility service plan including sanitary sewers, storm drainage, and potable water supply, showing general location of major water and sewer lines, plant location, lift stations, re-use water for irrigation, etc. 
i.  A statement indicating the type of legal instruments that will be created to provide for the management of common areas, streets and infrastructure. 
j.  A signage plan with locations and sizes of proposed signs. 
k.  Applicants are encouraged to include building elevations, color preferred, as well as other graphic representations, in both hard copy and digitally. 
l.  Electronic copies of the master plan and preliminary utility service plan. Also include building elevations, if possible. Applicants should coordinate with the city prior to submittal so as to insure compatibility between computer files (PDF, TIFF, JPEG and AUTOCAD are preferred). 
m.  Other information which may be determined necessary by the city in order to fully understand and document the proposal. Such other information shall not be unreasonable and shall be required only due to unique circumstances associated with the development site, the neighborhood or the proposal. 
(2)  Processing the planned mixed development zoning application and preliminary master plan submittals. When the administrative services department has received the application and submittals, and is satisfied that the application and submittals are complete, the application shall be processed as any other zoning application in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
The preliminary master plan must accompany the rezoning application. 
(3)  Final development plan. If approval for the planned mixed use development is granted by the city council, the applicant shall submit a final development plan covering all or part of the approved master plan within 12 months, to the administrative services director. 
The final development plan shall include the following exhibits. 
a.  A statement of objectives; 
b.  A topographic map showing: 
1.  The location of existing streets, buildings, water courses, transmission lines, sewers, bridges, water mains and any public utility easements. 
2.  Wooded areas, streams, lakes, wetlands and any other physical conditions affecting the site. 
3.  Existing contours shown at intervals of two feet. 
c.  A development plan showing: 
1.  The boundaries of the site. 
2.  Width, location and names of surrounding streets. 
3.  Surrounding land use. 
4.  Proposed streets and street names and other vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems including off-street parking. 
5.  The use, size and location of all proposed building sites including type structures, with building elevations. 
6.  Location and size of common open spaces and public or semi-public areas, including facilities, types and quantities, if any. 
d.  A utility service plan showing: 
1.  Existing and proposed drainage and sewer lines. 
2.  The disposition of sanitary waste and stormwater. 
3.  The source of potable water. 
4.  Re-use water for irrigation. 
5.  Location and width of all utility easements right-of-way. 
6.  Department of Transportation and Department of Environmental Protection and/or U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or any other regulatory agency permits required for the development, if any. 
e.  A landscaping plan showing: 
1.  Landscaped areas with details of proposed plantings and natural vegetation retained after development. 
2.  Location, height and material for walks, fences, walkways, and other man-made landscape features. 
f.  The substance of covenants, grants, easements or restrictions to be imposed on the use of the land, buildings and structures, including proposed easements for public and private utilities. All such legal documents, including homeowners associations and deed restrictions, must be approved by the city attorney before final approval of the plan. 
g.  Electronic copies of the master plan, utility service plan and landscape plan. Also include building elevations, if possible. Applicants should coordinate with the city prior to submittal so as to insure compatibility between computer files (PDF, TIFF, JPEG and AUTOCAD are preferred). 
(4)  Approval required for issuance of permit. No permit shall be issued for any portion of a proposed planned mixed use development until the final development plan has been approved. 
(5)  Revision of an approved planned development. Any proposed major and substantial change in the approved preliminary planned mixed use development master plan which affects the intent and character of the development, the density or land use pattern, the location or dimensions of arterial or collector streets, or similar substantial changes, shall be reviewed by the city in the same manner as the initial site plan approval. A request for a revision of the preliminary planned mixed use development master plan, shall be supported by a written statement and by revised plans demonstrating the reasons revisions are necessary or desirable. 
Minor changes, and/or deviations from the preliminary planned mixed use development master plan, which do not affect the intent or character of the development, shall be reviewed and identified by the administrative services director, and may be approved by the same. Upon approval of the revisions, the applicant shall make revisions to the plans and submittals and file with the city within 30 days. 
Examples of substantial and/or minor changes are: 
Substantial changes: Perimeter changes, including building reorientation or shifts in location when such building(s) are located adjacent to any perimeter landscaped or buffer areas; 
Change in alignment, location, direction or length of roads or streets; 
Change in building height, density, intensity or land use pattern; 
Changes in signage plan; 
Any reduction in open space and/or landscaped areas. 
Minor changes: Adjustments or minor shifts in dwelling unit or commercial mixes, not resulting in increased overall density or increased intensity; 
Reorientation or slight shifts in building locations for structures not at or near the perimeter of the site. 
If the administrative services director is uncertain as to whether a proposed change is minor or substantial, the proposed change shall be submitted to the city council for a determination as to the acceptability of the proposed change. 
(6)  Planned mixed development time limitations. If substantial construction, as determined by the city, has not begun within two years after approval of the PMDD by the city council, the approval of the PMDD will lapse. 
The administrative services director may extend the period for beginning construction by not more than six months, if it is demonstrated that such an extension will result in the development of the approved PMDD and that delays were beyond the control of the applicant. The burden of proof for obtaining the extension is on the applicant. 
If the PMDD lapses under this provision, the city shall cause the PMDD district to be removed from the official zoning map, mail a notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, of revocation to the applicant and owner or owners and reinstate the zoning district which was in effect prior to the approval of the PMDD. If the applicant is other than the owner, the notice shall be sent to the person or entity listed in the county property appraiser's records as owning the subject property. 
(i)  Development standards for planned mixed use developments. 
(1)  The development parcel shall have a minimum frontage width of 100 feet on a public roadway to be considered for planned mixed use development. 
(2)  Relation to zoning districts. An approved planned mixed use development plan shall establish the restrictions and regulations according to which the development shall occur. Upon approval, the official zoning map will be changed to indicate the property is in the planned mixed development district. 
(3)  Density/intensity. The maximum density of residential uses and the maximum intensity of nonresidential uses shall not exceed the limits established in the adopted comprehensive plan by the future land use category imposed on the property to be developed as a PMDD. However, the density limits apply only to the residential portion of a PMDD and the intensity limits (floor area ratio) apply only to the non-residential portion of a PMDD. This applies even if a building is proposed to contain both residential and non-residential uses. 
(4)  Dimensional and bulk regulations. The location of all proposed building sites shall be shown on the final development plan, subject to the minimum lot sizes, setback lines, and other features specified in the master plan as approved by the city council. 
(5)  Common open spaces. At least 18 percent of the gross area covered by a final development plan shall be usable, common open space owned and operated by the developer or dedicated to a property owner's association or similar group. Provided, that in establishing the density or intensity per gross acre, the city may require an increase in the percentage of common open space in order to carry out the intent and purposes as set forth in subsection (f), above. 
(6)  Access and parking. All streets, thoroughfares and access ways shall be designed to effectively relate to the roadway network of the city and the county. Adequate off-street parking shall meet the off-street parking requirements as set forth in this Code for similar uses unless otherwise approved or required and based on empiric data for such uses. 
(7)  Perimeter requirements. 
a.  The city council, upon a recommendation of the administrative services director, may impose the requirement that structures, buildings and streets located at the perimeter of the development be permanently screened, buffered, re-oriented or modified to insure compatibility with adjacent existing uses. 
b.  Frontage streets, limited accessways and/or shared accesses may be required where the proposed development would otherwise have multiple access to major or minor arterials or collectors to protect the health, safety and welfare of the motoring public. 
(j)  Planned mixed development submittal checklist. 
_____1. Statement of objectives _____a. The general purpose of the proposed development. _____b. The general character of the proposed development. _____2. A vicinity map showing the location of the proposed planned business development. _____3. A boundary survey and legal description of the property. _____4. Topographic survey. _____5. Master plan. _____a. Proposed land uses including type of structures. _____b. Lot sizes. _____c. Building setbacks. _____1. Surrounding property lines. _____2. Proposed and existing streets. _____3. Other proposed buildings. _____4. The centerline of channels, streams, and canals. _____5. The mean high water line of waterbodies. _____6. Other man-made or natural features which would be affected by building encroachment, including wetlands. _____d. Maximum height of buildings. _____e. Open spaces. _____1. Developed recreation. _____2. Common open space. _____3. Natural areas. _____4. Common amenities. _____f. Streets and thoroughfares. _____g. Screening and buffering areas and concepts. _____h. Landscaped areas and concepts (including location, species, height of plant materials). _____6. A table showing acreage or square footage for each category of land use. _____7. A table of proposed maximum and average density for residential land uses and intensity of non-residential uses. _____8. Preliminary utilities service plan, including sanitary sewers, storm drainage as required by DEP, and potable water supply. _____9. A statement indicating the type of legal instruments that will be created to provide for the management of common areas. _____10. Electronic copies of the master plan, preliminary utility service plan, landscape plan and, when possible, building elevations.  
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 1249, § 4, 4-10-06) 
Sec. 102-131. - Annexations. 
    Policy and procedural guide for processing annexation requests or contraction requests shall be as contained in the annexation policy guide. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-132. - Mobile home parks. 
    Policy and procedural guidelines for establishing mobile home parks shall be found in article XXII of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-133. - Standards for telecommunications antennae and towers. 
(a)  Purposes. This section is designed and intended to balance the interests of the residents of the city, telecommunications providers, and telecommunications customers in the siting of telecommunications facilities within the city. To that end, this section shall: 
(1)  Provide for the appropriate location and development of telecommunications facilities in the city. 
(2)  Minimize adverse visual impacts of telecommunications facilities through careful design, siting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging techniques. 
(3)  Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower or antennae failure through engineering and careful siting of telecommunications tower structures and antennae. 
(4)  Maximize use of any new and existing telecommunications towers so as to minimize the need to construct new towers and minimize the total number of towers throughout the city. 
(5)  Maximize and encourage use of alternative telecommunication tower structures as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers. 
(6)  Encourage and promote the location of new telecommunications facilities in areas which are not zoned for residential use. 
(b)  Definitions. In this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
(1)  Alternative site is one or more separate locations within the search ring at which a provider could place its antenna to serve substantially all of the area intended to be served by the site requiring special exception. Alternative sites must be available to the provider on commercially reasonable terms. 
(2)  Antenna means any exterior apparatus designed for the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves for telephonic, radio, television, or personal wireless services. 
(3)  Micro telecommunications facilities are those which are located an existing buildings, poles or other existing support structures where antennae do not project more than three feet above the top of the structure and there are no more than six antennae per site. 
(4)  Macro telecommunications facilities are those which are located on existing buildings, poles or other existing support structures and which project more than three feet above the top of the structure but no more than ten feet above the roof line, parapet or top of the structure. Macro telecommunication facilities may exceed the height limitation specified for the zoning district. 
(5)  Monopole tower means a telecommunications tower consisting of a single pole, constructed without guy wires or ground anchors. 
(6)  Search ring is the geographic area in which a provider's antenna is intended to be located to serve the provider's coverage area. 
(7)  Telecommunications facilities refers to antennae, towers and related accessory structures either individually or together. 
(8)  Tower means a structure, such as a lattice tower, guy tower or monopole tower, constructed as a free-standing structure or in association with a building, other permanent structure or equipment, on which is located one or more antennae intended for transmitting or receiving analog, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, personal wireless service or similar forms of electronic communication. The term includes microwave towers, common carrier towers, and cellular telephone towers. 
(c)  Exclusions. The following shall be exempt from this ordinance. 
(1)  Any tower and antenna owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission. 
(2)  Any tower or telecommunications facility for which a permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this section. 
(d)  Placement of telecommunications facilities by zoning district. 
(1)  In industrial (M-1), commercial (C-1), and agriculture (A) zoning districts, micro and macro telecommunications facilities meeting the following conditions shall be allowed as a use by right. Telecommunications towers designed and intended to accommodate at least one user are permitted up to a height of 180 feet following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the building official. Telecommunications towers designed and intended to accommodate at least two users are permitted up to a height of 240 feet following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the official. Telecommunications towers designed and intended to accommodate at least three users are permitted up to a height of 300 feet following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the building official. Licensed AM/FM radio broadcast stations and television stations need not accommodate additional users and may erect a tower not to exceed 600 feet in height. 
(2)  In single-family residential (R-1 and R-1A), and multi-family residential (R-2) zoning districts, and planned unit developments (PUDs), micro telecommunications facilities (no towers) shall be allowed as a use by right on nonresidential structures following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the building official. Macro telecommunications facilities shall be allowed by special exception on nonresidential structures following design review by the board of adjustment and receipt of a building permit from the official. 
(3)  Site location and development shall preserve the preexisting character of the surrounding and land uses and the zoning district as much as possible. Personal wireless telecommunication towers shall be integrated through location and design to blend in with existing characteristics of the site to the extent practical. 
(e)  Preferred location sites for antennae. 
(1)  Co-location sites. Any existing telecommunications tower currently being used for transmitting receiving analog, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, personal wireless service or similar forms of electronic communication (regardless of the underlying zoning designation of the site). 
(2)  Publicly-used structures. Publicly-used structures include, but are not limited to, facilities such as police or fire stations, libraries, community centers, civic centers, courthouses, utility structures, water towers, elevated roadways, bridges, flag poles, schools, hospitals, clock or bell towers, light poles and churches. 
(3)  Upon a tower in any large, open tracts of city-owned, industrial or commercial private property. 
(f)  Requirements for telecommunications facilities. 
(1)  General requirements for all telecommunications facilities. The requirements set forth in this section shall govern the location and construction of all telecommunications facilities governed by this chapter. 
a.  Towers must conform to Electronic Industries Association/Telecommunications Association (EIA/TIA) 222, Revision F, standard entitled "Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting Structures" as may be amended. Owners of telecommunications facilities shall conduct inspections of such facilities at least once every year to ensure structural integrity. Inspections shall be conducted by a qualified, independent engineer licensed to practice in Florida. The results of such inspection shall be provided to the building official. Proof of liability insurance covering structural failure of the tower and each attached antenna may substitute for the inspection. 
b.  New tower construction should provide co-location for additional users. A tower shall be deemed to meet this requirement if its design is certified by a registered professional engineer as being appropriate for co-location and the applicant certifies that he is prepared to offer adequate space on the tower to others on commercially fair and reasonable terms. An applicant's requirement to provide adequate space for co-location may be subject to the following factors: Structural engineering, planned future use by applicant and emergency services, radio frequency intermodulation acceptance, and willingness of other licensees wishing to co-locate on applicant's tower to allow applicant to reciprocate. 
c.  Regulatory compliance. All telecommunications facilities must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate telecommunications facilities. Telecommunications facilities shall be upgraded as required by those agencies. 
d.  Security. All telecommunications facilities shall be enclosed with appropriate decay-resistant security fencing of not less than six feet nor more than eight feet in height. This requirement may be waived by the planning director if the tower is made unclimable to a height of above twenty feet. 
e.  Lighting. Illumination on towers shall be as required by the FCC, FAA or other state federal agency. Further, unless prohibited by the FAA, all towers will have as a minimum one beacon placed at the top of the tower. Required lighting must be configured to cause the least disturbance to the surrounding uses and views. All beacons and lighting upon a tower which, at time of commencement of construction, is located within a distance of 300 percent of the height of the tower from a residential use or residential zoning district shall be erected with shields mounted underneath the lights or beacons to obstruct view of said lights from the ground for a distance from the tower of 300 percent of the tower height. 
f.  Advertising. No advertising is permitted on telecommunications facilities. 
g.  Visual impact. 
1.  Telecommunications facilities, including all support structures, shall be screened from public roadways or adjacent residential property by landscape. Accessory structures shall be a neutral color that is compatible with the color of the surrounding area so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
2.  Towers shall not be placed in a line-of-sight exclusion zone, as viewed from Main Street, extending two miles northwest and two miles southeast along Main Street. 
h.  Lot size and setbacks. 
1.  The following setback requirements shall apply to all telecommunications facilities. 
(i)  Towers must be set back a distance no less than equal to the tower height or 250 feet, whichever is less, from any residential zoning boundary or off-site residential structure in any other zoning district. Setback distance shall be measured from the center of the tower base to the nearest residential zoning boundary or lot line for off-site residential structures in other districts. 
(ii)  Towers, guy wires and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements. In no case shall a tower be located within the required front yard, backyard, or side yard setback areas in a residential district. 
(g)  Application procedures. 
(1)  General requirements for all permit applications. Application for a building permit for any telecommunications facility shall be made to the building official or his designated representative by the person, company or organization that will own and operate the telecommunications facility. If the applicant is not the property owner, a letter from the owner authorizing application for the permit must be included. An application will not be considered until it is complete and the administrative fees paid to the city. The following information must be submitted for an application to be considered complete (AM/FM radio broadcast and television stations are exempt from paragraphs a.4-a.6 and subsection b): 
a.  Basic information: 
1.  Site plan (to scale) specifying the location of telecommunications facilities, transmission building and/or other accessory uses, access, parking, fences, landscaped areas, and adjacent land uses. 
2.  Report from a qualified engineer licensed in the state, documenting the following: 
(i)  Telecommunications facility height and design; 
(ii)  Total anticipated capacity of the telecommunications facility, including number and types of antennae which can be accommodated; 
(iii)  Evidence of structural integrity of the tower structure; 
(iv)  Construction, placement, and operation of the proposed facility will not interfere with public safety communications nor degrade the usual and customary transmission and reception of radio and television service enjoyed by adjacent residential and nonresidential property tenants. 
3.  Written evidence that tower design and placement are within FAA regulations, or that tower is exempt from FAA certification. 
4.  A definition of the area of coverage to be served by the antenna or tower and information showing the proposed facility would provide the needed coverage or capacity. 
5.  Applicants wishing to erect a tower must identify all existing and proposed towers located within the search ring. Applicants must provide written evidence of the lack of space on all existing towers within the search ring, what good faith efforts were made to secure existing space, or why existing apace is technically inappropriate for use. 
6.  Designation of which preferred location, identified in section 102.133(e) above, the proposed facility is meeting. If the proposed location is not a preferred location, explain what good faith efforts and measures were taken to secure use of each preferred location sites within the search ring, and why each such site was not technologically, legally or economically feasible. 
b.  Five-year plan and site inventory: 
1.  Each application shall include a five-year facilities plan and site inventory including list of all existing, existing to be upgraded or replaced, and proposed telecommunications facility sites owned or proposed to be created by the applicant within the city limits and within one mile of the city limits; a map showing these sites; and heights of structures located at these sites. 
2.  If the applicant does not know specific future tower and antenna site locations but does know of areas where the applicant's telecommunications facilities will be needed within the next five years to provide anticipated service, the applicant shall submit a map identifying each geographic coverage area with a number that will correspond to the future telecommunication facility site. 
(h)  Abandoned towers. 
(1)  At the time of building permit the applicant shall enter into a contractually enforceable agreement with the city that requires the applicant or the owner of the tower to remove the tower upon its abandonment. 
(2)  In the event all legally approved use of a tower is discontinued for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, it shall be deemed to be abandoned. Determination of the date of abandonment shall be made by the planning director, who shall have the right to request documentation and/or affidavits from the tower owner regarding the issue of the tower's usage. 
(3)  At such time as the planning director reasonably determines that the tower is abandoned, he or she shall provide the tower owner written notice of abandonment determination by certified mail. Failure or refusal of the owner to respond within 60 days of receipt of such notice shall constitute prima facie evidence that the structure has been abandoned. 
(4)  If the tower owner fails to respond or fails to demonstrate that the tower is not abandoned, the tower shall be considered abandoned and the owner shall have an additional 120 days within which to reactivate use of the tower, transfer the tower to another owner who makes use of the tower within the 120-day period, or dismantle the antenna. At the earlier of 121 days from the date of abandonment without reactivation or upon completion of dismantling and removal, any special exception approval for the tower shall automatically expire. 
(i)  Pre-existing towers/nonconforming uses. 
(1)  All telecommunications facilities operative on the effective date of the governing ordinance from which this section derives shall be allowed to continue their present usage as a nonconforming use and shall be treated as a nonconforming use in accordance with this chapter. New construction other than routine maintenance shall comply with the requirements of this section. 
(2)  Placement of an antenna on a nonconforming structure shall not be considered an expansion of the nonconforming structure. 
(j)  Special exceptions. 
(1)  To provide a means of balancing concerns about towers that do not meet the requirements for administrative approval under subsection 102.133(d) and the recognized need for the provider to serve the entire community, special exception requests shall be reviewed on a case-by-case basis consistent with section 102.36 and this subsection. The board of adjustment shall consider and weigh the aesthetic impact and compatibility issues of the proposed tower with the public benefit derived from having a reliable and efficient wireless communications system. To assist the board in reaching such determination, the application for special exception shall provide the information below: 
a.  Design of the tower with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing visual obtrusiveness; 
b.  Nature of principle uses of the site, with preferences being given to use of sites which are already developed with non-single-family uses and which are currently visually impacted by tall structures, utility facilities, light poles, or similar improvements. 
c.  Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties and the proximity of the tower to all adjacent land uses, with preference being given to sites adjacent to nonresidential uses or nondwelling aspects of residential properties, such as open space areas, parks, retention ponds, golf courses, wetland areas, etc.; 
d.  On-site and surrounding tree coverage and foliage, with preference being given to sites which can provide heavy vegetative screening of a tower; and 
e.  The lack of suitable existing structures within the search ring. 
(2)  In determining a special exception request for a tower in addition to those criteria set forth in sections 102.36, the board of adjustment shall take into consideration whether or not the proposed tower will have substantial and adverse aesthetic impact on neighboring residential lands. The board determination shall be based on relevant and competent evidence, documentation, and testimony received at the public hearing from the staff, the applicant and any party in support or opposition, or their respective representatives. The board shall utilize the following criteria in determining if a special exception is deemed approvable: 
a.  Aesthetic impact. Aesthetic impact shall take into consideration, but not be limited to, the amount of the tower that can be viewed from surrounding residential zones in conjunction with the tower proximity (distance) to the residential zone, mitigation, landscaping or intervening visual buffers, existing character of surrounding area, or other visual options proposed by the applicant. 
b.  Compatibility. Compatibility shall take into consideration the degree to which an tower is designed and located to be compatible with the nature and character of other land uses and/or with the environment within which the tower proposes to locate. The tower maybe placed or designed to assist with mitigating the overall aesthetic impact of a tower. 
c.  Availability of alternative sites. This means the board of adjustment must consider whether there is a suitable and available alternative site. If the applicant demonstrates that an alternative site does not exist and this demonstration is not rebutted by competent and substantial evidence, the board shall issue special exception approval. 
(k)  Penalty for violation of section. Any person who attempts to erect or erects a telecommunications facility or tower covered by this section without having first obtained the necessary building permit in the manner provided in this section shall be deemed in violation of this section. Each and every day such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use continues may be deemed a separate offense as provided for in section 1-11 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 935, § 2, 9-28-98) 
Secs. 102-134-102-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TRAFFIC CIRCULATION 

Sec. 102-146. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide provisions for the safe and convenient onsite traffic circulation. Important elements of consideration include: 
(1)  Right-of-way (ROW) protection (policy 8.A.2.2); 
(2)  Provide adequate setbacks along all roadways (policy 8.A.5.1); 
(3)  Limit new access points to arterial and collector roads by including distance requirements for driveways and median cuts (policy 8.A.1.4); 
(4)  Provide labor intensive transportation facilities and sufficient vehicular parking in all new development (policy 8.A.3.2). 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-147. - Right-of-way (ROW) protection. 
(a)  No encroachment shall be permitted into existing rights-of-way, except for temporary use authorized by the city. 
(b)  Use of rights-of-way for public or private utilities, including, but not limited to, sanitary sewer, potable water, telephone wires, cable television wires, gas lines, or electricity transmission, shall be allowed subject to specifications included in applicable existing or future city regulations. 
(c)  Sidewalks, recreational trails and bicycle ways shall be permissible in ROWs. 
(d)  Applications to vacate ROWs may be approved upon a finding that all of the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The requested vacation is consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  The ROW does not provide the sole access to any property. Remaining access shall not be by easement. 
(3)  The vacation would not jeopardize the current or future location of any utility. 
(4)  The proposed vacation is not detrimental to the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 1335, § 2, 6-25-07) 
Sec. 102-148. - Provide adequate setbacks along all roadways. 
    Setbacks or ROW requirements serve the needs of a development project and/or anticipated future needs of the city. Section 102-149 provides road and street construction design standards. Included are ROW minimum requirements, pavement width and lane thickness, street grades, curbing, general design standards, roadway shoulders, clear visibility triangle, signage and signalization. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-149. - Road and street construction. 
(a)  Generally. Streets will intersect at angles no less than 60 degrees. Unaligned intersections shall be separated by a minimum of 150 feet between centerlines. Intersections involving more than four basic street approaches shall be prohibited. 
(b)  Right-of-way, minimum requirements. 
(1)  Arterial streets: 100 feet. 
(2)  Major streets: 80 feet. 
(3)  Collector streets: 66 feet. 
(4)  Minor streets 600 feet or more in length or more than 30 DU's: 50 feet. 
(5)  Minor streets less than 600 feet in length and 30 or less DU's: 40 feet. 
(6)  Cul-de-sac: 50 feet minimum width with permanent turning circles at end of cul-de-sac or dead end streets not less than 100 feet in diameter. 
(7)  Alleys and service drives: 20 feet. 
(c)  Pavement width and base thickness. 
(1)  Major streets: 26 feet, eight-inch base and two inches of asphalt. 
(2)  Collector streets: 26 feet, eight-inch base and two inches of asphalt. 
(3)  Minor streets 600 feet or more in length or more than 30 DU's: 24 feet, six-inch base and one and one-half-inch asphalt. 
(4)  Minor streets less than 600 feet in length and 30 or less DU's: 22 feet, six-inch base and one and one-half-inch asphalt. 
(5)  Cul-de-sac: 24 feet, six-inch base and one and one-half-inch asphalt. Pavement of a turning circle at the end of a cul-de-sac or dead-end street shall have a minimum outside diameter of 80 feet with a return radius of 25 feet, a six-inch base and two-inch asphalt. 
(6)  Alleys and service drives: 20 feet, six-inch base and one and one-half-inch asphalt. 
(d)  Street grades. No street grade shall be less than 0.5 percent. Wherever feasible grades shall not exceed the following: 
(1)  Major streets: As specified by State road department. Otherwise seven percent maximum. 
(2)  Collector streets: Eight percent maximum. 
(3)  Minor streets: Ten percent maximum. 
(4)  Cul-de-sac: Ten percent maximum. 
(e)  Curbing. 
(1)  Major streets: 24 inches wide by eight inches deep. 
(2)  Collector streets: 24 inches wide by eight inches deep. 
(3)  Minor streets: 18 inches wide by eight inches deep. 
(4)  Cul-de-sac: 18 inches wide by eight inches deep. 
(5)  Ribbon curbing for any type street: 12 inches wide by eight inches deep with one reinforcing number four steel bar or wire mesh with 3,000 psi (pounds per square inch) concrete, with a minimum three-inch cover. Maximum allowable grade for streets with ribbon curbing is five percent. The 12-inch width of the ribbon curbing may be counted as part of the minimum pavement width of the street. 
(f)  General design standards. 
(1)  All streets in a new development shall be designed and constructed pursuant to the standards in this chapter and of the Florida Department of Transportation's Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design, Construction and Maintenance for Streets and Highways (Commonly known as the "Florida Greenbook"), current edition, and shall be dedicated to the City upon completion, inspection and acceptance by the City. 
(2)  The street system of the proposed development shall, to the extent practicable, conform to the natural topography of the site preserving existing hydrologic vegetative patterns and minimizing erosion potential, runoff and the need for site alteration. Particular effort should be directed toward securing the flattest possible grade near intersections. 
(3)  Streets shall be laid out to avoid environmentally sensitive areas. 
(4)  Private streets may be allowed within development that will remain under common ownership, provided they are designed and constructed pursuant to the standards in this article. 
(5)  The street layout in all new development shall be coordinated with and interconnected to the street system of the surrounding area. 
(6)  Streets in proposed subdivisions shall be connected to rights-of-way in adjacent areas to allow for proper inter-neighborhood traffic flow. If adjacent lands are unplatted, stub-outs in the new development shall be provided for future connection to the adjacent unplatted land. 
(7)  Residential streets shall be arranged to encourage through traffic. 
(8)  Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles and in no case shall be less than 60 degrees. 
(9)  New connections to an existing street shall, where possible, coincide with existing intersections. Where an offset (jog) is necessary at an intersection, the distance between centerlines of the intersecting streets shall be no less than 150 feet. 
(10)  No two streets may intersect with any other street on the same side at a distance of less than 500 feet measured from the centerline of the intersecting street. When the intersected street is an arterial, the distance between intersecting streets shall be no less than 1,000 feet. 
(11)  Concrete curb and/or gutter shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Forms may be wood or metal having a depth of not less than six inches. These shall be set using sufficient supports to hold the concrete without moving. 
b.  Contraction joints shall be constructed every ten feet but no section shall be less than four feet long. Steel templates shall be used for these joints and withdrawn after the initial set. At intervals not to exceed 50 feet and at all inlets and at all radius points, a three-fourths-inch full-depth expansion joint shall be constructed of an approved material. 
c.  Machine placement of concrete curb and gutter may be allowed with the approval of the Public Services department, provided that an acceptable finished product, true to line, grade, and cross section, is consistently produced. 
d.  Compressive strength for the concrete shall not be less than 3,000 psi at the end of 28 days. No concrete shall be placed when the air temperature is 40 degrees Fahrenheit or less. Curing methods shall conform to the appropriate section of the standard FDOT specifications. 
(g)  Roadway shoulders. Shoulders, where required, shall measure at least four feet in width and shall be required on each side of streets and shall be located within the right-of-way. Shoulders on State roads shall be a minimum of six feet. Shoulders shall consist of stabilized turf or other material permitted by specifications in the City Construction Standards Manual, which is available for inspection in the Public Services offices of the City. Shoulders and/or drainage swales are required as follows: 
(1)  Shoulders with adjacent swales are required on residential access and residential subcollector streets only where necessary for stormwater management or road stabilization. 
(2)  All residential collector streets shall provide two four-foot-wide minimum shoulders with adjacent swales. Shoulders shall be grass-surfaced except in circumstances where grass cannot be expected to survive. In no case shall the shoulders be paved. 
(3)  Where shoulders are required by the FDOT. 
(4)  Collector streets where curbing is not required. 
(5)  Arterial streets where curbing is not required. 
(6)  Drainage swales adjacent to roadway shoulders shall be a minimum of 12 inches deep, 24 inches wide (at bottom), and have sideslopes of 3:1 maximum. Swales shall be grassed to prevent erosion. 
(h)  Clear visibility triangle. In order to provide the motorist with a clear view of intersecting streets and driveway connections, there shall be a triangular area of clear visibility formed by two intersecting streets or the intersection of a driveway and a street. The following standards shall be met: 
(1)  Nothing shall be erected, placed, parked, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially impede vision between a height of two feet and ten feet above the grade, measured at the centerline of the intersection. 
(2)  The clear visibility triangle shall be formed as specified in the Florida Department of Transportation's Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design, Construction and Maintenance for Streets and Highways (commonly known as the "Florida Greenbook"), current edition. 
(3)  Clear visibility triangles shall be provided at all intersections and driveways regardless of the direction of travel. For example, clear vision triangles shall be provided for both directions at an intersection even though one or both streets are one way only. Likewise, clear vision triangles shall be provided in both directions at a driveway connection, even if the driveway is one way in or one way out. 
(i)  Signage and signalization. The developer shall deposit with the City sufficient funds to provide all necessary roadway signs and traffic signalization as may be required by the city, based upon city or state traffic standards. At least two street name signs shall be placed at each four-way street intersection, and one at each "T" intersection. Signs shall be installed under light standards and free from visual obstruction. The design of street name signs shall be consistent, of a style appropriate to the community and of a uniform size and color. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 989, § 2, 1-22-01; Ord. No. 1157, § 2, 10-25-04; Ord. No. 1335, § 3, 6-25-07) 
Sec. 102-150. - Limit access points to arterial and collector roads. 
(a)  Access points onto or from an arterial or collector roadway to shopping locations and/or other roadways shall be limited as follows: 
Functional Class of Roadway Distance Between Access Points (feet) Principal arterial 300 Minor arterial 250 Major collector 185 Minor collector 140  
(b)  The distance between access points shall be measured from the centerline of the proposed driveway or roadway to the centerline of the nearest adjacent roadway or driveway. 
(c)  The limits listed above apply to all roadways within the City except those roadways designated limited access roads in section 102-152. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 1157, § 3, 10-25-04; Ord. No. 1335, § 4, 6-25-07) 
Sec. 102-151. - Provide labor intensive transportation facilities and sufficient parking facilities. 
(a)  Definition. Labor intensive transportation includes signage, striping of roadways, installation of sidewalks, recreational or bicycle lanes, sidewalk ramps and other facilities designed for the handicapped, or to otherwise provide safe and convenient nonmotorized traffic circulation in conjunction with motorized traffic. 
(b)  Sidewalks, recreational trails, bicycle paths. Projects abutting collector or arterial facilities shall provide sidewalks, recreational trails or bicycle paths adjacent to the collector or arterial roadway as follows: 
(1)  Where a proposed development includes improvements or new construction of collector or arterial facilities, facility designs shall include provision for labor intensive transportation facilities. 
(2)  Residential projects adjacent to or in the immediate vicinity of an activity center comprised of commercial, office, service, educational or recreational activities shall provide labor intensive transportation facilities from the development to the activity center. 
(3)  Crosswalks, whether on or above the surface of roadways, not less than five feet in width, may be required before a final development order is approved. Such pedestrian ways shall be placed in the center of blocks more than 800 feet long where deemed necessary to provide safe access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation or other community facilities. 
(c)  Off-street parking, parking lots and loading spaces. 
(1)  Dimensions. For the parking of automobiles, the minimum space shall be nine by 19 feet. The table of design standards for off-street parking is as follows: 
MINIMUM PARKING DESIGN STANDARDS 
Parking Angle (degrees) Width of Stall (feet) Depth of Stall (feet) Minimum Aisle Width (feet) Length of Curb per Car (feet) 0 9 10 12 23 45 9 21.2 16 14.1 60 9 22.3 18 11.5 90 9 20 24 9  
(2)  Parking lots. In addition to the provisions in this chapter all parking lots shall comply with tree preservation and landscaping requirement provisions established in article XXIII, chapter 102 of the Code of Ordinances. The following requirements are applicable to all parking lots and parking spaces, whether or not such lots or spaces are required by the provisions of this section. 
a.  Design of parking lots: All parking lot plans must be reviewed by the city engineer and the planning department. Proper ingress/egress from the lot shall be required and adequate interior drives shall be required for all parking lots. 
b.  Grading and surfacing: 
1.  Parking lots that include lanes for drive-in windows or contain more than ten parking spaces shall be graded and surfaced with asphalt, concrete, or other material that will provide equivalent protection against potholes, erosion, and dust. 
2.  Parking lots with ten or less parking spaces may be surfaced with alternative surface material such as crushed stone, gravel, or other suitable material, with the approval of the city, to provide a surface that is stable and will help to avoid dust and erosion. The perimeter of such parking lot shall be defined by bricks, stones, railroad ties, or other similar devices. In addition, whenever a parking lot abuts a paved street, the driveway apron leading from such street to such area shall be improved as provided for in section 74-26. 
c.  Demarcation of parking spaces: Parking spaces in areas surfaced in accordance with subsection 1 shall be appropriately demarcated with painted lines or other markings. Parking spaces surfaced in accordance with subsection 2 shall be demarcated. 
d.  Maintenance: Parking lots shall be properly maintained in all respects. Parking area surfaces shall be kept in good condition, free from potholes, and parking space lines or markings shall be kept clearly visible and distinct. 
e.  Lighting: Adequate lighting shall be provided for parking lots with ten or more spaces, and lighting shall be positioned to reflect away from the adjoining properties. 
f.  Screening: Where a parking lot adjoins a residential zone or use, or fronts on a street adjoining a residential zone or use directly across the street, a solid wall, fence, or approved compact hedge not less than four feet high shall be erected along the lot line(s), except that within a visibility triangle the height requirement shall be reduced to two feet. 
g.  Fencing, wheel stops or bumper guards: Fencing, wheel stops or bumper guards are required along property and street lines to avoid the chance of encroachment on other properties or sidewalks. 
(3)  Off-street loading spaces. No motor vehicle shall be allowed to extend onto a public street, sidewalk or alley while loading or unloading. Off-street loading spaces or berths shall be provided as follows: 
a.  All manufacturing, industrial, warehouses, retail and similar establishments customarily receiving and distributing goods by motor vehicle shall provide loading and unloading facilities on the premises. The minimum dimensions for off-street loading spaces shall be ten feet by 50 feet, and the number of spaces shall be determined according to the following floor area schedule: 
Floor Area (Square Feet) Minimum Number of Berths 0 to 20,000 1 20,001 to 40,000 2 40,001 to 100,000 3 100,001 to 200,000 4 200,001 to 320,000 5 320,001 to 400,000 6 400,001 or larger 6 plus 1 for each 90,000 square feet above 400,001  
b.  Bus and truck terminals: Sufficient space to accommodate the maximum number of buses or trucks to be stored or to be loaded at the terminal at any time. 
c.  Retail business and services: 
Square Feet No. of Spaces Up to 10,000 1 10,001 to 20,000 2 20,001 to 50,000 3 50,001 to 75,000 4 75,001 to 100,000 5 100,001 to 125,000 6 125,001 to 150,000 7 150,001 to 175,000 8 175,001 and above 9  
(4)  The minimum required number of vehicle parking spaces for specific uses shall be as follows: 
a.  Residential uses. 
1. Detached single-family and duplexes up to 3 bedrooms 2 spaces per dwelling unit 2. Detached single-family and duplexes - 4 bedroom 3 spaces per dwelling unit 3. Detached single-family and duplexes - 5 bedroom 4 spaces per dwelling unit. Over 5 bedrooms add 1 space per bedroom 4. Apartments and condominiums - Efficiency and 1 bedroom 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit 5. Apartments and condominiums - 2 and 3 bedrooms 2 spaces per dwelling unit 6. Apartments and condominiums - 4 or more bedrooms 2.5 spaces per dwelling unit 7. Townhomes 2.33 spaces per dwelling unit. Over 3 bedrooms add 1 space per bedroom 8. Mobile home parks 2.25 spaces per mobile home 9. RV parks 1 space per lot, not including recreational vehicle 10. Rooming houses and boarding houses 2 spaces per 3 guest rooms  
b.  Public assembly and recreational uses. 
1. Churches, theaters, auditoriums, stadiums, and other public assembly 1 space per 3 seats of the principal public assembly room or area 2. Libraries and museums 1 space per 500 square feet of floor area 3. Community recreation center 1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area 4. Bowling alley 3 spaces per lane 5. Miniature golf 2 spaces per hole 6. Private clubs 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area 7. Skating rink, ice or roller 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area 8. Schools: Day care or nursery, dance, arts, etc. 1 space per employee plus 1 off-street loading space per 8 students Elementary or junior high 1 space per 2 employees plus 1 space per classroom Senior high 1 space per 2 employees plus 1 space per 10 students College, trade or business school 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area, or 1 space per 3 classroom seats, whichever is greater 9. Swimming pool, dance hall, exhibition hall 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area  
c.  Health facilities. 
1. Hospital 1 space per 3 hospital beds plus 1 space per staff doctor plus 1 space per employee on the largest shift 2. Nursing homes 1 space per 6 patient beds, plus 1 space per employee on the largest shift 3. Medical and dental offices 5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area  
d.  Commercial and office uses. 
1. Banks 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee on the largest shift 2. Restaurant, standard 1 space per 3 seats including outdoor dining areas 3. Fast food restaurant 1 space per 3 seats including outdoor dining areas 4. Taverns, nightclubs and lounges 1 space per 100 square feet of gross floor area 5. Offices other than medical/dental offices 1 space per 300 square feet of gross office floor area plus 1 space per business vehicle plus 1 space per 1000 square feet of gross accessory storage area 6. Gasoline service stations 1 space per employee on the largest shift plus 1 space per indoor service bay plus 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area of convenience store 7. Grocery or supermarket 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee on the largest shift 8. Convenience store 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee on the largest shift 9. Hotels and motels 1 space per guestroom plus 1 space per 3 employees plus any parking spaces required for accessory uses such as restaurants or lounges 10. Marina 1.5 spaces per berth. If the marina contains a boat ramp, at least 10 percent of the spaces must be large enough to accommodate cars with trailers. 11. Multi-tenant retail complexes: <10,000 square feet of gross floor area 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area >10,000 square feet of gross floor area 50 spaces plus 1 space for each additional 250 square feet over 10,000 square feet of gross floor area 12. Barber and beauty shops 1 space per station plus 1 space per employee 13. Bed and breakfast 1 space for owner/manager plus 1 space per sleeping room 14. Car wash-full service 1 space per employee on the largest shift plus 2 stacking spaces and 1 drying space per cleaning station 15. Car wash-self service 2 stacking spaces and 1 drying space per wash stall 16. Dry cleaning shop 1 space per employee on the largest shift plus 1 space per truck plus 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area 17. Other general business, retail, department stores or personal service establishments 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee on the largest shift  
e.  Warehousing and industrial uses. 
1. Mini-warehouses 1 space per 10 storage cubicles, plus 2 spaces per manager's residence 2. Warehouse 1 space per 3,000 square feet of gross floor area 3. Extraction uses 1 space per employee on the largest shift 4. General industrial 1.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area  
(5)  Bicycle parking requirements. 
a.  Number of spaces required. The bicycle parking requirements in this section are intended to encourage the use of bicycles as a means of transportation in the city. The number of bicycle parking spaces required shall be as follows: 
Land Use Spaces Required Elementary schools, middle and high schools 0.75 per vehicle parking space Libraries, museums 0.15 per vehicle parking space Shopping centers 0.05 per vehicle parking space Eating and drinking establishments 0.05 per vehicle parking space Bowling alleys 0.05 per vehicle parking space Churches, temples, other places of worship 0.05 per vehicle parking space Amusement centers and theaters 0.10 per vehicle parking space Outdoor recreation uses 0.10 per vehicle parking space  
b.  Design of bicycle parking spaces. Required bicycle parking facilities shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  Bicycle parking facilities shall include provision for the secure storage and locking of bicycles. 
2.  Fixed objects that are intended to serve as bicycle parking facilities shall be clearly labeled as available for bicycle parking. 
3.  Individual locker spaces or racks shall be designed so as to provide convenient access to users. 
(d)  Parking for the handicapped. The number, design and location of handicapped spaces shall be consistent with the requirements of F.S. §§ 316.1955 and 316.1956, or succeeding provisions. 
(1)  On publicly owned and maintained streets and parking lots, reserved parking space for the handicapped shall be posted with a fixed sign approved by the State Department of Transportation (DOT) bearing the internationally accepted wheelchair symbol with caption, "PARKING BY DISABLED PERMIT ONLY." The following minimum number of parking spaces shall be provided as follows: 
Total Parking in Lot Required Minimum Number of Handicapped Accessible Spaces 1 to 25 1 26 to 50 2 51 to 75 3 76 to 100 4 101 to 150 5 151 to 200 6 201 to 300 7 301 to 400 8 401 to 500 9 501 to 1000 2 percent of total 1001 and over 20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1000  
(2)  Any business, firm or persons licensed to do business with the public are encouraged to provide parking for the handicapped consistent with the above minimums. Such spaces when marked by the DOT approved signage shall be subject to the same restrictions and punishments in the event of violation. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any nondisabled or nonpermitted person to stop, stand or park a vehicle within any such designated parking space unless that person is conveying a handicapped person entitled to exemption entitlement parking. Whenever a law enforcement officer or a parking enforcement specialist finds a vehicle in violation of this chapter, that official shall have the power to charge the operator or other person in charge of the vehicle in violation with a noncriminal traffic infraction punishable as provided in F.S. § 318.18(2). 
(4)  Handicapped spaces shall be located as close as feasibly possible to the handicapped-accessible entrance or entrances of a business. 
(e)  Approved transportation plans. All new developments affecting roadways shall be considered for development orders on the basis that each shall be required to provide safe and convenient onsite traffic flow, labor intensive transportation facilities and sufficient vehicular parking to accommodate the needs of the development. 
(1)  Proposed roadway improvements which are currently scheduled in the transportation improvement program (TIP) most recently approved by the Fort Walton Beach Urbanized Area Transportation Planning Organization (TPO) will be considered positively in the approval of development orders. 
(2)  Transportation improvements scheduled in the TIP program which require part or complete funding by the local government shall be included in the local government's capital improvement program (CIP) before approval of development orders can be rendered. 
(3)  It shall be incumbent upon the local government to prioritize local roadway improvements with the TPO when the LOS of any roadway is degraded from a level of "D" to "E." 
(4)  The transportation plan or traffic concurrency analysis should include an analysis of the impact of the proposed development on nearby roadways consistent with the nature of the proposed development. 
(f)  Downtown parking and C-2 parking districts. Parking in the downtown parking district and the C-2 parking district (figure 1, located at the end of this section), shall follow the additional regulations below. 
(1)  Downtown parking district. 
a.  Existing on-street parking spaces immediately adjacent to a property count toward the number of required spaces for a development. The number of spaces credited to a development shall be determined by measuring the length of street frontage, in feet, adjacent to the property, subtracting the width of proposed driveways and dividing the resulting length by the appropriate length of curb for the type of parking as stipulated in the minimum parking design standards table in subsection 102-151(c)(1). 
b.  Additional on-street parking may be constructed as part of a new development in the downtown parking district provided the parking spaces meet the requirements of the minimum parking design standards table in subsection 102-151(c)(1). In no case shall on-street parking be allowed on Ferdon Blvd. (State Road 85), James lee Blvd. (US 90), or Industrial Drive. 
c.  On-street parking spaces in the downtown parking district must be constructed of asphalt or concrete and meet the specifications established in this section. 
(2)  C-2 Parking district. 
a.  New development, redevelopment, or changes of use within the C-2 parking district are exempt from the parking space requirements of subsection 102-151(c)(4). 
b.  If a developer wishes to add additional on-site, privately maintained, parking spaces then those parking spaces shall be constructed of asphalt, concrete, or brick pavers and meet the specifications established in this section. 
c.  Existing and future public parking spaces in the C-2 parking district may be developed and maintained by the city through funds derived by a special assessment of properties within the C-2 parking district. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 989, § 3, 1-22-01; Ord. No. 1335, § 5, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 1417, § 2, 8-24-09) 

Sec. 102-152. - Designation of "limited access" roads and design standards for limited access roads. 
    The following "limited access" standards shall be applicable to Redstone Avenue East, from its intersection with Brookmeade Drive and proceeding to the east, and any other road hereinafter designated limited access by resolution of the city council. 
(1)  Access points shall be located no closer than 500 feet apart measured from center line to center line of the roadway regardless of which side of the street the access point is located on. 
(2)  Median cuts shall be located no closer than 500 feet apart measured from center line to center line of the median cut. 
(3)  Deceleration, acceleration, stacking lanes and median cuts shall be installed and constructed in accordance with the state department of transportation standards in effect at the time of application by the applicant requesting the same. 
(4)  Other than currently existing driveways, no access will be allowed requiring a backing maneuver into the right of way. 
(5)  Other than heretofore platted lots of record, no access will be allowed serving individual private residential driveways. 
(6)  Residential developments contiguous to limited access roads shall be accessed by collector streets at a minimum distance of 500 feet apart. 
(7)  New connections to one side of the limited access road shall, where possible, coincide with existing intersections on the opposite side of the limited access road. 
(8)  This section is not intended to deny access to any existing lot, parcel, or tract of land for which the only means of access to the same would be by the limited access road, but is intended to limit any further divisions into parcels or lots unless compliance herewith is accomplished. 
(Ord. No. 1157, § 4, 10-25-04; Ord. No. 1335, § 6, 6-25-07) 
Secs. 102-153-102-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - HOUSING 

Sec. 102-161. - Purpose of residential housing provisions. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide development design and improvement standards applicable to residential development within the city. In addition, regulations under this article are intended to provide the following: 
(1)  Criteria guiding the location of housing for low and moderate income families, mobile homes, group homes, foster care facilities and households with special needs (policies 9.A.1.4 and 9.A.1.8). 
(2)  Provide for the removal of housing stock with structural deficiencies and/or the rehabilitation of substandard housing (policies 9.A.2.3 and 9.A.4.1). 
(3)  Connect household/development sewage to central systems where available (policy 9.A.3.2). 
(4)  Conserve established residential neighborhoods (policy 9.A.4.2). 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-162. - Development design and improvement standards. 
    All developments shall have a total land area sufficient to meet all development design standards in this chapter. These include but are not limited to land required to provide setbacks from abutting rights-of-way, buffers, stormwater management, offstreet parking and circulation, protection of environmentally sensitive lands, and any other provisions which may require land area to be set aside. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-163. - Criteria for the location of special housing. 
(a)  Generally. In the context of this chapter, "special housing" shall include the housing classifications delineated in section 120-161(1). 
(b)  Low to moderate income housing. The percentages of the total housing stock in the city occupied by very low, low and moderate income families are shown in table 6-18 of the foundation document. The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) annually establishes income limitations to determine eligibility of families for subsidized housing assistance. These figures are generally used to classify individual and family incomes. It is anticipated that although low to moderate income levels will be higher with the findings of the 1990 census, approximately the same percentage of the population will require affordable housing suited to low to moderate income ranges. "Affordable" is generally stated as housing that costs no more than 35 percent of family income either in rent or mortgage payments. Table 6-18, foundation documents, projects a need for 1,003 very low and low income housing units and a need of 214 moderate income housing units by 2000. The following incentives and criteria are designed to encourage the construction of affordable housing: 
(1)  Performance standards, density and intensity bonuses shall be offered to developers in accordance with section 102-118(e) of this chapter. 
(2)  The city shall favorably consider the awarding of tax-free municipal bonds to developers of projects planned exclusively for low to moderate income families under circumstances where no liability accrues to the city. 
(3)  If cases should arise, the city shall use its regulatory powers to discourage lending institutions from refusing to grant mortgage loans ("redlining") of development or redevelopment of older neighborhoods or areas inhabited primarily by minorities or low income families. 
(4)  Elderly cottage housing opportunity (ECHO) housing (see figures 6-4 and 6-5, foundation document) involves the construction of small, safe, secure and sanitary housing on lots already occupied by a principal residence. ECHO houses shall be permitted under the following conditions: 
a.  The lot is of sufficient size to meet setback requirements for ancillary buildings. 
b.  The justification for the housing unit is to provide housing for the elderly. 
(5)  The city shall permit no circumstance to discourage the private sector from making housing available under the Section 8 rental subsidy program of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development to low and moderate income families. 
(c)  Mobile or manufactured homes. (See article XXII of this chapter.) Regulation of mobile or manufactured homes, mobile or manufactured home parks and subdivisions is deferred in this chapter pending a review of the zoning provisions and study of relevant law, rules and regulations, and case law regarding local authority to regulate the placement of mobile or manufactured homes (policy 9.A.1.6). 
(d)  Group homes. 
(1)  Group homes housing six or fewer residents shall be permitted in any medium density residential development; homes with seven or more residents shall be permitted in multifamily districts. 
(e)  Foster homes. 
(1)  Foster homes shall be permitted in any residential land use district of the city. 
(2)  Foster homes shall provide a minimum of one bedroom per two children under the age of 12. One bedroom per child shall be required for children 12 or over. No foster home shall provide shelter to more than five children not biologically related. 
(f)  Households with special needs. 
(1)  Households that require special dispensation for nonconformance such as exterior access ramps, hydraulic lifts for the handicapped, or restraining devices and fences shall be accommodated by the city on a case-by-case basis. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 980, § 4, 6-14-99) 
Sec. 102-164. - Provide for removal of housing stock and rehabilitation of substandard housing. 
(a)  With a beginning date in 1991 and every subsequent five-year period or less, the city shall apply for a community development block grant (CDBG) for the removal or rehabilitation of substandard housing. 
(b)  Block grants shall also be sought to buy down interest rates for rehabilitation of housing so as to provide greater incentive to and participation by the private sector. 
(c)  Provisions set forth in the Standard Unsafe Building Code provided as appendix A to this article are incorporated in this chapter by reference. Appendix A, referred to in this section, has not been included herein, but is available for inspection at the offices of the city. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-165. - Connecting sewage to available central systems. 
(a)  Where central sewage collection systems are available and have sufficient capacity to accept sewage from a proposed development, it shall be required for that development to tie into the central system. 
(b)  Where proposed development cannot be served by a central sewage collection system, minimum lot areas shall be required under the following conditions: 
Type of Development Sewer/Water System Lot Area Residential Septic tanks Individual wells 1 acre per unit Residential Septic tanks Central water 1/4 acre per unit Nonresidential Septic tanks Individual wells 1/2 acre  
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-166. - Conserve established residential neighborhoods; nuisances. 
(a)  The city shall encourage the creation of homeowners' associations to maintain, conserve and improve established residential neighborhoods. Functions of the neighborhood associations include the following: 
(1)  Set standards to maintain the character and general appearance of the neighborhood. 
(2)  Employ the city to use its regulatory powers to prevent nonconforming land usages and to eliminate nuisance factors affecting the neighborhood. 
(b)  Public nuisances which tend to annoy the neighborhood, depreciate property values, injure public health or are deemed inconsistent with community standards may have a deleterious affect on a neighborhood. Therefore, public nuisances in the city shall be the same as described in F.S. ch. 823. The following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Dilapidated buildings and structures. The city may remove or compel the removal or demolition of any building which has for any cause become a nuisance. Pursuant to such action, the structure must be found in a dilapidated state and in violation of the Standard Building Code. If special dangers or appearance deficiencies arising from the condition of the building can be eliminated by lawful repair and alterations, then improvement rather than demolition shall be ordered by the city. 
(2)  Abandonment, vehicles and vessels. It shall be unlawful to abandon, discard or hold for resale on the premises any vessel or vehicle visible to the public, but not in use by the owner. A place of business authorized to maintain and operate a junkyard or deal in the sale or exchange of secondhand merchandise is not affected by this restriction. 
(3)  Commercial vehicles. All commercial vehicles larger than 11/2 tons shall not be allowed to park in residential districts except for the purpose of delivering materials or providing a service that is temporary in nature. It shall be unlawful for vehicles containing hazardous materials such as fuels, explosives, chemicals or gases to be parked unattended in residential districts at any time. 
(4)  Cleaning lots and premises. It shall be unlawful to permit rubbish, trash, debris, dead trees, or other unsightly or unsanitary matters to accumulate on any lot, tract, or parcel of land within the city which may reasonably become infested, inhabited by, or a breeding place for rodents, vermin, reptiles or wild animals which threaten or endanger the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-167. - Accessory structures and uses. 
(a)  General standards and requirements. Any number of different accessory structures may be located on a parcel, provided that the following requirements are met: 
(1)  There shall be a permitted principal development on the parcel, located in full compliance with all standards and requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  Any accessory structure closer than ten feet to the principal structure shall be construed as part of the principal structure and shall observe all setbacks required for the principal structure. 
(3)  Any accessory structure located over ten feet from a principal structure may be constructed no closer than three feet of any interior side or rear lot line; provided however, that such accessory buildings may not be located within the front setback. Whenever a lot is a corner lot, the required side setback for accessory buildings shall be the same as for main buildings. 
(4)  All accessory structures shall comply with standards pertaining to the principal use, unless exempted or superseded elsewhere in this chapter. 
(5)  Accessory structures shall not be located in a required buffer, landscape area or minimum building setback area. 
(6)  Accessory structures shall be included in all calculations of impervious surface and storm water runoff. 
(7)  Accessory structures shall be shown on any concept development plan with full supporting documentation. 
(b)  Storage buildings, utility buildings, greenhouses. 
(1)  No accessory buildings used for industrial storage of hazardous, incendiary, noxious or pernicious materials shall be located nearer than 100 feet from any property line. 
(2)  Storage buildings, greenhouses and the like shall be permitted only in compliance with standards for distance between buildings and setbacks, if any, from property lines. 
(3)  Storage and other buildings regulated by this section shall be permitted only in side and rear yards, and shall not encroach into any required building setback from an abutting right-of-way. 
(4)  Storage and other buildings regulated by this section shall be included in calculations for impervious surface, floor area ratio, or any other site design requirements applying to the principal use of the lot. 
(5)  Vehicles, including manufactured housing and mobile homes, shall not be used as storage buildings, utility buildings or other such uses. 
(c)  Swimming pools (policy 9.A.2.5) 
(1)  Findings of fact. In the interest of public health, safety and welfare, the city council finds the following: 
a.  That the location of swimming pools should be regulated as to minimum distances from construction integrity reasons and to abate noise; 
b.  That safety barriers in the form of pool enclosures, fences or walls are necessary to prevent accidental injury or drowning; and 
c.  That these regulations are necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(2)  Definition. As used in this article, the term "swimming pool" is hereby defined as a permanent receptacle for water or an artificial pool of water, having a depth, at any point, of more than two feet, intended for the purpose of immersion or a partial immersion therein of human beings, and including all pertinent equipment. 
(3)  Construction or alteration permit required. No swimming pool, as defined in subsection (d)(2) of this section, shall be constructed or altered within the city unless a building permit therefore shall first be obtained from the city inspections department. 
(4)  Compliance with building code and article required . No swimming pool, as defined in subsection (d)(2) of this section, shall be constructed, altered or maintained within the city except in conformity with the provisions of this article and the building code. 
(5)  Location . No portion of a swimming pool outside a building shall be located at a distance less than three feet from a building measured from the building to the water's edge. Also, no portion of a swimming pool outside a building shall be located at a distance less than four feet from any side or rear property line, or building line, measured from the property line to the water's edge. 
(6)  All pool enclosures (enclosure constructed of metal, wood, or similar type material for framing and consisting of screen mesh or any similar material between framing members making up the roof and walls, and which specifically covers a swimming pool or spa), shall have the same front setback as the principal structure and may be erected no closer than five (5) feet from the rear or side property line, except if the lot is a corner lot, then the main building corner side setback shall apply; however, if the main dwelling side setbacks are less than five (5) feet, the pool enclosure may take the same side setbacks as the main dwelling. 
(7)  Fencing. 
a.  Any person who owns, possesses, manages, operates, maintains or controls any real property where any swimming pool is situated shall erect a fence around the perimeter of any such pool which shall be no less than four feet in height, and such a fence may be built, constructed or erected either around the immediate proximity of such pool or around or within the boundary of the real property where such pool is located, whichever method shall provide an obstacle barrier and security for any such pool. The term "immediate proximity of such pool," as used in this subsection, shall be construed as that area which includes the pool, the surrounding patio, or the play or lounge area associated therewith. Before any work is commenced on a safety barrier, a building permit shall be secured from the building inspector. Plans shall contain all details necessary to show compliance with the terms and conditions of these regulations. No swimming pool permit shall be issued unless simultaneously therewith a permit is served for the erection of the required safety barrier. If a barrier already exists a permit shall not be required if, upon inspection, the existing barrier is proved to be satisfactory. 
b.  All such fences shall be constructed of sound material erected in accordance with good trade practice with no space between adjacent fence components of greater than four inches, including those types of fences commonly known as chain link, wood picket, stockade, woven wire or woven wood. All gates providing ingress or egress into the pool area shall have an effective self-closing, self-latching mechanism incorporated therein and the owner and the person who owns, occupies or possesses the real property where any such pool is located shall keep any such gate in a latched condition when such pool is not actually being used or supervised by any such person or by any person having the permission to use or supervise any such pool by such person. A solid wall of brick, stone or masonry material of at least four feet in height shall be sufficient to provide an enclosure for any such pool. The purpose of this section is to provide a barrier which shall be comprised of any or a combination of all of the above and foregoing types of fences or walls which are intended to prevent the unrestricted entry of persons or animals into such a pool area. The side of a building may also be considered to be part of any such barrier. Such pools which are wholly enclosed by screen enclosures or other similar enclosure devices shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(d)  Fences. 
(1)  All fences to be built shall comply with the Standard Building Code. The posts of each fence must be resistant to decay, corrosion and termite infestation. 
(2)  Fences or hedges may be located in all front, side and rear yard setback areas. No fences or hedges shall exceed four feet in height when placed in the front yard (the yard abutting a road or public right-of-way). Each fence located in the side and rear yard setbacks shall not exceed the height of eight feet. 
(3)  In areas where the property faces two roadways or is located in any other area construed to be a corner lot, no fence shall be located in the vision triangle. 
(4)  Any fence located adjacent to a public right-of-way or private road shall be placed with the finished side facing that right-of-way. 
(5)  A fence for safety and protection of hazard by another public agency may not be subject to the height limitations above. Approval to exceed minimum height standards may be given by the building inspector upon receipt of satisfactory evidence of the need to exceed height standards. 
(6)  No fence or hedge shall be constructed or installed in such a manner as to interfere with drainage on the site. 
(e)  Home occupations. A home occupation shall be allowed in a bona fide dwelling unit, subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  No person other than members of the family residing on the premises shall be engaged in such occupation. 
(2)  The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and shall under no circumstances change the residential character of the structure. 
(3)  There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation, other than one sign not exceeding one square foot in area, nonilluminated, mounted flat against the wall of the principal building at a position not more than two feet from the main entrance of the residence. 
(4)  No home occupation shall occupy more than 25 percent of the first-floor area of the residence. No accessory building, freestanding or attached, shall be used for a home occupation. 
(5)  No traffic shall be generated by such occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a front yard required pursuant to this chapter. 
(6)  No equipment, tools or process shall be used in such a home occupation which creates interference to neighboring properties due to noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio, telephone or television receivers off the premises or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises. 
(7)  Fabrication of articles commonly classified under the terms arts and handicrafts may be deemed a home occupation, subject to the other terms and conditions of this definition, and providing no retail sales are made at the home. 
(8)  Outdoor storage of materials shall not be permitted. 
(9)  Except where previously permitted as a nonconforming use, the following shall not be considered home occupations in residential districts: beauty shops, barbershops, band instrument or dance instructors, swimming instructor, studio for group instruction, public dining facility or tearoom, antique or gift shops, photographic studio, fortunetelling or similar activity, outdoor repair, food processing, retail sales, nursery school or kindergarten. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 1200, § 2, 11-14-05) 
Secs. 102-168-102-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - INFRASTRUCTURE 

Sec. 102-181. - Sanitary sewer, solid waste, drainage, potable water, and natural groundwater aquifer recharge element. 
    The purpose of this article is to implement policies of the comprehensive plan intended to provide for necessary public facilities and services and to provide development design and improvement standards applicable to sanitary sewer, solid waste, drainage, potable water and natural groundwater aquifer recharge. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-182. - Sanitary sewer. 
    The city operates a wastewater treatment system with a design capacity of 1.5 MGD. Projected flow in 1995 is 1.11 MGD; in 2000, projected flow is 1.22 MGD. Adopted level of service for the city is 108 gallons per day (gpd) per capita (policy 10.A.1.3). The following measures on the part of the city are intended to conserve the capacity of the treatment facility: 
(1)  Upon adoption of this chapter, the city shall require the implementation of the following rules to effect a 20 percent reduction of wastewater demand: 
a.  The city shall maintain an infiltration/inflow rate of 20 percent of average daily flow or better (policy 10.A.1.5). 
b.  No tank type water closet shall be installed with water usage in excess of 31/2 gallons upon each flush. 
c.  No showerhead or faucet shall be installed which allows a flow of more than an average of three gallons per minute at 60 pounds of pressure per square inch. 
(2)  Use of treated wastewater for irrigation of golf courses, median strips and rights-of-way shall be encouraged. 
(3)  The city shall require that proposed development be permitted for wastewater treatment capacity at a level no greater than the number of residential or commercial units proposed for construction within a one-year period. The one-year period shall begin after the award of a development permit by the city. Any subsequent expansion of a development project shall require new permitting for wastewater (policy 10.A.1.4). 
a.  Development projects that have not used allocated capacity within two years after start of construction shall be required to relinquish any excess capacity allocated in that project's name. 
(4)  The city shall take action to obtain additional treatment capacity after flow reaches 75 percent of treatment capacity. 
(5)  The city shall require that all septic tank users connect to the central sewer system within one year of sewer availability (goal 10.A). 
a.  Provisions contained in the Minimum Standard Housing Code produced by the Building Code Conference are incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be used as applicable by the Administrative Services Department to enforce minimum standards for the protection of the public's health, welfare and safety. These shall include mandatory tap-ons with central sewer systems when available. 
b.  Prior to taking action to enforce compliance with this chapter, the city shall after one year has elapsed notify the property owners in question by registered mail stating the delinquency and providing a grace period of no more than 60 days in which to comply with this chapter. 
c.  If connections are not voluntarily made to a central sewer system before the end of the 60-day grace period, the city shall use its regulatory powers to enforce compliance. This may take the form of any one or more of the following steps: 
1.  Inspection of all homes not in compliance shall occur upon the sale or resale of the home or upon the disconnection of power to the home as the result of a change in occupancy. As part of the minimum standards inspection performed by the city Building Director, connection to an available central system shall be required before the home is approved for occupancy. 
2.  Permits for property improvement or alteration shall be withheld until compliance with this chapter is achieved. 
3.  The city shall maintain a listing of the addresses of all homes not in compliance with this chapter and shall provide copies to all persons or agencies requesting same. 
4.  Upon receipt of evidence by the Administrative Services Department that appropriate fees have been paid to accomplish tap-ons to a central sewage system, any penalties or restrictions affecting the property pertinent to septic tank use shall be removed by the city. 
(6)  Extension of collection systems consistent with the future land use maps shall be provided at the expense of the developer in accordance with section 120-124(e) (policy 10.A.2.1). 
(7)  The city shall use the methodologies provided in article VI of this chapter to determine available capacity and impact of development on capacity (policy 10.A.1.4). 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-183. - Solid waste. 
(a)  Solid waste within the city is transported to the county landfill at Baker or other designated landfill sites approved by the State. The adopted level of service standard is five pounds per capita per day (policy 10.B.1.5). 
(b)  The city shall require that used motor oil be placed in plastic containers (milk cartons, etc.) clearly marked as "Oil." Oil products shall not be commingled with ordinary household solid waste. Any person, who, after written warning, is found to continue the illegal discard of petroleum products shall be subject to fines and penalties set forth in F.S. ch. 403. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-184. - Drainage. 
(a)  Adopted level of service; additional standards. The adopted level of service for drainage is to retain the first inch of runoff onsite; and post-development runoff shall not exceed pre-development runoff rate for a 25-year storm event, up to and including an event with a 24-hour duration (policies 7.A.1.1 and 10.C.2.3). Chapter 30, article III, Stormwater Drainage, of the Code of Ordinances is incorporated by reference in the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Stormwater management requirements. 
(1)  Performance standards (policy 10.C.2.3). All development must be designed, constructed and maintained to meet the following performance standards: 
a.  While development activity is underway and after it is completed, the characteristics of stormwater runoff shall approximate the rate, volume, quality and timing of stormwater runoff that occurred under the site's natural unimproved or existing state, except that the first inch of stormwater runoff shall be treated in an off-line retention system or according to other best management practices. 
b.  The proposed development and development activity shall not violate the water quality standards as set forth in chapter 17-3, F.A.C. 
(2)  Design standards. To comply with the foregoing performance standards, stormwater management systems shall conform to the following design standards: 
a.  Detention and retention systems shall be designed to comply with chapter 30 of this Code of Ordinances. 
b.  To the extent practicable, natural systems shall be used to accommodate stormwater. 
c.  The proposed stormwater management system shall be designed to accommodate the stormwater that originates within the development and stormwater that flows onto or across the development from adjacent lands. 
d.  The proposed stormwater management system shall be designed to function properly for a minimum 20-year life. 
e.  The design and construction of the proposed stormwater management system shall be certified as meeting the requirements of this chapter by a professional engineer registered in the state. 
f.  No surface water may be channelled or directed into a sanitary sewer. 
g.  The proposed stormwater management system shall be compatible with the stormwater management facilities on surrounding properties or streets, taking into account the possibility that substandard systems may be improved in the future. 
h.  The banks of detention and retention areas should be sloped and should be planted with appropriate vegetation. Slopes with a ratio of 4 to 1 or greater shall be fenced. 
i.  Dredging, clearing of vegetation, deepening, widening, straightening, stabilizing or otherwise altering natural surface waters shall be minimized. 
j.  Natural surface waters shall not be used as sediment traps during or after development. 
k.  For aesthetic reasons and to increase shoreline filtration, the shorelines of detention and retention areas shall be sinuous rather than straight. 
l.  Water reuse and conservation shall, to the maximum extent practicable, be achieved by incorporating the stormwater management system into irrigation systems serving the development. 
m.  Vegetated buffers of sufficient width to prevent erosion shall be retained or created along the shores, banks or edges of all natural or manmade surface waters. 
n.  In phased developments the stormwater management system for each integrated stage of completion shall be capable of functioning independently as required by this chapter. 
o.  All detention and retention basins, except natural water bodies used for this purpose, shall be accessible for maintenance from streets or public rights-of-way. 
p.  All stormwater management systems shall be designed to prevent flood, safety or health hazards. 
q.  No site alteration shall allow water to become a health hazard or contribute to the breeding of mosquitoes. 
r.  Composite coefficients used in runoff calculations shall be based on ultimate development, and future land use, and shall not exceed: 
c = 0.15 maximum for wetland areas 
c = 0.25 maximum for undeveloped areas other than wetlands 
c = 0.40 minimum for single-family residential uses 
c = 0.80 minimum for commercial, multifamily residential, industrial, public and semipublic uses 
(c)  Cash in lieu of onsite treatment of stormwater. 
(1)  Generally. Payment of cash in lieu of providing onsite treatment of stormwater may be accepted by the city if the three conditions set out in subsection (2) below are met. 
(2)  Conditions. 
a.  The development site is within the area covered by a functioning stormwater management facility permitted by the department of environmental regulation or Northwest Florida Water Management District. 
b.  The public services director, with the concurrence of the planning director, determines that the stormwater management facility is of sufficient size and capacity to accept the projected additional stormwater runoff without impairing its capacity to perform its current and projected functions for other areas. 
c.  Approval by the state department of environmental regulation is required when an established stormwater system is used to accommodate the stormwater runoff that would otherwise be required to be retained onsite. 
(3)  Determination and payment of cash in lieu. The amount of the cash in lieu of payment shall be set, and the payment shall be made, according to the following provisions: 
a.  The developer shall supply calculations, certified by a registered professional engineer, of anticipated additional post-development stormwater runoff. 
b.  A drainage payment shall be paid by the developer to the city upon final approval of the development plan as may be determined by the city council. 
c.  The amount of the payment shall be held in trust by the city and shall be used only for land acquisition and/or improvements for stormwater management purposes, and shall be applied only within the same drainage basin as the site for which it was collected. 
(d)  Dedication or maintenance of stormwater management systems. 
(1)  Dedication. If a stormwater management system approved under this chapter is intended to function as an integral part of the city-maintained regional system, as determined by the city, the facilities shall be dedicated to the city. 
(2)  Maintenance by an acceptable entity. 
a.  All stormwater management systems that are not dedicated to the city shall be operated and maintained by one of the following entities: 
1.  A local governmental unit including a county, municipality or regional utility authority, special taxing district or other governmental unit. 
2.  An active water control district created pursuant to F.S. ch. 298 or drainage district created by special act, or community development district created pursuant to F.S. ch. 190, or assessment district created pursuant to F.S. ch. 170. 
3.  A state or federal agency. 
4.  An official franchised, licensed or approved communication, water, sewer, electrical or other public utility. 
5.  The property owner or developer if: 
i.  Written proof is submitted in the appropriate form, by either letter or resolution, that a governmental entity or such other acceptable entity, as set forth in subsections (d)(2)a.1-4 above, will accept the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management and discharge facility at a time certain in the future. 
ii.  A security as described in section 102-35(c) or other assurance of continued financial capacity to operate and maintain the system is submitted. 
6.  For-profit or nonprofit corporations including homeowners associations, property owners associations, condominium owners associations or master associations if: 
i.  The owner or developer submits documents constituting legal capacity and a binding legal obligation between the entity and the city affirmatively takes responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility. 
ii.  The association has sufficient powers reflected in its organizational or operational documents to: 
(a)  Operate and maintain the stormwater management system as permitted by the city. 
(b)  Establish rules and regulations. 
(c)  Assess members. 
(d)  Contract for services. 
(e)  Exist perpetually, with the articles of incorporation providing that if the association is dissolved the stormwater management system will be maintained by an acceptable entity as described above. 
b.  If a project is to be constructed in phases, and subsequent phases will use the same stormwater management facilities as the initial phase or phases, the operation/maintenance entity shall have the ability to accept responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management systems of future phases of the project. 
c.  In phased developments that have an integrated stormwater management system, but employ independent operation/maintenance entities for different phases, the operation/maintenance entities, either separately or collectively, shall have the responsibility and authority to operate and maintain the stormwater management system for the entire project. That authority shall include cross easements for stormwater management and the authority and ability of each entity to enter and maintain all facilities, should any entity fail to maintain a portion of the stormwater management system within the project. 
d.  The applicant shall be an acceptable entity and shall be responsible for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management system from the time construction begins until the stormwater management system is dedicated to and accepted by another acceptable entity. 
(e)  General requirements. 
(1)  A stormwater management plan shall be filed with all development applications (policy 10.C.1.5). 
(2)  Channeling runoff directly into open water bodies including wetlands shall be prohibited (policy 11.A.2.4). 
(3)  Installation of drainage facilities made necessary by new development shall be the responsibility of the developer (policy 10.C.2.1). 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-185. - Potable water. 
(Also see article XIV, section 102-263(a). 
(a)  Generally. The adopted level of service is 125 gallons per day/capita (policy 10.D.1.2). This LOS shall be applied to all potable water systems serving the city. Conservation of potable water resources shall be accomplished through all available means (objective 10.D.3). 
(1)  The city shall require the use of water savings devices to effect a 20 percent reduction of wastewater demand (see section 102-182). 
(2)  The city shall require the installation of backflow prevention devices to protect the public system from contamination caused by backpressure or backsiphonage. 
(3)  Cross connections of water lines from private wells to public water supply lines shall be prohibited. 
(4)  The city shall take action to obtain additional potable water after flow reaches 85 percent of capacity. 
(b)  Water shortage plan. The Northwest Florida Water Management District Water Shortage Plan provided as appendix D to chapter 8, foundation document, is incorporated into this chapter by reference. This plan shall be used upon declaration of a water shortage or water shortage emergency within the city. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-186. - Natural groundwater aquifer recharge/sand-and-gravel aquifer. 
(a)  The Floridan aquifer is not recharged within the county. Protection of wells which draw potable water from the aquifer and their respective cones of influence is, however, a requirement of local government. Sand-and-gravel aquifers which overlie the impervious limestone strata covering the Floridan aquifer yield water for irrigation purposes and are also subject to conservation and protective measures of local government (policy 10.E.1). 
(b)  The Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act (LGCPLDRA) requires that local governments "generally identify and depict existing and planned water wells and cones of influence where applicable," within the land use elements of comprehensive plans (F.S. § 163.3177). A cone of influence is defined in rule 9J-5 as an area around one or more major water wells the boundary of which is determined by the Northwest Florida Water Management Agency (NWFWMA) or any other government agency having specific statutory authority to make such a determination based on groundwater travel or drawdown depth (9J-5.003(18) F.A.C.). The term "water well" is defined by rule 9J-5 as wells excavated, drilled, dug or driven for the supply of industrial, agricultural or potable water for general public consumption (9J-5.003(18) F.A.C.). 
(c)  The Northwest Florida Water Management District issues consumptive use permits for wells which meet certain withdrawal thresholds. In order to determine whether to allow the proposed withdrawal, NWFWMD staff must determine the impact of the well on adjacent property owners and the water resource. Rules generally state that the withdrawal of water from a well: 
(1)  Must not cause the level of the potentiometric surface under lands not owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the applicant to be lowered more than five feet; 
(2)  Must not cause the level of the water table under lands not owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the applicant to be lowered more than three feet; 
(3)  Must not cause the level of the surface of water in any lake or other impoundment to be lowered more than one foot; and 
(4)  Must not cause the potentiometric surface to be lowered below sea level (rule 40D-2.301(3), F.A.C.). 
    These regulations use the drawdown depth means of determining the impact on water resources since the quantity of a consumptive use is the primary concern. 
(d)  The location of potable wells within the city is depicted in the existing land use maps contained in the sleeve of the foundation documents. To protect these sites, no other land use or construction shall be permitted within a 200-foot radius of each well. 
(e)  With the adoption of this chapter, the city shall require that all shallow wells which tap the sand-and-gravel aquifer obtain a permit from the city. Applications for a sand-and-gravel well permit shall include the location of the proposed well on lot plats (objective 10.E.1). 
(1)  Shallow wells which draw water from the sand-and-gravel aquifer shall be used for irrigation purposes only. 
(2)  Sand-and-gravel wells may not be located within 25 feet of another shallow well. 
(3)  Provisions contained in article XII, recreation and open space, shall be implemented to provide sufficient open space for the recharge of the sand-and-gravel aquifer (policy 10.E.1.2). 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Secs. 102-187-102-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - CONSERVATION 

Sec. 102-201. - Environmentally sensitive lands. 
    Development plans submitted to the city shall comply with applicable federal, state and water management district regulations relating to environmentally sensitive lands. In all cases the strictest of the applicable standards shall apply (policy 11.A.3.3). Development plans submitted shall include soil tests conducted by testing agencies licensed by the state to establish soil compatibility specifically in the site of proposed development in environmentally sensitive areas (policy 11.B.3.1). 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-202. - Wetlands protection zone. 
(a)  Generally. There is hereby created a wetlands protection zone in which special restrictions on development apply (objective 11.A.2). The boundaries of this zone shall be the most landward extent of the following: 
(1)  Areas within the dredge and fill jurisdiction of the department of environmental regulation as authorized by F.S. ch. 403. 
(2)  Areas within the jurisdiction of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers as authorized by section 404, Clean Water Act, or section 1, River and Harbor Act. 
(3)  Areas within the jurisdiction of the Northwest Florida Water Management District. 
(b)  Request for determination of boundaries. A developer may obtain a determination of the boundaries of a protected environmentally sensitive zone by submitting to the city by certified mail or hand delivery a request for determination of boundaries. The request must, as a minimum, set forth an adequate description of the land the developer wishes to develop, the nature of the developer's right to ownership or control of the land, and other information needed to make the determination. The city shall make the determination within 15 working days of receiving the needed information from the developer. All such lands shall include all functioning wetlands. 
(c)  Development activities within protected environmentally sensitive zones. The following provisions apply but are not limited to the environmentally sensitive zones as shown in figure 8-3, foundation document (policies 11.A.2.1 and 7.A.6.4): 
(1)  Generally. Except as expressly provided herein, no development activity shall be undertaken in a protected environmentally sensitive zone which includes a wetlands protection zone. 
(2)  Activities presumed to have an insignificant adverse affect on protected environmentally sensitive zones. 
a.  Certain activities are presumed to have an insignificant adverse effect on the beneficial functions of protected environmentally sensitive zones. These activities may be undertaken unless it is shown by competent and substantial evidence that the specific activity would have a significant adverse effect on the protected environmentally sensitive area. 
b.  The following uses and activities are presumed to have an insignificant adverse effect on wetlands protection zones: 
1.  Scenic, historic, wildlife or scientific preserves. 
2.  Minor maintenance or emergency repair to existing structures or improved areas. 
3.  Cleared walking trails having no structural components. 
4.  Timber catwalks and docks four feet or less in width. 
5.  Commercial or recreational fishing or hunting and creation and maintenance of temporary blinds. 
6.  Cultivating agricultural or horticultural products that occur naturally on the site. 
7.  Constructing fences where no fill activity is required and where navigational access will not be impaired by construction of the fence. 
8.  Developing an area that no longer functions as a wetland, except a former wetland that has been filled or altered in violation of any rule, regulation, statute or this chapter. The developer must demonstrate that the water regime has been permanently altered, either artificially or naturally, in a manner to preclude the area from maintaining surface water necessary to sustain wetland structure and function. If the water regime of a wetland has been artificially altered, but wetland species remain the dominant vegetation of the area, the city shall determine the feasibility of restoring the altered hydrology. If the wetland may be restored at a cost that is reasonable in relation to benefits to be derived from the restored wetland, the developer shall, as a condition of development, restore the wetland and comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  Prohibited ongoing activities. The following standards apply to post-development activities taking place within any protected environmentally sensitive zone: 
(1)  Point source and nonpoint source discharges. Absent an amendment to the development order, point source and nonpoint source discharges shall continue to meet the standards applicable to the original development. 
(2)  Clearing. Absent an amendment to the development order, no person shall clear more vegetation than was permitted for the original development. 
(3)  Handling and storage of fuel, hazardous and toxic substances and wastes. 
a.  Developments where fuel or toxic substances will be stored, transferred or sold shall employ the best available facilities and procedures for the prevention, containment, recovery and mitigation of spillage of fuel and toxic substances. Facilities and procedures shall be designed to prevent substances from entering the water or soil and employ adequate means for prompt and effective cleanup of spills that do occur. 
b.  No toxic or hazardous wastes or substances shall be stored in outdoor containers. 
c.  Storage or disposal of all types of wastes is prohibited on shorelines. 
(4)  Prohibited uses. The longterm storage of equipment or materials and the disposal of wastes shall be prohibited. 
(5)  Fertilizers, herbicides or pesticides. 
a.  Fertilizers, herbicides or pesticides shall not be applied in a protected environmentally sensitive zone except for projects conducted under the authority of F.S. §§ 373.451-373.4595, the Surface Water Improvement and Management Act, and governmental authorized mosquito control programs. 
b.  Fertilizers, pesticides and herbicides used in restricted development zones shall be applied sparingly and at appropriate rates and time intervals. 
(6)  Spray vehicles. Vehicles used for mixing or spraying chemicals are prohibited from withdrawing water directly from surface waters. 
(7)  Pump-out, holding and treatment facilities for wastes from mobile sources. Sewage, solid waste and petroleum waste generated by vehicles or vessels on the site shall be properly collected and disposed of. 
(e)  Design standards (policy 11.A.4). The following special design standards apply to wetlands protection zones: 
(1)  Wherever possible, natural buffers shall be retained between all development and all protected environmentally sensitive zones. If a natural buffer does not exist, an equivalent buffer shall be created. The size of the buffer shall be the minimum necessary to prevent significant adverse effects on the protected environmentally sensitive area. The factual basis of the decision as to the size of the buffer shall be stated as a finding in the written record. 
(2)  The developer shall completely restore any portion of a protected environmentally sensitive zone damaged during construction. Complete restoration means that the damaged area shall, within five years, be operating as effectively as the natural system did prior to being destroyed. 
(3)  Other reasonable protective measures necessary to prevent significant adverse effects on a protected environmentally sensitive zone may be required. The factual basis of the decision to require the measure shall be stated as a finding in the written record. Protective measures may include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Maintaining natural drainage patterns. 
b.  Limiting the normal removal of vegetation to the minimum necessary to carry out the development activity. 
c.  Expeditiously replanting denuded areas. 
d.  Stabilizing banks and other unvegetated areas by siltation and erosion control measures. 
e.  Minimizing the amount of fill used in the development activity. 
f.  Disposing of dredged spoil at specified locations in a manner causing minimal environmental damage. 
g.  Constructing channels at the minimum depth and width necessary to achieve their intended purposes and designing them to prevent slumping and erosion and allow revegetation of banks. 
h.  Dredging wetlands at times of minimum biological activity to avoid periods of fish migration and spawning and other cycles and activities of wildlife. 
i.  Designing, locating, constructing and maintaining all development in a manner that minimizes environmental damage. 
j.  Prohibiting septic tanks or locating them away from high groundwater areas and peaty soils. 
k.  Using deed restrictions and other legal mechanisms to require the developer and successors to protect the environmentally sensitive areas and maintain the development. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-203. - Mitigation (policy 11.A.4.5). 
(a)  Compensatory mitigation. Mitigation procedures must be followed in any case where development degrades wetlands or other natural resources at a ratio of 2:1. Degradation means any modifications, alterations, or effects on waters, associated wetlands, surface area, species composition, or usefulness for human or natural uses which are or may potentially be harmful or injurious to human health, welfare, safety or property, to biological productivity, diversity, or stability or which unreasonably interfere with the reasonable use of property, including outdoor recreation. Degradation shall also include secondary or cumulative impacts. 
(1)  General requirements. 
a.  Compensatory mitigation, by which environmentally sensitive lands are purchased, created, enhanced and/or restored to compensate for the loss of such lands, is required whenever a land use is allowed. 
b.  The purchased, created, enhanced or restored environmentally sensitive land must be of the same type as that destroyed or degraded. 
c.  Compensatory mitigation shall not be the basis for approving a project that could not otherwise be approved. 
d.  A developer of a compensatory mitigation plan shall grant a conservation easement under F.S. § 704.06, on the newly purchased, created, enhanced or restored environmentally sensitive lands to protect them from future development. 
(2)  Wetlands. Compensatory wetland mitigation shall require that the amount of wetlands purchased, created, enhanced or restored be large enough to assure that the amount of wetlands destroyed or degraded will be completely and successfully replaced. The following ratios of replacement to destroyed wetlands shall be presumed to provide reasonable assurances for type-for-type mitigation (policy 11.A.3.6): 
Long leaf pine 2.5:1 Hickory pignut 2.5:1 Dogwood 2.5:1 Spruce pine 2.5:1 Pond pine 2.5:1 Water oak 2.0:1 River birch 2.0:1 Swamp laurel oak 2.0:1 Swamp chestnut oak 1.5:1 Cinnamon fern 1.5:1 Japanese climbing fern 1.5:1  
(3)  Disaster amelioration. To minimize the effects of natural disasters the city shall: 
a.  Comply with building code requirements of F.S. § 161.55, and section 102-204(b) of this chapter. 
b.  Participate in the national flood insurance program in conformance with the Federal Disaster Relief Act of 1974. This will become advisable as the city expands close to Shoal and Yellow Rivers. 
c.  Determine the feasibility of eliminating, relocating or structurally modifying public infrastructure which has suffered natural disaster damage and to implement appropriate cost-effective measures to mitigate future damage. 
d.  Maintain the same capacity of any public infrastructure that is relocated, modified or replaced unless the capacity is expanded as part of an approved post-disaster hazard mitigation plan in accordance with PL 93-288. 
(b)  Clustered development and density transfer. To alleviate any hardship caused by development restrictions on the use of environmentally sensitive areas, the clustering of residential or commercial development within the nonsensitive portions of the project site shall be permitted if other provisions imposed by this chapter, adopted ordinances or Florida Statutes are otherwise met by the proposed development. Density and intensity of development shall be applied under the provisions of any approved residential, commercial or PUD land use classification. If the site of proposed development encompasses environmentally sensitive areas, the density and intensity of dwellings or commercial units may be authorized to a level that would be permitted for the total square footage of the area including restricted portions. 
(1)  Such development must be clustered only on nonsensitive portions of the development site. 
(2)  If it is determined during the review of development applications described in article II of this chapter that the parcel proposed for development reflects unique or unusual circumstances, or that development of the parcel at the maximum density would affect surrounding land uses in a manner contrary to the public health, safety and welfare, or would be inconsistent with the comprehensive plan, the local planning agency may recommend that the density or intensity of development rights be capped at a specific level. An example might be to cap residential or commercial density where the adopted level of service of access roads may be degraded below a level of "D." In such case, the city council shall be provided findings of fact on which the restriction is based and any mitigating recommendations that would make the parcel eligible for maximum density and intensity potential. In making a final decision in such cases, the city council shall have full latitude to prescribe limited use of the property or density transfer ratios if a one-for-one transfer cannot be accomplished. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-204. - Protect lives and property. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to set forth regulatory controls necessary for the protection of lives and property in the city. Construction design standards in high-hazard areas promulgated by the Standard Building Code and not included in this chapter are incorporated into the code by reference. 
(b)  Floodplains. Floodplains are lands which will be inundated by floods known to have occurred or reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur from the overflow of inland waters and the accumulation of runoff of surface waters from rainfall. Design standards for reducing flood hazards in floodplains shall apply as follows: 
(1)  Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements of existing construction shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure during a base flood. Manufactured homes shall be anchored, tied down, and blocked in accordance with the standards of section 15C-1.10, Florida Administrative Code. 
(2)  Construction materials and methods. All new construction and substantial improvements of existing construction shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage, and using methods and practices that will minimize flood damage and prevent the pollution of surface waters during a base flood. 
(3)  Service facilities and utilities. 
a.  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning and other service facilities shall be designed or located to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during a base flood. 
b.  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate both infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
c.  Onsite sanitary sewage systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding, and shall not be installed wholly or partially in a floodplain. 
(4)  Residential structures. 
a.  All new construction and substantial improvements of existing construction of residential structures shall be constructed with the lowest floor elevated one foot above the flood protection elevation as delineated on the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) flood insurance rate maps (FIRM). 
b.  For all new construction and substantial improvements of existing construction, enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified as meeting this requirement by a registered professional engineer or architect, or must meet or exceed the following minimum standards: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. 
2.  Place the bottom of all openings no higher than one foot above grade. 
3.  Electrical, plumbing and other utility connections shall not be placed below the flood protection elevation. 
(5)  Nonresidential structures. New construction and substantial improvements of existing construction of nonresidential structures, including attendant utility or sanitary facilities, shall be constructed to meet the following minimum standards: 
a.  Walls below the flood protection elevation shall be substantially impermeable to the passage of water. 
b.  Structural components shall resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
c.  Be certified as meeting the standards of this article by a registered professional engineer or architect. 
(6)  Subdivisions. 
a.  All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the area of special flood hazard and the elevation of the base flood. 
b.  All final subdivision plans shall identify the elevation of proposed structures and pads. If the site is filled above the base flood, the final pad elevation shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor. 
c.  All public utilities and facilities in subdivisions shall be located and constructed to minimize flood damage, and shall be adequately drained to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
d.  Each lot must include a site suitable for constructing a structure in conformity with the standards of these flood damage prevention regulations. 
e.  All agreements for deed, purchase agreements, leases, or other contracts for sale or exchange of lots within an area of special flood hazard must contain in prominent visibility the following flood hazard warning in the document: 
Flood Hazard Warning 
This property may be subject to flooding. You should contact local building and zoning officials to obtain information about flood elevations and restrictions before making plans for the use of the property. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-205. - Conservation. 
(a)  Generally. Protection of environmentally sensitive lands in the foregoing subsections intrinsically provides for the conservation of affected resources. Conservation also extends to the preservation of air quality, the protection of historical resources, and the protection of endangered species of plants and animals. This section provides regulatory controls intended to conserve these resources. 
(b)  Preservation of historical resources (policy 7.A.4.4). Figure 4-2 of the foundation document identifies the location of one site of historic or archaeological significance in the city. See also table 4-4, foundation documents. There is no structure located on the historic sites. Any proposed land use shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  No excavation or fill construction activity shall be permitted on sites identified as having historical or archaeological significance without approval of the city and the department of state, division of historic resources. 
(2)  If the impact of development on any area of historic or historic significance is not known, the city shall require that a survey be conducted under the auspices of the survey and registration section, bureau of historic preservation, department of state, Tallahassee, Florida 32301. 
(3)  If valuable archaeological or historical resources are previously known to exist, development approval shall be conditioned upon performance of an archaeological salvage excavation plan approved by the city and the division of historic resources. 
(4)  If artifacts of known or suspected historical significance are found on the site, any further land disturbing activities shall cease pending an evaluation by the division of historical resources (policy 7.A.4.5). 
(c)  Flora. Tables 8-1 through 8-3 in the foundation documents identify predominant flora in the city (see article XII, recreation and open space, for landscaping requirements) (policy 11.A.3.6). 
(d)  Fauna. Table 8-4 of the foundation document lists the fauna in the area that are endangered, threatened or of special concern. Where development activity may threaten endangered wildlife, the following regulatory conditions apply (objective 11.A.4): 
(1)  Areas known to be important to animal species designated as endangered or threatened by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service or by the Florida Game and Fresh Water Fish Commission (FGFWFC) for reproduction, feeding or nesting of such species shall not be altered or in any way affected by development without the approval of the city and the FGFWFC. 
(e)  Air quality. Any development with point source emissions that may degrade air quality must comply with all applicable federal and state regulations regarding emission control (policy 11.A.1.1). 
(f)  Operation of incinerators. Municipal solid waste incinerators, areawide incinerators, or incinerators to be operated for commercial purposes shall not be located within the city (policy 11.A.1.2). 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Secs. 102-206-102-215. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - RECREATION AND OPEN SPACE 

Sec. 102-216. - Recreation. 
    Parks and recreation facilities are categorized as either resource-based or activity-based as defined below. Level of service (LOS) standards are prescribed for activity-based facilities (policy 12.A.3.1). The city shall continue to ensure that ample recreational facilities are acquired and maintained for public use and enjoyment. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-217. - Resource-based facilities. 
    Resource-based facilities are oriented to natural resources such as beaches, lakes, bays and bayous. These facilities usually fall under the purview and management of federal and state agencies. It is the responsibility, however, of local governments to preserve and protect such resources within its political jurisdiction and to enhance public access to such facilities. Article XI, conservation, provides for public recreational use and access to resource-based facilities consistent with regulations to protect the shoreline and environmentally sensitive areas. Policies set forth in chapter 12 of the comprehensive plan repeated under section 102-220 are referred to article XI. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-218. - Activity-based facilities. 
    Activity-based facilities include localized facilities such as parks, playgrounds, ballfields, and boat ramps. The private sector also provides activity-based facilities such as marinas, campgrounds and golf courses on a user fee basis. Table 9-5 of the foundation document lists existing city facilities. With regard to activity-based recreation, the following LOS shall govern future acquisition of city maintained and operated recreation and open space: 
(1)  The city shall maintain 0.08 acre of neighborhood parks and one acre of community parks respectively for each 1,000 residential and seasonal population. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-219. - Acquiring public recreational facilities. 
(a)  The city shall periodically seek funding through the Florida Recreation and Development Assistance Program (FRDAP) and the conservation and recreational lands trust fund (CARL) administered by the department of natural resources (DNR) to acquire environmentally endangered lands and other lands for recreation and open space. 
(b)  The city shall periodically seek the cooperation and assistance from the department of transportation (DOT) to identify and construct new bicycle route corridors. 
(c)  Purpose; general requirements. 
(1)  This section is enacted to ensure that future land development within the city provides land for park or recreational purposes in accordance with the city's comprehensive plan and this chapter. 
(2)  On any residential project of more than ten housing units, the subdivider shall agree in writing to the dedication of a minimum of four percent of the land for neighborhood park and recreational purposes. 
(3)  If it is determined by the city that a park or recreation facility in the proposed development is not feasible or if the size is one-half acre or smaller, then the developer shall pay a fee equal to four percent of the just value of the subdivision land, as determined by the county property appraiser. If a subdivider objects to the value determined, he may, at his own expense, obtain an appraisal of the property by a qualified real estate appraiser approved by the city. This new appraisal must also be accepted by the city. 
(4)  If money is given to the city instead of land, then these funds will be placed in a trust fund known as the park and recreational facilities reserve. This money will be used solely for the acquisition, improvement and expansion of parks and recreational facilities in the city. 
(5)  The site location within a development must be approved by the city. 
(d)  Criteria for determination regarding dedication of land or payment of fee. 
(1)  The city shall determine whether it will accept land dedication or elect to require payment of a fee in lieu thereof pursuant to this section by consideration of the following: 
a.  The topography, geology, access and location of land in the subdivision available for dedication. 
b.  The size and shape of the subdivision and land available for dedication. 
c.  The feasibility of dedication. 
d.  The availability of previously acquired park property. 
e.  Conformance with the recreation land use plan. 
(e)  Credit for open space. 
(1)  Up to 50 percent credit may be given toward the requirement of land dedication or payment of fees pursuant to this section for private open space or recreational development as determined by the city. The following four requirements must also be met: 
a.  Yards, setbacks and other open space areas (i.e. Buffers, storm water facilities, wetlands, vegetative buffers, etc.) required by the city zoning regulations and building ordinances are not included in the computation of such private open space. 
b.  Private ownership and maintenance of the open space by all property owners in the development must be ensured through recorded written agreement, conveyance or restrictions. 
c.  Private open space is restricted for park and recreational purposes unless the owner receives permission from the city council to develop the parcel. 
d.  Private open space must be adaptable for park and recreational purposes, i.e., size, shape, topography, geology, access and location must be suitable. 
(f)  Change of use. 
(1)  In the case of change of use, redevelopment, or expansion or modification of an existing use which requires the issuance of a residential building permit, the fee shall be based upon the net positive increase. 
(g)  Procedure for dedication of land or payment of fee. 
(1)  The subdivider shall agree in writing to dedicate land or pay a fee according to the city council's decision. The city council will base its decisions on the standards in this section, after receiving a recommendation from the planning and zoning board. At the time of the filing of the final plat, the subdivider must dedicate the land or pay a fee. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 1031, § 2, 8-28-00; Ord. No. 1286, § 2, 8-28-06) 
Sec. 102-220. - Open space. 
(a)  Open space classifications. Open space in this chapter is defined as undeveloped land suitable for passive recreation and/or conservation uses. The different forms of open space shall be classified by their functions as follows: 
(1)  Pastoral open space. The primary role of these lands is to provide resource-based and user-oriented recreation. These include federal, state and regional parks, forests, historic sites and other areas established for the protection of the site's natural resources or its aesthetic beauty. Private clubs and recreation areas are included in this classification as well. 
(2)  Utilitarian open space. Lands not suitable for residential development due to the existence of hazardous conditions are deemed utilitarian open spaces. These areas include wetlands, lakes and rivers, floodplains, drainage ditches, sinkholes and airport flight path zones. Areas dedicated to future resource development are also classified as utilitarian open spaces. 
(3)  Corridor open space. Corridor open spaces are areas through which people travel but which are also designed for aesthetic enjoyment and leisure. These corridors can provide a linkage between recreation areas and residential areas or between two residential areas. An example is SR 85. Other corridors include abandoned railroads, rivers and recreation trails. 
(b)  Applicability of standards. Within the city, open space shall mean any recreational facility maintained and operated by the city, any waterfront area, and any buffering or landscaping requirement set forth by this chapter. The regulations as set out in subsections (c) through (f) shall govern the use of open space for landscaping (policy 12.A.1.2). 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 1340, §§ 2, 3, 6-25-07) 
Secs. 102-221-102-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - INTERGOVERNMENTAL COORDINATION ELEMENT 

Sec. 102-241. - Intergovernmental coordination; comprehensive plan committee. 
(a)  Generally. The purpose of this article is to set forth regulations governing the procedures for effective intergovernmental coordination among and between the local governments of the county and various federal and state agencies. The provisions of this article are intended to implement, inculcate and recommend procedures that will provide the respective governing bodies the information gathering and exchange necessary to resolve conflicts that may arise as the result of plan implementation, e.g., impacts of development on level of service (LOS) standards. 
(b)  County comprehensive plan committee. This committee is formed pursuant to agreement between the municipalities of the county and the governing body of the county. The comprehensive plan committee serves as the technical advisory committee (TAC) to the local planning agency (LPA) and city council. Its purpose is to provide a forum for data dissemination, discussion and conflict mediation at a technical level prior to decision or action by the respective governing bodies (policy 13.A.1.2). 
(1)  Powers of the committee are limited as follows: 
a.  Adopt bylaws for the regulation of its affairs and the conduct of its business and rules pursuant to F.S. ch. 120, and concurrence of the respective local governments of the county. 
b.  All recommendations made by the committee to the respective local governments are advisory. 
(2)  Composition of the comprehensive plan committee shall be as follows: 
a.  The county, the municipalities within the county and the county school board shall all have two representatives on the committee. The planning director, or his designee, shall be the primary member of the committee and shall vote on any issue raised in the form of a motion for committee action. The LPA shall appoint from its membership an alternate member who shall vote only in the absence of the primary member. Persons appointed to represent the city on the committee shall be approved by the city council and shall represent the city on this committee exclusively at the pleasure of the city council. 
(3)  Meetings shall be held monthly as established by the chairman or at the special request of any of the committee members. The committee meetings shall be held in accordance with generally accepted parliamentary procedure. 
(4)  The committee shall have a chairman and vice-chairman who shall serve at the pleasure of the committee. The county shall provide a recording secretary. The chairman shall have the authority to appoint subcommittees and chairmen as necessary. The committee, with the concurrence of the represented governing bodies, may appoint an independent consultant to serve as chairman, or in some other technical advisory capacity. The consultant shall be qualified to monitor, advise and recommend methodologies for intergovernmental coordination and the implementation of the respective comprehensive plans. Remuneration for such a consultant shall be prorated based upon the population of each local government in the county that is represented on the committee. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-242. - State agencies coordination. 
    Table 10-1 below, taken from chapter 10 of the foundation documents, provides a listing of state agencies, their functions and the city office of primary responsibility for coordination. 
TABLE 10-1. STATE AGENCIES 
COORDINATION 
Florida Agency Function Coordination Entities 1 Department of community affairs a. Development of regional impact, application for development approval review Division of resource planning and management-Administrative assistant/planning director b. Consistency of local emergency management plans with regional plans Division of emergency management-Administrative assistant/planning director c. Review of local comprehensive plans for consistency with state and regional plans (chapter 9J-5.021) Division of resource planning and management-Administrative assistant/planning director Department of environmental protection a. Permitting: water and sewer systems, dredge and fill projects, landfill operations Bureau of permitting-Administrative assistant/planning director b. Monitoring Bureau of water quality management Bureau of waste management and grants Department of health and rehabilitative services Administers state programs relating to youth services, mental health, alcohol rehabilitation, family services, public health, crippled children, community hospitals, public welfare, and aging Administrative assistant/planning director, council on aging Department of environmental protection Consistency of recreation and open space element with state outdoor recreation plan Division of recreation and parks, office of policy planning-Administrative assistant/planning director Department of transportation Consistency of local government traffic circulation elements with Florida Transportation Plan Division of public transportation operations-Board of county commissioners, administrative assistant/planning director a. Consistency of the port, aviation and related facilities element with the state aviation plan and funding for aviation planning Division of public transportation operations-Board of county commissioners Department of state, division of historical resources Administers laws relating to historic sites and properties Administrative assistant/planning director Department of agriculture and consumer services Consumer protection Administrative assistant/planning director a. Inspects scales and measures b. Analysis of petroleum products c. Inspects and certifies milk products and citrus d. Receives consumer complaints and provides consumer information Game and freshwater fish commission Consistency of recreation and open space element with state outdoor recreation plan Administrative assistant/ planning director a. Administers Florida boating improvement program Administrative assistant/planning director b. Lake and pond renovation assistance c. Recreation grants (boat ramps, piers) Okaloosa Soil and Water Conservation District Supervises, develops and conserves natural resources County agent/administrative assistant/planning director a. Advises on land development proposals b. Interacts with local governments as nonvoting member of the comprehensive plan committee.  
       1 The office with primary responsibility for coordination is listed in the last column. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-243. - Other coordination agencies. 
    Other agencies which require frequent coordination are listed in chapter 10, foundation documents. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Secs. 102-244-102-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 102-261. - Capital improvements. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to provide for a capital improvement program (CIP) that is designed to maintain adopted levels of service in facilities that provide sanitary sewer, solid waste, drainage, potable water, traffic circulation, recreation and open space. 
(b)  Chapter 14, table 14-1 of the comprehensive plan presents a schedule of capital improvement projects for the city through 1995. This schedule may be changed by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-262. - Monitoring and evaluation. 
(a)  The CIP shall be reviewed on an annual basis by the technical review committee created by policy 14.A.2.6 of the comprehensive plan. 
(b)  The committee shall be comprised of the following: 
(1)  City clerk. 
(2)  Administrative assistant/planning director. 
(3)  Public services director. 
(4)  Other officials designated by the city council. 
(c)  The committee shall maintain information on development activity, level of service conditions and other data necessary to accurately evaluate the implementation of the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-263. - Methods of assessment (policy 14.A.2.5). 
(a)  Generally. Article VI of this chapter provides methodologies by which concurrence may be determined. To provide the infrastructure required for continued and orderly growth, CIP planning must be properly timed and projects prioritized for maximum utility and cost effectiveness. The rules contained herein express procedure and methodologies adopted by the city. 
(b)  Timing. In each of the public service facilities identified in section 102-261 above, the following schedule shall be adhered to by the CIP committee: 
(1)  Sanitary sewer. Provisions to expand treatment plant facilities, effluent disposal and collector systems shall be made at the point where existing flow and committed flow total at a level 85 percent of the total treatment facility capacity. Permitting of new development projects shall not occur after 95 percent of the total treatment facility capacity has been utilized. In such cases where construction to provide additional capacity has begun with a scheduled completion date, and upon the approval of the department of environmental regulation, permitting against the new capacity may be granted. 
(2)  Solid waste. Solid waste transfer and/or landfill capacity shall be expanded, or a new disposal methodology initiated, when the receiving capacity of the transfer station or landfill reaches 85 percent of capacity levels. Failure to provide for new expansion or a disposal methodology at or before the 80 percent capacity level by the servicing agency the county shall obligate the city to seek through the comprehensive plan committee ways and means to provide uninterrupted solid waste disposal service to the citizens of the city. 
(3)  Drainage. Drainage facilities shall be constructed as required by chapter 17-25, F.A.C., Stormwater Rule, so as to achieve an 80 to 95 percent removal of stormwater pollutants before discharge into receiving waters. The city's adopted LOS, i.e., to retain the first one inch of rainfall onsite with post-development runoff rate for a 25-year storm event not exceeding predevelopment, shall not be degraded. 
(4)  Potable water. New potable wells and storage tanks shall be constructed to maintain a minimum LOS of 125 gallons per capita per day (gpcd), and maintain a minimum sustained fire flow in accordance with standards promulgated by the National Board of Fire Underwriters (NBFU) and the Fire Suppression Rating Guide of the Insurance Services Office (ISO) and a minimum static pressure of 35 pounds per square inch (psi). Whenever demand is within 25 percent of the minimum standards for potable water, provisions shall be made to expand and/or improve the system. 
(5)  Recreation and open space. Acquisition of land for resource-based and activity-based parks and recreational facilities shall occur at the point no later than when the adopted LOS of one acre per 1,000 population is measured less (on an annual basis) than 1.05 acres per 1,000. 
_____
(c)  Setting priorities. The following checklist shall be used by the committee in conjunction with the LPA in assigning capital outlays to proposed/needed CIP projects. Individual projects shall be prioritized based on the number of "yes" responses in relation to other desired projects. "Yes" answers implement the goals, objectives and policies of the comprehensive plan. "No" answers do not directly support plan goals, objectives and policies: 
PRIORITY CHECKLIST 
(Objective 14.A.3) 
Project Yes No N/A (1) Will the project provide infrastructure for growth? _______________a. Will development bear the cost of facility improvements? _______________(2) Is the amount of growth that this project is designed to serve consistent with the most recent population projections? _______________(3) Will this project either leave unchanged or increase the ratio of jobs in Crestview to residents of Crestview? _______________(4) If the project is likely to stimulate residential development: a. Will development be centrally located in Crestview? _______________b. Can development be serviced with roads, schools, utilities, etc., without further city investment? _______________c. Will development benefit low to moderate income persons? _______________d. Will development provide open space in accordance with this chapter (article XII)? _______________(5) If the project is likely to slow residential development in an area: a. Is that area rural in classification? _______________b. Are one or more public service systems in the area being used at or near capacity? _______________(6) If the project is likely to stimulate commercial or industrial development in areas remote from central Crestview: a. Is the area presently zoned for such land use? _______________b. Can development be serviced with roads, schools, utilities, etc., without further city investment? _______________c. Will development provide open space in accordance with this chapter (article XII)? _______________(7) Will development have no impact on environmentally sensitive lands? _______________ 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
_____
Sec. 102-264. - Assessing pro rata costs (policy 14.A.3.1). 
    As may be determined by the assignment of priority to CIP projects under section 102-263(c), the city shall require that approved growth totally pay for itself except under the following conditions in which case pro rata costs shall be assessed for facility needs as set forth in table 14.03.01.A. Impact fees as established in article XVIII are affected by the percentages shown under "Developer Pro Rata Cost." 
TABLE 14.03.01.A. FACILITY NEEDS 
PRO RATA COST SHARING 
Project Developer Pro Rata Cost (1) Project provides low to moderate income housing _____  percent (2) Project promotes infill and does not extend infrastructure requirements _____  percent (3) Project provides jobs per 100 population that is greater than the existing unemployment rates per 100 population _____  percent (4) Project fulfills a community need, i.e., social, cultural, recreational, educational, historical or archaeological preservation, etc. _____  percent (5) Project adds to quality of life and aesthetic appeal of the city _____  percent  
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-265. - Annual report. 
(a)  Reporting generally. By April 1 of each year the technical review committee shall report to the city planning commission on the status of implementation activities and existing level of service conditions in the city. 
(b)  Committee reporting. Committee reporting to the LPA shall be as follows: 
(1)  Recommendations of the committee to maintain level of service standards. 
(2)  Any recommendations for adjusting the CIP and amending the plan. 
(3)  A schedule of priority for CIP projects. 
(c)  LPA reporting. LPA reporting to the city council shall be as follows: 
(1)  Recommendations of the LPA and the committee, if not the same, to maintain level of service standards. 
(2)  Any recommendations for adjusting the CIP and amending the plan. 
(3)  A schedule of priority for CIP projects. Committee priority schedule shall also be presented to the city council, if not the same. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Secs. 102-266-102-280. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - LEVELS OF SERVICE 

Sec. 102-281. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide a ready reference for determining development compliance with the levels of service adopted by this chapter in compliance with F.S. ch. 163 and chapter 9J-5, F.A.C. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-282. - Levels of service. 
    The following minimum levels of service shall guide the issuance of development permits pursuant to the concurrency management system (see article VI). 
(1)  Roadways. 
Local: Minimum operating LOS of C (reference policy 8.A.1.1) State: a. SR 85 from city limits (south) to U.S. 90 (SR 10) LOS D b. SR 85 from U.S. 90 (SR 10) to city limits (north) LOS D c. SR 10 from city limits (west) to SR 85 LOS D d. SR 10 (U.S. 90) from SR 85 to city limits (east) LOS D e. SR 8 (I-10) from city limits (west) to SR 85 LOS C f. SR 8 (I-10) from SR 85 to city limits (east) LOS C County: g. All collector roads (reference policy 8.A.2.1) LOS D  
(2)  Sanitary sewer. One hundred eight gallons/capita day (reference policy 10.A.1.3, comprehensive plan). 
(3)  Solid waste. Five pounds/capita day (reference policy 10.B.1.5, comprehensive plan). 
(4)  Drainage. 
a.  Retain the first one inch of runoff onsite for a 25-year storm event; and 
b.  Post-development runoff shall not exceed the pre-development runoff rate for a 25-year storm event, up to and including an event with a 24-hour duration (reference policy 10.C.2.3, comprehensive plan). 
(5)  Potable water. One hundred twenty-five gallons/capita day (reference policy 10.D.1.2, comprehensive plan). 
(6)  Recreation and open space. One acre per 1,000 population (reference policy 12.A.3.2, comprehensive plan). 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-283. - Concurrency management system. 
    The following sets forth criteria for determining concurrency (see article VI for methodology): 
(1)  Roadways (concurrency). 
a.  The city may not issue permits for development that will generate more trips than the transportation system can accommodate at the adopted LOS except as provided under section 102-83(b), and section 102-104. 
b.  The comprehensive plan, 2000 foundation (support) documents, chapter 5, projects department of transportation (DOT) compatible LOS for roadways in the city through the year 2000. Pertinent information that may be used to satisfy roadway concurrence may be found in this chapter. 
c.  The impact of various types of development on roadways is generalized in table 5-11 of the foundation documents. Impact is determined by calculating the estimated number of trips to be generated by the project. If the estimated trips do not degrade the affected roadways beyond the adopted LOS, the concurrency requirement is met. 
1.  If affected roadways are degraded beyond the adopted LOS, provisions in sections 102-104 and 102-105(d) apply. 
2.  Where the development will impact on more than one road, the calculations shall show the split in generated traffic. 
3.  Calculations used in projecting traffic to be generated shall be based on the trip generation table provided under section 102-105(d), "Trip Generation Rates." 
(2)  Sanitary sewer. 
a.  Development shall not be approved unless there is sufficient available capacity to sustain the adopted level of service. 
1.  Applicants for wastewater capacity shall contact the public services director to obtain most recent flow/demand ratios and available capacity. 
2.  If capacity exists, the application for a DEP wastewater permit must first be approved by the city. 
b.  Developers shall be required to construct sewers from the nearest source to the planned activity. 
(3)  Drainage. 
a.  Development shall not be approved unless there is sufficient drainage capacity to sustain the adopted level of service. 
b.  The comprehensive plan foundation documents provide available data and analysis on drainage. Generally policy 10.C.2.2 of the comprehensive plan and as stated under section 102-282(4)a applies. 
(4)  Potable water. 
a.  The city shall not approve development unless there insufficient available capacity to sustain the adopted levels of service. 
b.  Except as provided in this chapter, developers shall be required to construct water lines from the nearest source to the planned activity. 
1.  All necessary state permit applications shall be the responsibility of the developer. 
(5)  Recreation and open space. 
a.  The city shall not approve development unless there is sufficient available capacity to sustain the adopted levels of service. 
b.  The comprehensive plan foundation documents, chapter 9, provides available data and analysis on recreation and open space. Generally, policy 12.A.3.2 of the comprehensive plan and as stated under section 102-282 above applies. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Secs. 102-284-102-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - SIGNS 

Sec. 102-301. - Purpose; compliance; maintenance; definitions. 
(a)  Relationship to building and electrical codes. These sign regulations are intended to complement the requirements of the building and electrical codes adopted by the city. Wherever there is inconsistency between these regulations and the building or electrical code, the more stringent requirement shall apply. 
(b)  No defense to nuisance action. Compliance with the requirements of these regulations shall not constitute a defense to an action brought to abate a nuisance under the common law. 
(c)  Maintenance. All signs, including their supports, braces, guys and anchors, electrical parts and lighting fixtures, and all painted and display areas, shall be maintained in accordance with the building and electrical codes adopted by the city, and shall present a neat and clean appearance. The vegetation around, in front of, behind, and underneath the base of ground signs for a distance of ten feet shall be trimmed and free of unsightly weeds, and no rubbish or debris that would constitute a fire or health hazard shall be permitted under or near the sign. 
(d)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory sign means a permanent ground or building sign that is permitted under this Code as incidental to an existing or proposed use of land. Accessory signs advertise only the business located on the premises and is synonymous with the term on-site signs. 
    Accessory use means a use of land or structure or portion thereof customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or structure and located on the same parcel. 
    Advertising means sign copy intended to directly or indirectly promote the sale or use of a product, service, commodity, entertainment, or real or personal property. 
    Awning sign means any message or copy incorporated into or affixed to an awning or awning like structure which projects beyond the wall of the building, generally designed to provide protection from the weather. 
    Banner sign means a sign constructed of cloth, paper or other non-rigid material, with or without frames, and secured at both ends. 
    Building sign means a sign displayed upon (to include pictorial presentations) or attached to any part of the exterior of a building which projects no more than 12 inches from the building wall to which there are attached, including walls, windows, doors, parapets, marquees, and roof slopes of greater than 45 degrees that form a side of a building or unit. 
    Canopy sign means any message or copy incorporated into or affixed to a canopy attached to a building or walkway. 
    Changeable copy or automatic changeable facing sign means a sign on which a message is periodically changed, mechanically or manually in the field, through utilization of mechanical devices, attachable letters, numbers, symbols, or other similar characters or changeable panels. 
    Commercially developed parcel is a parcel of property on which there is at least one walled and roofed structure used, or designed to be used, for other than residential or agricultural purposes. 
    Computations of area of individual signs means the area of a sign face (which is also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only one face) shall be computed by the area of the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or geometric figure that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display, or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, also including any supporting framework, bracing, decorative fence, or wall. Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings and structures shall not be considered in the computation of the area of the individual sign. 
    Computations of area of multifaced signs means the sign area for a sign with more than one face shall be computed by adding together the area of all sign faces visible from any vantage point. When two identical sign faces are placed back to back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any one point at the same time, and when such sign faces are part of the same structure, the sign area shall be computed by the measurement of one of the faces. 
    Copy is the linguistic or graphic content of a sign. 
    Electric sign is any sign containing electric wiring. 
    Erect a sign is to construct, reconstruct, build, relocate, raise, assemble, place, affix, attach, create, paint, draw, or in any other way bring into being or establish; but it shall not include any of the foregoing activities when performed as an incident to the change of message, or routine maintenance. 
    Facade area is the area within a two-dimensional geometric figure coinciding with the edges of the walls, windows, doors, parapets, marquees and roof slopes of greater than 45 degrees that form a side of a building or unit. Except roof slopes of greater than 45 degrees that are above a roof slope of less than 45 degrees and form the roofline of the building shall not be considered as a facade area. 
    Flag is a rectangular piece of material of distinctive design that is used as a symbol (as of a nation, state, city or organization). Flags contain no advertising copy and are not banners. 
    Frontage means the length of the property line of any one parcel along a street on which it borders. 
    Governmental sign means a sign that directs and guides traffic to include signs for announcing government related facilities, activities, and public service announcements. 
    Ground sign means a sign that is supported by one or more columns, upright poles or braces extended from the ground or from an object on the ground, or that is erected on the ground, where no part of the sign is attached to any part of a building. 
    Harmful to minors means with regard to sign content, any description or representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct or sexual excitement, when it: 
(1)  Predominately appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid interest of minors in sex; 
(2)  Is patently offensive to contemporary standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable sexual material for minors; 
(3)  Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
The term "harmful to minors" shall also include any nonerotic word or picture when it is patently offensive to contemporary standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable for viewing by minors; and taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
    Illegal sign means any sign not conforming to, or provided an exception by this article. 
    Interstate Highway I-10 corridor sign is a sign constructed within 2,000 feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way of Interstate I-10. 
    Illuminated sign means a sign which contains a source of light or which is designed or arranged to reflect light from an artificial source including indirect lighting, neon, incandescent lights, and backlighting and shall also include signs with reflectors that depend upon automobile headlights for an image. 
    Major arterial means U.S. Highway 90 and S.H. 85 within the city limits. 
    Marquee means a structure projecting from and supported by a building which extends beyond the building line or property line and fully or partially covers a sidewalk, public entrance or other pedestrian way. 
    Message means any wording, logo or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises or calls attention to a business, product, service or other activity. 
    Multiple-occupancy complex means a commercial use, i.e., any use other than residential or agricultural, consisting of a parcel of property, or parcel of contiguous properties, existing as a unified or coordinated project, with a building or buildings housing more than one occupant. 
    Occupant (occupancy) means a commercial use, i.e., any use other than residential or agricultural. 
    Outdoor advertising sign means a permanent ground sign meeting the structural requirements of the Florida Building Code, attached to which is a sign face the bottom of which is at least 20 feet above the ground and which is at least 200 square feet in size. Outdoor advertising signs advertise businesses not located on the premises and is synonymous with the term off-site sign. 
    Parcel means a unit of land within legally established property lines. If, however, the property lines are such as to defeat the purposes of this article or lead to absurd results, a parcel may be as designated for a particular site by the planning director. 
    Permanent means designed, constructed and intended for more than short term use. 
    Premises means all the land areas under ownership or lease arrangement to the sign owner which are contiguous to the business conducted on the land except for instances where such land is a narrow strip contiguous to the advertised activity or is connected by such narrow strip, the only viable use of such land is to erect or maintain an advertising sign. For the purpose of determining "premises" contiguous shall mean that the business conducted on the land is located on the same side of the roadway and is within 800 feet of the sign location, the primary structure of the business is within 660 feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way. When the sign owner is a municipality or county, "premises" shall mean all lands owned or leased by such municipality or county within its jurisdictional boundaries as set forth by law. 
    Portable sign means any sign which is manifestly designed to be transported by trailer or on its own wheels, including such signs even though the wheels may be removed and the remaining chassis or support structure converted to an A- or T-frame sign and attached temporarily or permanently to the ground. 
    Reader board means a sign with letters that can be changed or rearranged to display a message that is attached to a permitted permanent accessory ground sign. May be a sign with electronic automatic changeable copy. 
    Roof sign means a sign placed above the roofline of a building or on or against a roof slope of less than 45 degrees. 
    Roofline means a horizontal line intersecting the highest point or points of a roof. 
    Sidewalk or sandwich sign means a moveable sign, no greater than six square feet, not secured or attached to the ground or any building or structure and displayed in or proximate to areas of pedestrian traffic. 
    Sign means any writing, pictorial presentation, number, illumination or decoration, flag, banner or pennant or other device, which is used to announce, direct attention to, identify, advertise or otherwise make anything known. The term "sign" shall not be deemed to include the terms "building" or "landscaping" or any architectural embellishment of a building not intended to communicate information. Square footage of signs located on architectural embellishments of a building shall be measured as defined in section 102-307. 
    Sign face means the part that is or may be used for copy. 
    Sign face area means the area of any regular geometric shape which contains the entire surface area of a sign upon which copy may be placed. 
    Sign structure means any construction used or designed to support a sign. 
    Snipe sign (coroplast) means an inexpensive synthetic corrugated sign face material usually supported by and attached to a wire framework which also serves as a supporting and attachment means. It is intended to be used for short periods of time to advertise special events. The maximum allowable sign face area is four square feet. 
    Statuary means any three-dimensional, man-made representation of a plant, animal or other thing intended primarily to attract attention and not intended or used to entertain or amuse customers of the business of which the statuary belongs or is part. 
    Street means a public or private right-of-way for vehicular traffic, including highways, thoroughfares, lanes, roads, ways and boulevards. Where access to a parcel is a two-way drive within a parking facility, the two-way drive shall be considered the street and signage located abutting the entrance side only of the drive. 
    Temporary means designed, constructed and intended to be used on a short term basis. 
    Unit means that part of a multiple-occupancy complex housing one occupant. 
    Vehicle sign means any sign affixed to a vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 979, § 2, 6-14-99; Ord. No. 1055, § 2, 3-12-01; Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-12-04) 
Sec. 102-302. - Exempt signs. 
    The following signs are exempt from the operation of these sign regulations, and from the requirement in this article that a permit be obtained for the erection of permanent signs, provided they are not placed or constructed so as to create a hazard of any kind: 
(1)  Signs that are not designed or located so as to be visible from any street or adjoining property. 
(2)  Signs of two square feet or less and signs that include no letters, symbols, logos or designs in excess of two inches in vertical or horizontal dimension, provided that such sign or combination of such signs does not constitute a sign prohibited by section 102-303(b) of this article. 
(3)  Signs necessary to promote health, safety and welfare and other regulatory, statutory, traffic control or directional signs erected on public property with permission as appropriate from the state, the United States, the county, or the city. 
(4)  Legal notices and official instruments. 
(5)  Decorative flags and bunting for a celebration, convention or commemoration of significance to the entire community when authorized by the city council for a prescribed period of time. 
(6)  Holiday lights and decorations. 
(7)  Merchandise displays behind storefront windows so long as no part of the display moves or contains flashing lights. 
(8)  Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and dates of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible materials and attached to the surface of a building. 
(9)  Signs incorporated into machinery or equipment by a manufacturer or distributor, which identify or advertise only the product or service dispensed by the machine or equipment, such as signs customarily affixed to vending machines, newspaper racks, telephone booths and gasoline pumps. 
(10)  Advertising and identifying signs located on taxicabs, buses, trailers, trucks or vehicle bumpers. 
(11)  Public warning signs to indicate the dangers of trespassing, swimming, animals or similar hazards. 
(12)  Works of art that do not constitute advertising. 
(13)  Signs carried by a person. 
(14)  Religious displays. 
(15)  Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking, and not exceeding six square feet in size. Off-site directional signs for churches and other not for profit organizations shall not exceed six square feet in size. 
(16)  School signs which direct and guide traffic to include sign face for announcing school related activities and public service announcements. 
(17)  Political signs. All signs shall be removed within ten days after the election date. If the city removes the sign the candidate shall be assessed a removal fee. 
(18)  Signs not exceeding four square feet in size to announce or advertise such temporary uses as fairs, carnivals, circuses, revivals, sporting events, events sponsored by nonprofit organizations, yard sales or any public, charitable, educational or religious event or function. Such message shall be removed within five days after the special event. 
(19)  Governmental signs. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 979, § 2, 6-14-99; Ord. No. 1036, § 2, 10-9-00; Ord. No. 1055, § 3, 3-12-01; Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-12-04) 
Sec. 102-303. - Prohibited signs. 
(a)  General. It shall be unlawful to erect, cause to be erected, maintain or cause to be maintained any sign not expressly authorized by or exempted from this article. 
(b)  Specifically. The following signs are expressly prohibited unless exempted by section 102-302 or expressly authorized by sections 102-304-102-306: 
(1)  Signs that are in violation of the building code or electrical code adopted by the city. 
(2)  Any sign that, in the opinion of the planning director, does or will constitute a safety hazard. 
(3)  Blank temporary signs. 
(4)  Strings of lightbulbs used on commercially developed parcels for commercial purposes, other than traditional holiday decorations. 
(5)  Roof signs of all types. 
(6)  Signs that incorporate projected images, emit any sound that is intended to attract attention, or involve the use of live animals. 
(7)  Signs that emit audible sound, odor or visible matter such as smoke or steam. 
(8)  Signs or sign structures that interfere in any way with free use of any fire escape, emergency exit or standpipe, or that obstruct any window to such an extent that light or ventilation is reduced to a point below that required by any provision of this article or other ordinance of the city. 
(9)  Signs that resemble any official sign or marker erected by any governmental agency, or that by reason of position, shape or color would conflict with the proper functioning of any traffic sign or signal, or be of a size, location, movement, content, color or illumination that may be reasonably confused with or construed as, or conceal, a traffic control device. 
(10)  Signs that obstruct the vision of pedestrians, cyclists or motorists traveling on or entering public streets. 
(11)  Nongovernmental signs that use the words "stop," "look," "danger," or any similar word, phrase or symbol. 
(12)  Signs, within ten feet of a public right-of-way or 100 feet of traffic control lights, that contain red or green lights that might be confused with traffic control lights. 
(13)  Signs that are of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or impair the vision of any motorist, cyclist or pedestrian using or entering a public way, or that are a hazard or a nuisance to occupants of any property because of glare or other characteristics. 
(14)  Signs that contain any lighting or control mechanism that causes unreasonable interference with radio, television or other communication signals. 
(15)  Searchlights used to advertise or promote a business or to attract customers to a property. 
(16)  Signs that are painted, pasted or printed on any curbstone, flagstone, pavement or any portion of any sidewalk or street, except house numbers and traffic control signs. 
(17)  Signs placed upon benches, bus shelters or waste receptacles, except as may be authorized in writing pursuant to F.S. § 337.407. 
(18)  Signs erected on public property, or on private property (such as private utility poles) located on public property, other than signs erected by public authority for public purposes and signs authorized in writing pursuant to F.S. § 337.407. 
(19)  Signs erected over or across any public street except as may otherwise be expressly authorized by this article, and except governmental signs erected by or on the order of a public officer. 
(20)  Vehicle signs with a total sign area on any vehicle in excess of ten square feet, when the vehicle: 
a.  Is parked for more than 60 consecutive minutes within 100 feet of any street right-of-way; 
b.  Is visible from the street right-of-way and is within 100 feet of such right-of-way; and 
c.  Is not regularly used in the conduct of the business advertised on the vehicle. A vehicle used primarily for advertising, or for the purpose of providing transportation for owners or employees of the occupancy advertised on the vehicle, shall not be considered a vehicle used in the conduct of the business. 
(21)  Signs displaying copy that is harmful to minors. 
(22)  Portable signs. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-12-04) 
Sec. 102-304. - Permitted temporary signs. 
(a)  Where allowed. Temporary signs are allowed throughout the city on private property, subject to the restrictions imposed by this section and other relevant parts of this article. 
(b)  Sign types allowed. A temporary sign may be a ground or building sign to include banners and sandwich or sidewalk signs, and snipe signs in commercially zoned property in major arterial roads, but may not be an electric sign. 
(c)  Removal of illegal temporary signs. Any temporary sign not complying with the requirements of this section is illegal and subject to immediate removal. 
(d)  Restrictions on content of temporary signs. A temporary sign may display any message so long as it is not: 
(1)  Harmful to minors. 
(2)  Advertising, except that advertising for the following purposes may be displayed: 
a.  To indicate that an owner, either personally or through an agent, is actively attempting to sell, rent or lease the property on which the sign is located. 
b.  To indicate the grand opening of a business or other activity, to include special sales or promotion of events or activities on the property on which the sign is located. Such message may be displayed for a period not exceeding 15 days. 
c.  To identify construction in progress on the property on which the sign is located. Such message shall not be displayed more than 60 days prior to the beginning of actual construction of the project, and shall be removed when construction is completed. If a message is displayed pursuant to this section, but construction is not initiated within 60 days after the message is displayed, or if construction is discontinued for a period of more than 60 days, the message shall be removed, pending initiation or continuation of construction activities. 
d.  To indicate the existence of a new business, or a business in a new location, if such business has no permanent signs. Such message may be displayed on the property on which the sign is located for a period of not more than 60 days or until installation of permanent signs, whichever shall occur first. 
(e)  Permissible size, height and number of temporary signs. 
(1)  One-family and two-family residences. A parcel on which is located a single one-family or two-family residence may display not more than two temporary signs with an aggregate sign area of not more than ten square feet. No individual sign shall exceed six square feet nor exceed eight feet in height. 
(2)  Three-family and four-family residences. A parcel on which is located a single three-family or four-family residence may display not more than four temporary signs with an aggregate sign area of not more than ten square feet. No individual sign shall exceed six square feet nor exceed eight feet in height. 
(3)  Major arterials. 
a.  Commercial zoned properties fronting major arterials may display a maximum number of ten snipe signs. No individual snipe sign will exceed four square feet. All signs will be displayed on private property and will not obstruct the vision triangle or create a public safety hazard. 
1.  Requests for temporary snipe signs will be processed through the administrative services department on forms provided by the department. 
2.  Each snipe sign will require a label affixed to the sign face. A label will be provided for each snipe sign at the time a permit is issued. Each label will include at a minimum: name of permit holder, permit number, beginning date, expiration date and authorization. Permits will be valid for a maximum of 14 days. 
b.  Commercial zoned properties fronting major arterials may display a maximum number of banner, sandwich or A-frame signs equal to one square foot of signage per ten feet of frontage up to a maximum of 100 square feet. No individual sign shall exceed 24 square feet nor exceed ten feet in height and must be displayed on the property on which the business or event advertised is located. All signs will be displayed on private property and will not obstruct the vision triangle or create a public safety hazard. 
1.  Banner, sandwich or a frame signs may be posted on private property for the duration of the special event for which they are used, but no longer than 15 days. 
(4)  On all other parcels. All other parcels may display one square foot of temporary signage per ten feet of frontage up to a maximum of 100 square feet. No individual sign shall exceed 60 square feet nor exceed ten feet in height. Signs must be spaced at least 100 feet apart. Sign must be displayed on the property on which the business or event advertised is located. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 979, § 2, 6-14-99; Ord. No. 1055, § 4, 3-12-01; Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-12-04; Ord. No. 1179, § 2, 6-13-05) 
Sec. 102-305. - Permitted permanent accessory signs. 
(a)  Sign types allowed. A permanent accessory sign may be a ground sign to include a 32 square foot reader board, or building sign. Permanent accessory signs and reader board signs may be changeable copy or automatic changeable facing signs; however, facing or copy shall not rotate or change so rapidly as to cause distraction to motorist. 
(b)  Content. A permanent accessory sign may display any message so long as it is not harmful to minors. 
(c)  Permissible number, area, spacing and height of permanent accessory signs. 
(1)  Ground sign single occupancy. The permissible number, area, spacing and height of permanent accessory ground signs for each parcel shall be determined according to the following tables and text: 
a.  If located on a thoroughfare with a speed limit of 34 miles per hour or less: 
Frontage 1 Number of Signs 2, 6 Total 3 Minimum 4 Maximum 5 Less than 50 1 24/24 5/NA/10 18 At least 50 but less than 100 1 32/32 5/NA/10 22 At least 100 but less than 200 1 48/48 5/NA/10 26 At least 200 but less than 300 1 64/64 5/NA/10 30 At least 300 but less than 400 2 72/72 5/100/10 34 400 or more 3 96/96 5/100/10 38  
Notes: 
Notes: 
1 On a public right-of-way in feet. 
2 Number of allowed signs. 
3 Sign area allowed/maximum sign area for individual sign in square feet. 
4 Distance from any side property line/other permanent ground sign on the same site in feet /other permanent ground sign not on the same site in feet. 
5 Height in feet. 
6 One additional reader board with a maximum of 32 square feet is allowable for each parcel. 
b.  If located on a thoroughfare with a speed limit greater than 34 miles per hour: 
Frontage 1 Number of 
Signs 2, 6 Total 3 Minimum 4 Maximum 5 Less than 50 1 24/24 5/NA/10 18 At least 50 but less than 100 1 48/48 5/NA/10 22 At least 100 but less than 200 1 64/64 5/NA/10 26 At least 200 but less than 300 1 96/96 5/NA/10 30 At least 300 but less than 400 2 170/120 10/100/10 34 400 or more 2 194/120 10/100/10 38  
Notes: 
1 On a public right-of-way in feet. 
2 Number of allowed signs. 
3 Sign area allowed/maximum sign area for individual sign in square feet. 
4 Distance from any side property line/other permanent ground sign on the same site in feet /other permanent ground sign not on the same site in feet. 
5 Height in feet. 
6 One additional reader board with a maximum of 32 square feet is allowable for each parcel. 
(2)  Ground signs multiple occupancy. The permissible number, area, spacing and height of permanent accessory ground signs for each multiple-occupancy complex shall be determined according to the following tables and text: 
a.  If located on a thoroughfare with a speed limit of 34 miles per hour or less: 
Frontage 1 Number of 
Signs 2, 6 Total 3 Minimum 4 Maximum 5 Less than 50 1 64/64 5/NA/10 18 At least 50 but less than 100 1 72/72 5/NA/10 22 At least 100 but less than 200 1 84/84 5/NA/10 26 At least 200 but less than 300 1 128/128 5/NA/10 30 At least 300 but less than 400 2 156/156 5/100/10 34 400 or more 3 192/192 5/100/10 38  
Notes: 
1 On a public right-of-way in feet. 
2 Number of allowed signs. 
3 Sign area allowed/maximum sign area for individual sign in square feet. 
4 Distance from any side property line/other permanent ground sign on the same site in feet /other permanent ground sign not on the same site in feet. 
5 Height in feet. 
6 One additional reader board with a maximum of 32 square feet is allowable for each parcel. 
b.  If located on a thoroughfare with a speed limit greater than 34 miles per hour: 
Frontage 1 Number of 
Signs 2, 6 Total 3 Minimum 4 Maximum 5 Less than 50 1 84/84 5/NA/10 18 At least 50 but less than 100 1 88/84 5/NA/10 22 At least 100 but less than 200 1 96/96 5/NA/10 26 At least 200 but less than 300 1 144/144 5/NA/10 30 At least 300 but less than 400 2 170/170 10/100/10 34 400 or more 2 240/240 10/100/10 38  
Notes: 
1 On a public right-of-way in feet. 
2 Number of allowed signs. 
3 Sign area allowed/maximum sign area for individual sign in square feet. 
4 Distance from any side property line/other permanent ground sign on the same site in feet /other permanent ground sign not on the same site in feet. 
5 Height in feet. 
6 One additional reader board with a maximum of 32 square feet is allowable for each parcel. 
(3)  Building signs. 
a.  Subject to the design criteria in section 102-307, the maximum height of a building sign shall be 18 feet, except that on a building of more than two stories, a single building sign is allowed above 18 feet on each side of the building. 
b.  Each multiple-occupancy complex may display one permanent accessory building sign on each side of the principal building or buildings in which the complex is located, not to exceed a sign area of up to ten percent of the facade area of each building side. 
c.  Each occupant of a multiple-occupancy complex may display three permanent signs on any exterior portion of the complex that is part of the occupant's unit (not including a common or jointly owned area), not to exceed a total combined sign area of 15 percent of the facade area of such exterior portion. 
d.  Each occupant not located in a multiple-occupancy complex may display three permanent accessory building signs on each side of the principal building in which the occupancy is located, not to exceed a total combined sign area for each building side of 20 percent of the facade area of the building side. 
(4)  Multiple frontages. If a building has frontage on two or more streets, each frontage shall be separately considered for the purposes of determining compliance with the provisions of these regulations, but the permitted sign area for one frontage may not be combined with that permitted on another frontage to increase the permitted sign area on one frontage. However, no ground sign on one right-of-way may be closer than 100 feet to a sign on another right-of-way, measured as the sum of distances measured continuously along the rights-of-way through a common point or points. 
(d)  Time-temperature-date signs. Time-temperature-date signs are permitted as a permanent accessory sign on commercially developed parcels notwithstanding the general prohibition on changing signs. These signs may only display numerical information in an easily comprehensive way and shall be kept accurate. They may be ground or building signs, and are subject to the regulations applicable to such signs. They shall be counted as part of an occupancy's allowable sign area. 
(e)  Directional signs. Directional signs giving directions to motorists regarding the location of parking areas and access drives shall be permitted as permanent accessory signs on all parcels and shall not be counted as part of an occupancy's allowable sign area. 
(1)  Directional signs located on parcels with single user drives and parking, shall be limited to ten square feet. 
(2)  Directional signs located on parcels with shared access drives and interconnected parking, shall be limited to 20 square feet. 
(f)  Signs at entrances to residential developments, farms and ranches. 
(1)  Generally. Permanent accessory signs may be displayed at the entrance to residential developments, farms and ranches. 
(2)  Restrictions. 
a.  Signs are permitted at each entrance into the development, farm or ranch from each abutting street. The sign may be a single sign with two faces of equal size or may be two single-faced structures of equal size located on each side of the entrance. No face of the sign shall exceed 32 square feet in size, and may be illuminated in a steady light only. 
b.  When considering the placement of such signs, the administrative services department shall consider the location of public utilities, sidewalks and future street widening. 
c.  The administrative services department shall ensure that such signs shall be maintained perpetually by the developer, the owner of the sign, a pertinent owners' association, or some other person who is legally accountable under a maintenance arrangement approved by the department. If no accountable person accepts legal responsibility to maintain the signs and no other provision has been made for the maintenance of them, the signs shall be removed by the developer or owner. 
(g)  Flags. 
(1)  Number. Not more than four flags or insignias of governmental, religious, charitable, or fraternal organizations may be displayed on any one parcel of land. 
(2)  Size. The maximum distance from top to bottom of any flag shall be 20 percent of the total height of the flagpole, or, in the absence of a flagpole, 20 percent of the distance from the top of the flag or insignia to the ground. 
(h)  Utility signs. Public utility signs that identify the location of underground utility lines and facilities, high-voltage lines and facilities, and other utility facilities and appurtenances are permitted so long as they do not exceed three feet in height, and so long as the sign face does not exceed one-half square foot. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 979, § 2, 6-14-99; Ord. No. 1055, § 5, 3-12-01; Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-12-04; Ord. No. 1179, § 3, 6-13-05) 
Sec. 102-305.1. - Interstate Highway I-10 Corridor Accessory Sign. 
(a)  Where allowed. Interstate Highway Corridor accessory signs are allowed in the Interstate Highway I-10 Corridor only. 
(b)  Sign types allowed. An Interstate Highway I-10 Corridor sign may be a ground sign and may be changeable copy or automatic changeable facing signs; however, facing or copy shall not rotate or change so rapidly as to cause distraction to motorist. 
(c)  Content. An Interstate Highway I-10 Corridor Accessory sign may display any message so long as it is not harmful to minors. 
(d)  Permissible number, area, spacing and height of Interstate Highway I-10 Corridor Accessory signs. The permissible number, area, spacing and height of Interstate Highway I-10 Corridor Accessory signs for each multiple-occupancy complex and each occupant not located in a multiple occupancy complex shall be determined according to the following table and text: 
Number of Signs 1 Total Square Feet 2 Minimum 
Spacing 3 Maximum 
Height 4 1 420 50/100/25 85  
Notes: 
1 Number of allowed signs. 
2 Maximum sign area for individual sign in square feet. 
3 Distance from any side property line/other permanent ground sign on the same site in feet/from front property line. 
4 Maximum height in feet above the crown of Interstate Highway I-10 nearest the sign. 
(e)  A set of engineered plans must be submitted for approval by the city. Criteria within the plans must specifically meet those standards adopted in the building codes, policies and regulations of the city in force at the time of application. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 1055, § 6, 3-12-01; Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-12-04) 
Sec. 102-306. - Permitted permanent outdoor advertising signs. 
(a)  Where allowed. Permanent outdoor advertising signs are allowed in the following land use districts: commercial (C) and industrial (IN). 
(b)  Content. Outdoor advertising signs may display any message so long as it is not harmful to minors. 
(c)  Permissible number, area, spacing and height of permanent outdoor advertising signs. 
(1)  Maximum size. No permanent outdoor advertising sign may exceed 310 square feet in size. 
(2)  Maximum height. No permanent outdoor advertising sign, or combination of signs, may exceed 38 feet in height. 
(3)  Maximum width. No permanent outdoor advertising sign, or combination of signs, may exceed 30 feet in width. 
(4)  Spacing. No permanent outdoor advertising sign may be closer than 10 feet from any property line, nor closer than 1,500 feet from any other permanent outdoor advertising sign on each side of the thoroughfare or thoroughfares to which the permanent advertising sign is directed. Spacing shall be determined based on signs that have received the necessary city permit pursuant to this chapter, and signs having received prior authorization shall have priority over a later applicant in determining compliance with the spacing restrictions. Where two applications from different persons conflict with each other, so that only one of the applications may be granted, the first application received by the department will be the first considered for approval. The second application shall remain pending until resolution of the first application. The second applicant shall be advised in writing of the first application and that his application will remain pending until the first application is acted upon. If the first application considered is granted, the second application shall be denied. If the first application is denied, the second application shall then be considered for approval. 
(5)  Permits required from other agencies shall be obtained prior to receiving a permit from the administrative services department. 
(d)  Nonconforming permanent outdoor advertising signs. Nonconforming outdoor advertising signs are subject to article VII of this chapter, except that, if the only reason for the nonconforming is a failure to meet the spacing requirement between signs, the sign or signs may remain subject only to the prohibition listed below: 
(1)  Any sign within the city which is prohibited by or does not conform to the requirements of this article; except that signs that are within ten percent of the height and size limitations of this article, and that in all other respects conform to the requirements of this article, shall be deemed to be in conformity. 
(2)  If a sign structure in existence or fully permitted on June 13, 2005 meets the spacing requirements of the state department of transportation it shall be deemed to be a conforming structure if the only reason for nonconformance is a failure to comply with section 102-306(c)(4) requiring a 1,500 foot spacing between signs. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 979, § 2, 6-14-99; Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-12-04; Ord. No. 1179, § 4, 6-13-05) 
Sec. 102-306.1. - Interstate Highway I-10 corridor outdoor advertising signs. 
(a)  Where allowed. Interstate Highway I-10 corridor outdoor advertising signs are allowed in the Interstate Highway I-10 corridor within the following land use districts: commercial (C) and industrial (IN). 
(b)  Sign types allowed. An Interstate Highway I-10 Corridor outdoor advertising sign may be a changeable copy or automatic changeable facing signs; however, facing or copy shall not rotate or change so rapidly as to cause distraction to motorists. 
(c)  Content. Outdoor advertising signs may display any message so long as it is not harmful to minors. 
(d)  Permissible number, area, spacing and height of permanent outdoor advertising signs. 
(1)  Maximum size. No Interstate Highway I-10 corridor outdoor advertising sign facing including embellishments may exceed 672 square feet in size. 
(2)  Maximum height. No Interstate Highway I-10 corridor outdoor advertising sign, or combination of signs, may exceed 50 feet in height above the crown of Interstate Highway I-10 nearest the sign. 
(3)  Maximum width. No permanent outdoor advertising sign, or combination of signs, may exceed 48 feet in width. 
(4)  Spacing. No Interstate Highway I-10 corridor outdoor advertising sign may be closer than 20 feet from the Interstate Highway I-10 corridor right-of-way nor closer than 50 feet from all other property lines, nor closer than 1,500 feet from any other outdoor advertising sign on either side of the thoroughfare or thoroughfares to which the Interstate Highway I-10 corridor advertising sign is directed. Spacing shall be determined based on signs that have received the necessary city permit pursuant to this chapter, and signs having received prior authorization shall have priority over a later applicant in determining compliance with the spacing restrictions. Where two applications from different persons conflict with each other, so that only one of the applications may be granted, the first application received by the department will be the first considered for approval. The second application shall remain pending until resolution of the first application. The second applicant shall be advised in writing of the first application and that his application will remain pending until the first application is acted upon. If the first application considered is granted, the second application shall be denied. If the first application is denied, the second application shall then be considered for approval. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-12-04) 
Sec. 102-307. - Measurement determinations. 
(a)  Distance between signs. The minimum required distance between signs shall be measured along street rights-of-way from the closest parts of any two signs. See figure 16.07.01.A. 
(b)  Facade area. The facade area shall be measured by determining the area within a two-dimensional geometric figure coinciding with the edges of the walls, windows, doors, parapets, marquees and roof slopes of greater than 45 degrees that form a side of a building or unit (see figure 16.07.02). 
(c)  Sign area. 
(1)  Generally. The area of a sign shall be the area within the smallest square, rectangle, parallelogram, triangle, circle or semicircle, the sides of which touch the extreme points or edges of the sign face (see figure 16.07.03). 
(2)  Special situations. 
a.  Where a sign is composed of letters or pictures attached directly to a facade, window, door or marquee and the letters or pictures are not enclosed by a border or trimming, the sign area shall be the area within the smallest rectangle, parallelogram, triangle, circle or semicircle, the sides of which touch the extreme points of the letters or pictures (see figure 16.07.03.A). 
b.  Where two sign faces are placed back to back on a single sign structure, and the faces are at no point more than four feet apart, the area of the sign shall be counted as the area of one of the faces. 
c.  Where four sign faces are arranged in a square, rectangle or diamond, the area of the sign shall be the area of the two largest faces. 
d.  Where a sign is in the form of a three-dimensional object, the area shall be determined by drawing a square, rectangle, parallelogram, triangle, circle or semicircle, the sides of which touch the extreme points or edges of the projected image of the sign, and multiplying that area by two. The "projected image" is that image created by tracing the largest possible two-dimensional outline of the sign. 
(d)  Number of signs. 
(1)  Generally. In general, the number of signs shall be the number of noncontiguous sign faces. Multiple noncontiguous sign faces may be counted as a single sign if all the sign faces are included in the geometric figure used for determining the sign area. 
(2)  Special situations. 
a.  Where two sign faces are placed back to back and are at no point more than three feet apart, it shall be counted as one sign. 
b.  If a sign has four faces arranged in a square, rectangle or diamond, it shall be counted as two signs. 
(e)  Sign height. The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of the existing grade prior to construction, the newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. In cases where the normal grade cannot be easily determined by the city or where the normal grade is ten feet below the adjacent edge of pavement, the sign height shall be computed from the elevation of the nearest edge of pavement of a publicly maintained roadway or the elevation of the principal entrance to the designated parcel. 

FIGURE 16.07.01.A 

FIGURE 16.07.02 

FIGURE 16.07.03.A 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 979, § 2, 6-14-99; Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-12-04) 
Sec. 102-308. - Design, construction and location standards. 
(a)  Generally. All permanent signs must comply with the following design, construction and location standards. 
(b)  Compliance with building and electrical codes required. All permanent signs, and the illumination thereof, shall be designed, constructed and maintained in conformity with applicable provisions of the building and electrical codes adopted by the city. 
(c)  Illumination standards. 
(1)  Sign lighting may not be designed or located to cause confusion with traffic lights. 
(2)  Illumination by floodlights or spotlights is permissible so long as none of the light emitted shines directly onto an adjoining property or into the eyes of motorists or pedestrians using or entering public streets. 
(3)  Illuminated signs shall not have lighting mechanisms that project more than 18 inches perpendicularly from any surface of the sign over public space. 
(d)  Placement standards. 
(1)  Near street and driveway intersections. Signs located near street intersections, and driveway and street intersections, shall not be placed closer than 30 feet to any such intersection and may be required to be placed at a greater distance from the intersection if signage prohibits clear visibility of the intersection. Placement shall be reviewed by the administrative services and public services departments before approval and permitting of the sign. 
(2)  In right-of-way. Supports for signs or sign structure shall not be placed in or upon a public right-of-way or public easement, except under the terms of a lease between the owner of the easement or right-of-way and the owner of the sign. 
(3)  Over right-of-way. No ground sign shall project over a public right-of-way. 
(4)  Blocking exits, fire escapes, etc. No sign or sign structure shall be erected that impedes use of any fire escape, emergency exit or standpipe. 
(e)  Clearance standards. 
(1)  Over pedestrian ways. All signs over pedestrian ways shall provide a minimum of seven feet six inches of clearance. 
(2)  Over vehicular ways. All signs over vehicular ways shall provide a minimum of 13 feet six inches of clearance. 
(f)  Relationship to building features. A building sign shall not extend beyond any edge of the surface to which it is attached, nor disrupt a major architectural feature of the building (see figures 16.08.06.A and B). 
(g)  Maximum projection. A building sign may project no more than four feet perpendicularly from the surface to which it is attached. 
(h)  Maximum window coverage. The combined area of permanent and temporary signs placed on or behind windows shall not exceed 25 percent of the total window area at the same floor level on the side of the building or unit upon which the signs are displayed. 
(i)  Format for multiple-occupancy complexes. Building signs for multiple-occupancy complexes constructed or remodeled after the effective date of this chapter shall conform to an approved sign format. The sign format shall be included as a submittal for authorization to erect such a sign and shall be maintained on file in the department. The format shall be presented in a plan or sketch, together with written specifications in sufficient detail to enable the planning director to authorize signs based on the specifications. At a minimum, the sign format shall specify the types of signs and dimensions (not to exceed the size limits contained in this article) which will be permitted each occupant within the complex. The sign format shall also contain common design elements, such as placement, color, shape or style of lettering, which lend a unified appearance to the signs of the occupants within the complex. The sign format may only be modified with the approval of the director upon submission of a revised plan and specifications detailing the revised format. 
(j)  Signs required to be certified by a Florida registered engineer. The following signs shall be designed and certified by a Florida registered engineer: 
(1)  Building signs that project perpendicularly from the surface to which it is attached and that are more than 24 square feet in area. 
(2)  Ground signs of more than ten feet in height and 100 square feet in area. 
(k)  Nonconforming signs. 
(1)  Defined. Any sign within the city on the effective date of this article or a sign existing within any area annexed to the city after the effective date of this article, which is prohibited by, or does not conform to the requirements of, this article; except that signs that are within ten percent of the height and size limitations of this article, and that in all other respects conform to the requirements of this article, shall be deemed to be in conformity with this article. 
(2)  Continuation of nonconforming signs. A nonconforming sign may be continued and shall be maintained in good condition as required by this article, but it shall not be: 
a.  Structurally changed to another nonconforming sign, but its pictorial content may be changed. 
b.  Structurally altered to prolong the life of the sign, except to meet safety requirements. 
c.  Altered in any manner that increases the degree of nonconformity. 
d.  Expanded. 
e.  Reestablished after damage or destruction if the estimated cost of reconstruction exceeds 50 percent of the appraised replacement cost as determined by the city/planning director. 
f.  Continued in use when a conforming sign or sign structure shall be erected on the same parcel or unit. 
_____ 
FIGURE 16.08.06.A 

FIGURE 16.08.06.B 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 979, § 2, 6-14-99; Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-12-04) 
_____
Sec. 102-309. - Building permit; zoning compliance certificate. 
    All signs regulated herein shall conform to the Florida Building Code for permitting purposes. A sign permit shall also be obtained from the city before installation of any sign regulated herein. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-12-04) 
Secs. 102-310-102-325. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - CHECKLISTS 

Sec. 102-326. - Checklists for developers. 
    This article provides recommended checklists for various types of development ranging from single-family to large-scale development with regional impact. These may be changed at any time by the city. Type and scope of the checklists to be completed by an applicant are determined by the size of the project and its impact on infrastructure and the environment. It is the administrative assistant/planning director's responsibility to assure that developers have the proper checklists for completion prior to any formal review of applications by the city as detailed in article II of this chapter. Checklists forms include the following: 
(1)  Common application form, basic information required from all permit applicants section 102-327, Form A. 
(2)  Minor development (less than ten dwelling units per acre) section 102-329, Form B. 
(3)  Major development section 102-330, Form C. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-327. - Common application form. 
    Certain basic information is required from all applicants seeking a development order and building permit. After conferring with the planning director this completed form and other applicable forms shall be submitted by the developer or agent to the administrative assistant/planning director. Form A shall be considered page 1 of development applications. 
    Form A: Common application form for City of Crestview development/building authorization. 
Form A: Common application form for City of Crestview development/building authorization. 
(Complete applicable sections only) 
APPLICANT:  _____  DATE: ___________ 
ADDRESS:  _____  TELEPHONE: ___________ 
AGENT OF APPLICANT (IF ANY)  _____ 
ADDRESS  _____  TELEPHONE: ___________ 
LOCATION (AND NAME) OF PROPERTY TO BE DEVELOPED  _____
_____ 
TYPE OF RESIDENTIAL (Please Check) 
/ / Single-Family Dwelling or Duplex / / Multifamily Dwellings / / Subdivision or PUD / / Commercial / / Development of Regional Impact  
LEGAL PROPERTY DESCRIPTION (Write in or attach to this form)  _____
_____
_____
_____
_____ 
EXISTING LAND USE AND ZONING DISTRICT IS  _____
_____ 
ZONING CHANGE REQUESTED IS (if applicable)  _____ 
LICENSED ARCHITECT/GENERAL CONTRACTOR/ENGINEER/AGENT (as applicable) 
_____  TELEPHONE: ___________ 
_____  TELEPHONE: ___________ 
FEES AND CERTIFICATIONS 
APPLICATION FEE ENCLOSED _____
($    ) 
SECURITY (120% of construction costs to be executed upon receipt of Final Development Order  _____
($  ) 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-328. - Certification forms. 
    The following are the certification forms to be included with form A: 
    Certifications. (Complete only applicable sections.) 
(1)  By architect/general contractor. 
I certify that the plans submitted (or to be submitted) on the above project conform to the requirements of the most recent Standard Building Code and all other building codes adopted by the City of Crestview. 
I further certify that all work done on the above project will be accomplished in conformity with the approved plans. 
_____
Notary _____
Architect _____
Date _____
Registration No.  
(2)  Regulatory agencies: applicant (owner/agent). 
I certify that the requirements applicable under the following checked items shall be met and necessary approvals obtained from state and federal regulatory agencies as may be necessary prior to beginning construction on the project: 
/ / Dredge and fill activities: Approvals shall be obtained from concerned agencies such as the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, department of natural resources and department of environmental regulation. 
/ / Floodplains: If property is located in a floodplain, proposed dwelling/building/development shall satisfy all requirements set forth in the Flood Management and Prevention Control provisions of article XX, of the development regulations, ch. 102, Code of Ordinances, prior to the clearing of land and start of construction. 
_____
Notary _____
Applicant _____
Date  
(3)  Zoning: by applicant (owner/agent). 
I certify that development on cited property complies with the provisions of the Code of Ordinances and including any and all zoning regulations, subdivision restrictions and covenants which apply. 
_____
Notary _____
Applicant _____
Date  
(4)  Concurrency: by applicant (owner/agent). 
I certify that in accordance with article VI of this chapter that the development project will either not degrade the established levels of service (LOS) provided in article X of this chapter, or is exempted according to provisions of this chapter. 
_____
Notary _____
Applicant _____
Date  
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-329. - Form B: minor development. 
    (Include with form A.) 
Please check applicable blocks 
/ / A complete set of plans is submitted with this application. (11 inch × 17 inch plans with scale of one inch equaling 100 feet are acceptable for minor development.) 
/ / A scaled site plan showing setback requirements, roads and pertinent orientation information is submitted conforming to this chapter of the City of Crestview Code of Ordinances. 
/ / "As Built" Elevation Form is submitted with this application (check and complete form available from the Planning and Zoning Department only if property is in a floodplain). 
/ / Certified Copy of "Notice of Commencement" shall be filed with the clerk of the Circuit Court after receipt of building permit and before first inspection of completed construction. 
/ / I request that this application, complete with development plan, be considered for (please check): 
(a) Preliminary review / / (b) Preliminary and final review / / (c) Single final review / /  
/ / I request assistance from the City of Crestview as follows:  _____
_____
_____
_____ 
_____
Notary _____
Applicant/Agent _____
Date  
FORM B-1. CHECKLIST 
1. / / Any land rendered unusable for development purposes by deed restrictions or other legally enforceable covenants or limitations. 2. / / All watercourses, water bodies, floodplains, wetlands, important natural features, wildlife areas, soil types and vegetative cover on or adjacent to the site. 3. / / The location of environmentally sensitive lands designated pursuant to Article XI of this chapter, if any. 4. / / The location and intensity or density of the proposed development. 5. / / A general parking and circulation plan. 6. / / Points of ingress and egress and any planned public or private roads, rights-of-way, pedestrian ways, bicycle paths or transportation facilities. 7. / / The existing and proposed stormwater management systems on the site and proposed linkage, if any, with existing or planned public stormwater management systems. 8. / / Proposed location and sizing of potable water and wastewater facilities to serve the proposed development. 9. / / Proposed open space areas on the development site and types of activities proposed to be permitted on such open space areas. 10. / / Lands to be dedicated or transferred to a public or private entity and the purposes for which the lands will be held and used. 11. / / A description of how the plan mitigates or avoids potential conflicts between land uses. 12. / / Architectural elevations of all buildings sufficient to convey the basic architectural intent of the proposed improvements. 13. / / A soils map of the site. 14. / / A recent aerial photograph encompassing the project area and identifying the project area and total land areas. The scale shall be no smaller than one inch equals 800 feet. 15. / / A map of vegetative cover including the location and identity, by common name, of all protected trees. 16. / / A topographic map of the site clearly showing the location, identification and elevation of benchmarks, including at least one benchmark for each major water control structure. 17. / / A map showing the locations of any soil borings or percolation tests as may be required by this chapter. 18. / / The location of any underground or overhead utilities, culverts and drains on the property and within 100 feet of the proposed development boundary. 19. / / The 100-year flood elevation boundaries. 20. / / Area and percentage of total site to be covered by impervious surfaces. 21. / / Grading plans specifically including perimeter grading. 22. / / Construction phase lines. 23. / / Building plans showing the location, dimensions, gross floor area and proposed use of buildings. 24. / / Building setback distances from property lines, abutting rights-of-way and all adjacent buildings and structures. 25. / / Minimum floor elevations of buildings within the 100-year floodplain, if any. 26. / / The location, dimensions, type, composition and intended use of all ancillary structures. 27. / / The location and specifications of any proposed garbage dumpsters. 28. / / Cross sections and specifications of all proposed pavement. 29. / / Typical and special roadway and drainsections and summaries of quantities. 30. / / Information sufficient to determine compliance with the Landscape and Tree Protection Regulations of this Chapter (reference Article XII). 31. / / The location, accompanied by all necessary drawings, construction plans, wiring plans, etc., of all proposed signs. 32. / / The proposed number, minimum area and location of lots, if the development involves a subdivision of land. 33. / / All lots shall be numbered either by progressive numbers or in blocks progressively numbered or lettered except that blocks in numbered editions bearing the same name may be numbered consecutively throughout several editions. 34. / / All interior excluded parcels shall be indicated and labeled accordingly. 35. / / All contiguous property shall be identified by development title, plat book and page, or if the land is unplatted it shall be so designated. 36. / / Total number and type of residential units categorized according to number of bedrooms. The total number of residential units per gross acre shall be given. 37. / / Location of onsite wells, if any, and wells within 200 feet of any property line, if any. 38. / / Restrictions pertaining to the type and use of existing or proposed improvements, waterways, open spaces, buffer strips and the like shall require the establishment of restrictive covenants and such covenants shall be submitted with the final development plan for recordation. 39. / / If the development includes private streets, ownership and maintenance association document shall be submitted with the final development plan and the dedication contained on the development plan shall clearly indicate the roads and maintenance responsibility to the association without recourse to the city or any other public agency. 40. / / If the development is to be phased for any reason, a master plan for the entire project shall be submitted with the development plan for the first phase or the phases for which approval is sought. In addition, a schedule indicating approximate development phasing, including the sequence for each phase, shall be included. 41. / / The manner by which historic and archeological sites on or near the site will be protected.  
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-330. - Form C-2: major development. 
    (Include with form A.) 
/ / A complete set of plans, in triplicate, is submitted with this application. (11 inch × 17 inch plans with scale of one inch equaling 100 feet are acceptable unless informed otherwise by the planning department.) 
/ / A scaled site plan showing setback requirements, right-of-way lines (ROW), streets, railroads, buildings, transmission lines, sewers, bridges, culverts, drainpipes, water mains, fire hydrants, and any public or private easements, is provided in conformance with this Chapter, Crestview Code of Ordinances. 
/ / "As Built" Elevation Form is submitted with this application (obtain and complete form available from the Planning Department only if property is in a floodplain). 
/ / Certified Copy of "Notice of Commencement" shall be filed with the clerk of the Circuit Court after receipt of building permit and before first inspection of completed construction. 
/ / I request that this application, complete with development plan, be considered for Preliminary Review. 
/ / I request assistance from the City of Crestview as follows:  _____ 
_____
_____
_____
_____ 
_____
Date _____
Applicant/Agent  
FORM C-1. CHECKLIST 
1. / / Any land rendered unusable for development purposes by deed restrictions or other legally enforceable covenants or limitations. 2. / / All watercourses, water bodies, floodplains, wetlands, important natural features, wildlife areas, soil types and vegetative cover on or adjacent to the site. 3. / / The location of environmentally sensitive lands designated pursuant to Article XI of this Chapter, if any. 4. / / The location and intensity or density of the proposed development. 5. / / A general parking and circulation plan. 6. / / Points of ingress and egress and any planned public or private roads, rights-of-way, pedestrian ways, bicycle paths or transportation facilities. 7. / / The existing and proposed stormwater management systems on the site and proposed linkage, if any, with existing or planned public stormwater management systems. 8. / / Proposed location and sizing of potable water and wastewater facilities to serve the proposed development. 9. / / Proposed open space areas on the development site and types of activities proposed to be permitted on such open space areas. 10. / / Lands to be dedicated or transferred to a public or private entity and the purposes for which the lands will be held and used. 11. / / A description of how the plan mitigates or avoids potential conflicts between land uses. 12. / / Architectural elevations of all buildings sufficient to convey the basic architectural intent of the proposed improvements. 13. / / A soils map of the site. 14. / / A recent aerial photograph encompassing the project area and identifying the project area and total land areas. The scale shall be no smaller than one inch equals 800 feet. 15. / / A map of vegetative cover including the location and identity, by common name, of all protected trees. 16. / / A topographic map of the site clearly showing the location, identification and elevation of benchmarks, including at least one benchmark for each major water control structure. 17. / / A map showing the locations of any soil borings or percolation tests as may be required by this Chapter. 18. / / The location of any underground or overhead utilities, culverts and drains on the property and within 100 feet of the proposed development boundary. 19. / / The 100-year flood elevation boundaries. 20. / / Area and percentage of total site to be covered by impervious surfaces. 21. / / Grading plans specifically including perimeter grading. 22. / / Construction phase lines. 23. / / Building plans showing the location, dimensions, gross floor area and proposed use of buildings. 24. / / Building setback distances from property lines, abutting rights-of-way and all adjacent buildings and structures. 25. / / Minimum floor elevations of buildings within the 100-year floodplain, if any. 26. / / The location, dimensions, type, composition and intended use of all ancillary structures. 27. / / The location and specifications of any proposed garbage dumpsters. 28. / / Cross sections and specifications of all proposed pavement. 29. / / Typical and special roadway and drain sections and summaries of quantities. 30. / / Information sufficient to determine compliance with the Landscape and Tree Protection Regulations of this Chapter (reference Article XII). 31. / / The location, accompanied by all necessary drawings, construction plans, wiring plans, etc., of all proposed signs. 32. / / The proposed number, minimum area and location of lots, if the development involves a subdivision of land. 33. / / All lots shall be numbered either by progressive numbers or in blocks progressively numbered or lettered except that blocks in numbered editions bearing the same name may be numbered consecutively throughout several editions. 34. / / All interior excluded parcels shall be indicated and labeled accordingly. 35. / / All contiguous property shall be identified by development title, plat book and page, or if the land is unplatted it shall be so designated. 36. / / Total number and type of residential units categorized according to number of bedrooms. The total number of residential units per gross acre shall be given. 37. / / Location of onsite wells, if any, and wells within 200 feet of any property line, if any. 38. / / Restrictions pertaining to the type and use of existing or proposed improvements, waterways, open spaces, buffer strips and the like shall require the establishment of restrictive covenants and such covenants shall be submitted with the final development plan for recordation. 39. / / If the development includes private streets, an ownership and maintenance association document shall be submitted with the final development plan and the dedication contained on the development plan shall clearly indicate the roads and maintenance responsibility to the association without recourse to the city or any other public agency. 40. / / If the development is to be phased for any reason, a master plan for the entire project shall be submitted with the development plan for the first phase or phases for which approval is sought. In addition, a schedule indicating approximate development phasing, including the sequence for each phase, shall be included. 41. / / The manner by which historic and archeological sites on or near the site will be protected.  
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-331. - Checklist of development plan review process for major projects. 
    The following is a checklist of events for the development plan review process for major projects: 
Step 1: Applicant schedules preliminary conference with planning director. 
Planning director classifies project as "major" or "minor." 
Applicant receives application forms and checklists. 
Step 2: Applicant completes application and checklist, returns to planning director. 
Planning director determines if application is complete/incomplete (seven days). 
Step 3: If complete, project is scheduled for review by technical review committee. 
Technical review committee submits concurrency findings and recommendations to local planning agency. 
(Summary of recommendations provided by administrative official.) 
Step 4: LPA determines consistency with comprehensive plan and forwards recommendations to city council. 
Step 5: City council accepts/rejects LPA recommendations. 
If accepted, city council authorizes issuance of preliminary development order through administrative official. 
Step 6: Applicant submits final development plan. 
Planning director prepares final development order if final plan is complete. 
(Administrative official forwards order with covering letter.) 
Step 7: Applicant provides applicable performance and maintenance securities and pays relevant fees. 
Step 8: Upon receipt of relevant securities and fees, planning director issues construction (building) permit. 
(Permit may not be changed without city approval.) 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-332. - Landscape checklist. 
    (Use with either minor or major development.) 
    A landscape checklist shall be completed by a developer to accompany any application for a preliminary development review. 
    Certification. 
1. This project (does/does not) fall within the scope of said Chapter. _____2. This project is a single-family residence and falls within item 23. _____3. This project will be in proximity to sewage treatment ponds and will utilize deep-rooted, wetland trees for nutrient uptake. _____4. Removal of native vegetation will be minimal; site alteration will occur in _____ stages; and adequate erosion control will be used. _____5. This project will affect (more than 50 percent/less than 50 percent) of the development area. _____6. A minimum of 15 percent of the property will be landscaped. _____7. All land not used for impervious surface will be permanently landscaped. _____8. A minimum of a ten-foot strip abutting the right-of-way, and excluding sidewalks, shall be landscaped. _____9. One tree per 25 linear feet of lot frontage is required, of which 75 percent of the trees must be indigenous. _____10. The remainder of the ten-foot strip shall be landscaped with appropriate cover. _____11. Each vehicle overhang area cannot be more than two feet, and cannot be included as part of the ten-foot landscape requirement. _____12. No fences shall be forward of the front yard building setback line, except for single-family residences. _____13. Minimum access for one-way drives shall be 15 feet when drives are no less than 20 feet apart. _____14. Minimum access for two-way drives shall be 27 feet when drives are no less than 20 feet apart. _____15. Copy of agreement between owners of common entryways shall be filed with City Planning and Zoning. _____16. Vehicle overhang areas do not exceed two feet each into landscaped areas. _____17. Interior areas of offstreet parking, not specifically used for parking spaces or maneuvering areas, shall not be paved and will be landscaped. _____18. One space, 9 × 19 feet, shall be landscaped for each 15 continuous parking spaces. _____19. Each landscaped area must have one tree at least six feet high. _____20. Each row of interior parking spaces shall be terminated with a 10 × 10 foot landscaped area, each containing at least one tree. _____21. Every 2,500 square feet of garage parking requires 171 square feet of exterior green area. _____22. All interior landscaping must be protected from vehicles. _____23. Buffer zone landscaping is required between single-family and multifamily/industrial or commercial zones. _____24. A landscape buffer zone, ten feet deep and a minimum of six feet high, is required. _____25. A six-foot wall or fence in a ten-foot-wide area may be substituted. At least one tree is required for each 25 linear feet of barrier. _____26. A 25-foot vegetated buffer zone is required along all bodies of water. _____27. No landscaping shall restrict the visibility at intersections. _____28. A minimum of one indigenous tree is required for each one-tenth acre (ten trees per acre). _____29. No tree 24 inches or more in diameter shall be removed. _____30. Ten trees per acre credit will be given to _____ trees of _____ inches in diameter. _____31. Fifty percent of the dripline of preserved trees shall be retained as pervious surface. _____32. A minimum of 75 percent native vegetation shall be used toward the required 18 percent landscaping. _____33. All shrubs and hedges shall be at least 12 inches in height at planting. _____34. All trees shall be at least six feet high at planting. Tree crown spread should be at least 20 feet. _____35. Planting area for trees shall be at least 100 square feet with a minimum of five feet maintained clear around the trunk. _____36. Trees whose roots can damage public works shall not be planted closer than 12 feet to any such infrastructure; except Willow trees shall be no closer than 50 feet. _____37. All areas subject to erosion, such as swales, shall be sodded. _____38. All dead plant material, planted under the provisions of this Chapter, shall be replaced within one year. _____39. A landscape plan shall be submitted prior to receiving a building permit, except for single-family residences. _____40. Landscape plan completed. _____41. No building permit shall be issued without approved landscape plan. _____42. Approved landscape plan will be at construction site. _____43. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued until the landscape plan has been fulfilled. _____44. Special exception is required for slopes of 20 percent or more which removes 40 percent or more of the parcel from development. _____ 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-333. - Checklist, for city internal use. 
    The city staff, planning commission and city council may be informed of the status of development applications at any time within the review process by use of the following checklist. It is designed to implement provisions of this Chapter under articles II, VI, VII and XV. Each step of the review process through final action should be recorded and dated. 
BUILDING PROJECTS 
Status checklist. 
DATE:  _____ 
APPLICANT  _____ 
PROJECT NAME  _____ 
STEP 1: PRELIMINARY 
/ / Land development applicant has received initial instructions from the Building Inspector and checklists appropriate to the development discussed. 
/ / Project is designated "Major" or "Minor" (circle one). 
Recorded Date: ___________ Recorder:  _____ 
STEP 2: DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW 
/ / Completed checklists have been filed by developer. 
/ / Application fee ($_____) collected. 
/ / Plans have been submitted in triplicate. 
/ / Review by Technical Review Committee completed on _____ . 
Action of Committee: 
/ / Preliminary Development Order Approved. 
/ / Final Development Order Approved (Single-Family and Duplexes only). 
/ / Development Order Approved with Modifications Required. 
/ / Final Development Order Approved with Modifications Required (Single-Family and Duplexes). 
/ / Preliminary Development Order Denied for Noncompliance with Chapter. 
/ / Final Development Order Denied for Noncompliance. 
Recorded Date: ___________ Recorder:  _____ 
STEP 3: FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW 
/ / Technical Review Committee Review and Administrative Assistant/Planning Director Reports submitted to Planning Commission. 
/ / Modifications of Preliminary Development Plan Received. 
Action of Planning Committee: 
/ / Final Development Order Recommended for Approval. 
/ / Final Development Order Recommended with Modifications Required before Building Permit. 
/ / Recommended Final Development Order Denied for Noncompliance. 
/ / Planning Commission Finds Development in Conformance with Comprehensive Plan and this Chapter. 
/ / Planning Commission Finds Development in Noncompliance with Comprehensive Plan and this Chapter. 
/ / Technical Review Committee and Administrative Assistant/Planning Director Reports and Planning Commission Recommendations Forwarded to City Council for Approval. 
Recorded Date: ___________ Recorder:  _____ 
STEP 4: CITY COUNCIL REVIEW 
/ / Public Hearing Notices Appeared on _____ . 
/ / City Council Received All Reports and Documentation on: _____ . 
Actions of the City Council: 
/ / Recommendations of Planning Commission Accepted. 
/ / Recommendations of Planning Commission Accepted With Modifications Required (See section 102-26(7)b). 
/ / Recommendations of Planning Commission Rejected. 
/ / Project Returned to Developer for Resubmittal. 
/ / Project In-Line Priority Voided. 
Recorded Date: ___________ Recorder  _____ 
STEP 5: FINAL DEVELOPMENT ORDER 
/ / Final Development Order Issued on _____ . 
/ / Guarantees and Sureties From Developer Obtained on (date) (amount of surety). 
Recorded Date: ___________ Recorder  _____ 
STEP 6: BUILDING PERMIT 
/ / Building Permit Issued on _____ . 
Post-Permit Changes  / / Yes  / / No 
Recorded Date: ___________ Recorder:  _____ 
STEP 7: APPEALS 
/ / No Administrative Appeals Received on Development Project. 
/ / Appeal of decision received on _____ . 
Resolution of Appeals 
/ / City Review Procedures and Decision Upheld. 
/ / Appeals Decided in Favor of Appellants. 
Recorded Date: ___________ Recorder: _____ 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
_____
Secs. 102-334-102-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - ADMINISTRATIVE FEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1604, § 2, adopted May 23, 2016, repealed former art. XVIII, §§ 102-351-102-358, and enacted a new art. XVIII. Former art. XVIII pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 897, adopted October 14, 1996; Ord. No. 1166, adopted February 14, 2005; Ord. No. 1285, adopted August 28, 2006; Ord. No. 1366, adopted September 10, 2007; Ord. No. 1439, adopted October 25, 2010; and Ord. No. 1511, adopted September 23, 2013. 

Sec. 102-351. - Building permit fees. 
(a)  Generally. The following permit fees shall be charged by the city for projects which require an inspection in accordance with the Florida Building Code as determined by the building official, permit fees shall be collected by the building division for all work done within the city as outlined below; and such fees shall be paid before the beginning of any construction or alteration as hereinafter set forth. All fees outlined below shall be used solely for the enforcement of the Florida Building Code in accordance with F.S. § 553.80(7). A non-refundable base fee of $55.00 shall be assessed for any required permit unless otherwise noted herein. Permit fees shall, at minimum, cover the cost of processing, plan review, and the required inspections. If the permit fee does not cover the costs of the required inspections, a trip charge of $45.00 shall be added for each inspection not covered by the permit fees. 
(b)  Building permit fees. 
(1)  Master permit. The applicant for a master permit for any new building or structure, or for any additions, repairs, or alterations to an existing building or structure, or portion thereof, shall, at the time of issuance of a permit, pay for each and every building or structure the following master building permit fee, which shall be based on the valuation of the construction cost. The construction valuation shall be calculated using the greater of either the contract amount, estimated cost of construction, or the latest revision of the building valuation data table published each February and August in the Building Safety Journal by the International Code Council (ICC). A separate sub-permit shall be secured for connection of electrical, plumbing, gas, roofing, fire suppression, and/or mechanical as specified herein. The table below shall be used to assess fees based on the total valuation: 
Total 
Valuation Fee $15,000 and less $35.00 for the first $7,000.00 plus $5.00 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof, up to and including $15,000.00. $15,000.01 to $50,000.00 $75.00 for the first $15,000.00 plus $4.00 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof, up to and including $50,000.00. $50,000.01 to $100,000.00 $215.00 for the first $50,000.00 plus $3.00 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof, up to and including $100,000.00. $100,000.01 to $500,000.00 $365.00 for the first $100,000.00 plus $2.00 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof, up to and including $500,000.00. $500,000.01 and up $1,165.00 for the first $500,000.00 plus $1.25 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof.  
(2)  Plan review fee. All plans shall be subject to plan review fees at the following rates: 
a.  One- and two-family dwelling plan review fee. Plans for one- and two-family dwellings and accessory structures shall be subject to a plan review fee of 25 percent of the master permit fee. This fee shall be non-refundable, and may be assessed at the time of application submittal. 
b.  Plan review fee for occupancies other than one- and two-family dwellings. Plans for all occupancies other than one- and two-family dwellings shall be subject to a plan review fee of 50 percent of the master permit fee. This fee shall be non-refundable, and may be assessed at the time of application submittal. 
c.  ICC plan review fee. Projects deemed by the building official necessary to be concurrently reviewed by the International Code Council (ICC) are subject to additional review fees by the ICC. The applicant shall pay the applicable fees assessed by the ICC at the time plans are submitted. 
d.  Addendum fee. A fee shall be assessed for addendums for all plans. An addendum applies to changes that occur during construction that results in plan revisions. One- and two-family dwellings and their accessory structures shall be assessed a $25.00 addendum fee per change and all other occupancies shall be assessed a $100.00 addendum fee per change for each addendum. 
e.  Revision fee. A fee shall be assessed for re-submittals of non-compliant plans. Revision fees apply to plans which are still under review prior to permit issuance, that do not comply with the Florida Building Code and which have been returned to the applicant for revisions. One- and two-family dwellings and their accessory structures shall be assessed a $25.00 revision fee, and all other occupancies shall be assessed a $100.00 revision fee for each trade. Revisions resubmitted three or more times during plan review for failure to correct a code violation specifically and continuously noted in each rejection shall be imposed a fee of four times the amount of the proportion of the permit fee attributed to plans review in accordance with F.S. § 553.80(2)(b). 
f.  Re-submittal fee. A fee shall be assessed for re-review of lost or stolen approved jobsite plans. Plans that are resubmitted to be re-reviewed shall be subject to a fee equal to the original plan review fee. 
g.  Extra jobsite copy review fee. One "jobsite copy" set of plans are released upon permit issuance. Upon request, an additional set of plans may be submitted and an extra "jobsite copy" of the plans may be reviewed and released. A $25.00 fee shall be assessed for the requested extra "jobsite copy" for one- and two-family dwellings and their accessory structures. All other occupancies shall be assessed a $100.00 extra "jobsite copy" review fee. 
(3)  Undervalued permits. If, in the opinion of the building official, the building permit valuation appears to be underestimated on the application, the permit may be withheld unless the applicant can show detailed cost estimates which meet the approval of the building official. The building official may require a copy of the construction contract to be submitted with the permit application. 
(4)  Mobile home fee. The permit fee for mobile homes, blocked, with foundation walls, tie-downs and parking shall be $150.00. A separate sub-permit shall be secured for connection of electrical, plumbing, gas, and mechanical as specified herein. 
(5)  Moving structure fees. Moving structures (excluding mobile homes and portable buildings) shall require a permit and compensation to the city for any unusual costs incurred by the city. Fees shall be as follows: 
a.  To move any non-portable structure from one lot to another noncontiguous lot within the city, $175.00. 
b.  To move any non-portable structure from outside of the city limits to a lot within the city limits, $250.00. 
c.  To move any non-portable structure from one location to another location within the same lot, parcel or tract, $45.00. 
d.  A separate building permit shall be secured for the foundation upon which such structure shall be placed, $90.00. 
(6)  Temporary use permit fee. Permits for temporary use shall be issued as follows: 
a.  Placement of tents that are in excess of 120 square feet, $45.00. 
b.  Job site construction trailers. May be placed for the duration of the construction project, $45.00. 
c.  All other temporary structures, which shall be limited to placement for a period of less than 180 days, $45.00. 
(7)  Demolition of buildings or structure fees. Demolition of buildings or structure fees shall be as follows: 
a.  For the demolition of any building or structure, the fee shall be $100.00 for up to 2,000 square feet plus $5.00 for each 100 square feet of total gross floor space, or portion thereof, over 2,000 square feet. 
b.  Prior to issuance of a building permit for alterations or additions, a Demolition Permit may be issued for demolition of a portion of a building or structure, or for removal of materials, of which the fee shall be $50.00. 
(8)  Sign permit fees. 
a.  Permanent accessory signs (excluding I-10 Corridor signs): 
1.  Up to 64 square feet, $60.00. 
2.  Greater than 64 square feet and up to 96 square feet, $95.00. 
3.  Greater than 96 square feet and up to 120 square feet, $130.00. 
4.  Greater than 120 square feet and up to 240 square feet, $175.00. 
b.  I-10 Corridor accessory signs: 
1.  Up to 200 square feet, $345.00. 
2.  Greater than 200 square feet and up to 420 square feet, $520.00. 
c.  Outdoor advertising signs (excluding 1-10 Corridor signs): Up to 310 square feet, $200.00. 
d.  I-10 Corridor outdoor advertising signs: 
1.  Up to 200 square feet, $260.00. 
2.  Greater than 200 square feet and up to 310 square feet, $430.00. 
3.  Greater than 310 square feet and up to 672 square feet, $600.00. 
(9)  Re-inspection fees. The initial inspection cost is typically included in the building permit fee. A re-inspection fee of $30.00 shall be assessed for the initial re-inspection of any violation of the Florida Building Code. The re-inspection fee shall be charged for each unit, building, or structure, and for each trade when multiple inspections occur at the same time. The fee for a second re-inspection of the same code violation shall be $50.00, and the fee for a third re-inspection for failure to correct a code violation specifically and continuously noted in each rejection shall be $120.00 each, in accordance with F.S. § 553.80(4)(c). All outstanding fees shall be paid prior to closing out the permit and prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion. 
(10)  Additional inspection fee. Requests for an out of sequence inspection or an additional inspection shall be assessed a trip fee of $45.00. 
(11)  After hours inspection fee. Inspection requests for after business hours, weekends, or holidays shall be assessed a fee of $100.00 per hour with a one-hour minimum charge, or the contractor may be billed for the total amount incurred, including the inspector's overtime wages and benefits. 
(12)  Change of use fee. Any change of occupancy which results in a change of occupancy classification to a building, or a portion of a building, without undergoing any alterations, shall be required to obtain a change of use building permit at a fee of $30.00 and a certificate of occupancy shall be reissued upon determining compliance. 
(13)  Annual facility permit fees. In lieu of an individual permit for each alteration to an existing electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing or interior nonstructural office system(s), the building official is authorized to issue an annual permit for any occupancy to facilitate routine or emergency service, repair, refurbishing, minor renovations of service systems or manufacturing equipment installations/relocations. The building official shall be notified of major changes and shall retain the right to make inspections at the facility site as deemed necessary. An annual facility permit shall be assessed with an annual fee of $150.00 and shall be valid for one-year from date of issuance. A separate permit shall be obtained for each facility and for each construction trade, as applicable. The permit application shall contain a general description of the parameters of work intended to be performed during the year. 
(14)  Temporary certificate of occupancy fee. Requests for a temporary, conditional, or partial certificate of occupancy shall be requested in writing, and if granted by the building official, shall be assessed a fee of $200.00. Any request for a time extension of a temporary, conditional, or partial certificate of occupancy shall be assessed a fee of $50.00 for each extension. 
(15)  Expired permit fees. A permit once issued, expires if work is not commenced within 180 days of issuance or if construction or work is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days at any time after work is commenced. To avoid permit expiration, a progress report (showing progress toward the permit) needs to be submitted in writing, or an extension request needs to be submitted in writing showing justifiable cause to extend the permit prior to 180 days of inactivity, otherwise the permit will expire. Extensions may be granted by the building official for increments of 90 days. The fee for renewal of expired permits shall be 50 percent of the original fee paid if the fee is paid within 30 days of the expiration date. After 30 days, the full original fee is due. 
(c)  Electrical permit fees. The following fees shall be assessed for electrical permits: 
(1)  Service fees, electrical service (residential, commercial and industrial, including signs, generators, and service changes). 
a.  Temporary and construction service through 100 amperes, $35.00. Temporary and construction service 101 amperes and over, $50.00. 
b.  Service up to 100 amperes, $45.00. 
c.  Service 101 amperes through 200 amperes, $70.00. 
d.  Service 201 amperes through 400 amperes $85.00. 
e.  Service 401 amperes through 600 amperes, $105.00. 
f.  Service 601 amperes through 800 amperes, $120.00. 
g.  Service 801 amperes and over, $0.20 per amperes. 
h.  Sub panel derived from main service, per panel, $30.00 for one- and two-family dwellings and $60.00 for all other occupancies. 
i.  Reconnect meter inspection fee, to be assessed where service has been discontinued and no work is required, but where the connecting utility company requires the electrical system to be inspected, $15.00. 
(2)  Circuit fees. Each individual branch circuit and feeder shall be assessed a fee of $2.50 each. 
(3)  Electric motor fees. 
a.  Motors up to and including one horsepower, $5.00. 
b.  Motors over one horsepower through three horsepower, $7.00. 
c.  Motors over three horsepower through five horsepower, $9.00 
d.  Motors over five horsepower through eight horsepower, $10.00. 
e.  Motors over eight horsepower through ten horsepower, $12.00. 
f.  Motors over ten horsepower through 25 horsepower, $14.00. 
g.  Motors over 25 horsepower, $17.00. 
(4)  Swimming pool electrical fees. Includes grounding, pump motor and underwater lights, $30.00 for private pools, and $100.00 for public pools. This fee does not include the installation of any new circuit(s), feeder(s) or subpanel(s). 
(5)  Transformer fees. 
a.  Transformer types up to 50 amps, $25.00. 
b.  Transformer types over 50 amps, $35.00. 
(6)  X-ray unit fees. 
a.  X-ray unit, $50.00. 
b.  Each additional unit, $25.00. 
(7)  Electric elevator fees. Each elevator shall be checked for conformity with appropriate standards, codes, regulations and laws. Each installation, $175.00. 
(8)  Electrical repair fees. Any such repair of equipment of which an inspection is required, shall be subject to a fee of $30.00. 
(9)  Power inspection fee. All new buildings shall have a power inspection to ensure that power is on for the final inspection. New one-and two-family dwellings shall be assessed a fee of $30.00 for the first service and $15.00 for each additional service. All other occupancies shall be assessed a fee of $75.00 for the first service and $37.50 for each additional service. The power inspection fee shall be collected prior to the issuance of the master permit. 
(d)  Mechanical fees. The following fees shall be assessed for mechanical permits. 
(1)  Electric heating fees, each system. 
a.  Up to two kilowatts, $9.00. 
b.  Over two kilowatts and up to ten kilowatts, $10.00. 
c.  Over ten kilowatts and up to 15 kilowatts, $17.00. 
d.  Over 15 kilowatts, $1.30 per kilowatt. 
(2)  Central air conditioning (including heat pump) fees, each system: 
a.  Up to five tons, $35.00. 
b.  Over five tons, at the rate of $7.00 per ton. 
c.  Mechanical duct work only, $3.50 for each supply and return outlet. 
(3)  Miscellaneous fees: 
a.  Any unit not listed, rated at two kilowatts or less, $9.00. 
b.  Any unit not listed, rate over two kilowatts and up to ten kilowatts, $10.00. 
c.  Any unit not listed, rated over ten kilowatts, $17.00. 
d.  Packaged terminal air conditioners (PTAC) units, each unit $15.00. 
(4)  Commercial kitchen exhaust hood fee, per hood, $30.00. 
(e)  Plumbing permit fees. 
(1)  Each fixture, $3.50. 
(2)  Electric water heater replacement, $15.00. 
(3)  Grease trap/interceptor, new and replacement: 
a.  Small volume, under sink interceptor, 100 gallons or less, per interceptor $45.00. 
b.  Medium volume, underground system 2,500 gallons or less, per interceptor, $150.00. 
c.  Large volume, underground system larger than 2,500 gallons, per interceptor, $200.00. 
(4)  Repair or replacement of any water distribution line, building drain piping, or sewer line, $15.00. 
(f)  Gas installation permit fees. 
(1)  Each new fixture, $3.50. 
(2)  Replacement or change-out of any gas appliance, $15.00. 
(3)  Repair or alteration of existing gas piping, $15.00. 
(g)  Water and sewer permit fees. 
(1)  Residential. Each individual sewer or water tap and line roughed in for residential buildings (one- and two-family dwellings), $15.00. 
(2)  Commercial. Each individual sewer or water tap and line roughed in for commercial buildings (includes all occupancies other than one-and two-family dwellings), $45.00. 
(h)  Fire sprinkler system permit fees. 
(1)  Residential, (one- and two-family dwellings), per building, $120.00. 
(2)  Commercial; small, six heads or less, (includes all occupancies other than one-and two-family dwellings), per building, $150.00. 
(3)  Commercial; large, seven or more heads, (includes all occupancies other than one-and two-family dwellings), per building, $250.00. 
(4)  Existing systems; each relocated or additional sprinkler head, $5.00. 
(i)  Exhaust hood fire suppression system permit fee. Per hood system, $60.00. 
(j)  Floodplain development permit fee. To be assessed on any proposed development that occurs within the special flood hazard area. If issued in conjunction with a building permit, the base fee shall not be assessed for the floodplain development permit. 
(1)  Minor floodplain development. 
a.  Accessory structures. Including, but not limited to, sheds, detached garages, retaining walls, fences, pergolas, pool houses, pools, etc., $30.00. 
b.  Habitable buildings. To include new construction, additions, and alterations of any building, $100.00. 
(2)  Major floodplain development. 
a.  New development. To be assessed for any new residential subdivision, or any new commercial development, $250.00. 
b.  Other development. To be assessed on any development or alterations of infrastructure, including but not limited to, utilities, stormwater, watercourse changes, roads, utilities, etc., $200.00. 
(3)  Letter of map change/flood study review fee. To be assessed for review of any letter of map change or flood study, including but not limited to CLOMR, LOMR, LOMR-F reviews, $150.00. 
(k)  Alarm system fees. 
(1)  Fire alarm, valuation up to and including $999.99, $70.00. 
(2)  Fire alarm, valuation of $1000.00 up to and including $4999.99, $100.00. 
(3)  Fire alarm, valuation of $5000.00 up to and including $9999.99, $150.00. 
(4)  Fire alarm, valuation $10,000.00 and above, $200.00. 
(5)  Low voltage security alarm fees. Only applicable for wired systems. Fees shall be assessed in accordance with F.S. §§ 489.503 and 553.793. Permits are not required for wireless systems. 
(l)  Installation of pollutant/hazardous storage tank fees. 
(1)  Above ground, $175.00. 
(2)  Underground, $350.00. 
(3)  Removal of storage tank, $70.00. 
(m)  Irrigation and lawn sprinkler fees. 
(1)  Residential (one-and two-family dwellings), $30.00. 
(2)  Commercial (other than one-and two-family dwellings), $70.00. 
(3)  Shallow well, $35.00. 
(n)  Driveway permit inspection fees. To be assessed when a driveway is constructed or altered where the driveway has a connection to a city maintained road. 
(1)  Residential (one- and two-family dwellings), $35.00. 
(2)  Commercial (other than one- and two-family dwellings), $50.00. 
(o)  In ground swimming pool permit fees. 
(1)  Private pools and spas, $135.00. 
(2)  Public pools, shall be assessed fees based on the contract price of the pool, as specified in Section (b)(1). 
(3)  Pool modifications, $100.00. 
(p)  Minor residential accessory structure permit fee. Minor residential accessory structures associated with one-and two-family dwellings that are not subject to plan review shall be assessed a fee of $15.00. Minor accessory structures include non-structural fences, retaining walls less than 48 inches in height, and portable storage sheds 250 square feet and less. 
(q)  Proper permits needed. Failure to purchase proper permits prior to beginning construction of any project which requires a permit or permits shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  Owner-builders. Any property owner who commences construction without obtaining the necessary permit(s), who applies in person and meets the owner-builder exemption in F.S. § 489.103, shall be assessed a fee of two times the usual permit fee for each required permit. 
(2)  Contractors. Any contractor who commences construction without obtaining the necessary permit(s), shall be assessed a fee of four times the usual permit fee for each required permit. Second and repeat occurrences by a contractor shall be subject to a fee of four times the usual permit fee plus an additional $500.00 each occurrence for each required permit. 
Such fees shall be collected by the building division prior to issuance of the applicable building permit(s). The building official may grant extensions of time or waive penalties when justifiable cause has been demonstrated in writing. 
(r)  Faxed or emailed permit fee. An additional fee of $10.00 shall be assessed for processing faxed or emailed permits. 
(s)  Reduced fee or no-cost permits. Reduced fee or no-cost permits, shall not be granted pursuant to F.S. § 553.80(7)(b)(2), except for city projects carried out by the city public services department employees. Costs for these permits shall be covered by utilities and other services provided by the city at no expense to the building division. 
(t)  Refunds of permit fees. Refunds of permit fees shall be requested in writing to the building official. Refunds shall not apply to projects for which construction has commenced and an inspection has been performed. If granted, a refund shall not include the base fee or the plan review fee if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1604, § 2, 5-23-16) 
Sec. 102-352. - Planning and zoning review, recommendations, processing and fees. 
(a)  There shall be an administrative review fee established for the review of the following land development applications including, but not limited to: Permits, variances, annexations, rezoning, special exceptions, planned unit developments, major subdivisions, minor subdivisions, replatting of subdivision/lot reconfigurations, major development orders, modifications for major development orders, minor development orders, modifications to minor development orders, development of regional impact, landscape plans submitted separate from a development order application, protected tree removal, appeals of administrative decisions, letters/certificates of zoning compliance, amendments to the comprehensive plan and/or the land development code and/or the Code of Ordinances as it relates to land development, zoning and land use map changes, site inspections, comprehensive plan/land development code written interpretation, home occupational and business tax receipt review, all mailings, and advertisement costs. 
    These fees as set out in this section shall be established by the city council by ordinance and shall be reviewed no less than annually during the budget process. 
(b)  Review and processing fees. Prior to the submittal of a development project, a schedule of projected fees shall be provided to the applicant. The appropriate fees are due at time of submittal and until the appropriate fees have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any development submittal. 
    All expenses for advertising, mailing or other administrative fees shall be billed to the applicant at direct incurred cost. 
(1)  Subdivisions. If a development is to be phased for any reason, a master plan for the entire project shall be submitted. 
a.  Master planned development. 
1.  Master plan base fee, $2,000.00. 
2.  Plus $20.00 per acre or fraction thereof. 
3.  Revised plan/document submittal (each submittal), $500.00. 
4.  Expenses for advertising, mailing and other administrative fees shall be billed to the applicant at direct incurred cost. 
b.  Residential development. 
1.  Base plan, $350.00. 
2.  Plus, each parcel within the subdivision, $15.00. 
3.  Revised plan submittal, $150.00, each submittal. 
4.  Expenses for advertising, mailing and other administrative fees shall be billed to the applicant at direct incurred cost. 
c.  Residential planned unit development. 
1.  Base plan, $800.00. 
2.  Plus, each parcel within the subdivision, $15.00. 
3.  Revised plan submittal, $150.00, each submittal. 
4.  Expenses for advertising, mailing and other administrative fees shall be billed to the applicant at direct incurred cost. 
d.  Commercial and industrial development. 
1.  Base plan, $350.00. 
2.  Plus, each parcel within the subdivision, $15.00. 
3.  Revised plan submittal, $150.00, each submittal. 
4.  Expenses for advertising, mailing and other administrative fees shall be billed to the applicant at direct incurred cost. 
e.  Planned mixed development district. 
1.  Base plan, $800.00. 
2.  Plus, each parcel within the subdivision, $15.00. 
3.  Revised plan submittal, $150.00, each submittal. 
4.  Expenses for advertising, mailing and other administrative fees shall be billed to the applicant at direct incurred cost. 
f.  Mobile home parks. 
1.  Base plan, $350.00. 
2.  Plus, each parcel/lot within the park, $15.00. 
3.  Revised plan submittal, $150.00, each submittal. 
4.  Expenses for advertising, mailing and other administrative fees shall be billed to the applicant at direct incurred cost. 
(2)  Developments of regional impact. Development of Regional Impact (DRI) is a development that impacts on infrastructure, concurrency, the environment or other considerations beyond the political jurisdiction in which development occurs. 
a.  Base fee, $2.000.00 
b.  Each parcel/lot and/or each 100 square foot area, $20.00 
c.  Revised plan submittal, $150.00 each submittal. 
d.  Expenses for advertising, mailing, travel (at state rates) and other administrative fees shall be billed to the applicant at direct incurred cost. 
(3)  Commercial/industrial site plan reviews. 
a.  Area-wide impact projects. Project sites are larger than 100,000 square feet. 
1.  Base fee, 100,000 square feet, $2,000.00. 
2.  $20.00 per 1,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, for each additional 1,000 square feet. 
3.  Revised plan submittal, $150.00, each submittal. 
4.  Expenses for advertising, mailing and other administrative fees shall be billed to the applicant at direct incurred cost. 
b.  Major development projects. Project sites area are over 10,000 square feet but under 100,000 square feet. 
1.  Base fee, 10,000 square feet, $500.00. 
2.  $30.00 per 1,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, for each additional 1,000 square feet. 
3.  Revised plan submittal, $150.00, each submittal. 
4.  Expenses for advertising, mailing and other administrative fees shall be billed to the applicant at direct incurred cost. 
c.  Minor projects. Projects sites are under 9,999 square feet. 
1.  Sites: 0 to 1,000 square feet, $250.00. 
2.  Sites: 1,000 to 5,000 square feet, $350.00. 
3.  Sites: 5,001 to 9,999 square feet, $450.00. 
4.  Revised plan submittal, $150.00, each submittal. 
5.  Expenses for advertising, mailing and other administrative fees shall be billed to the applicant at direct incurred cost. 
d.  Commercial interior remodel or interior build out. 
1.  2,000 square feet, or less, $250.00. 
2.  2,001 square feet or greater, $350.00. 
3.  Revised plan submittal, $150.00, each submittal. 
4.  Expenses for advertising, mailing and other administrative fees shall be billed to the applicant at direct incurred cost. 
(c)  Land planning application, administrative and processing fees. Prior to the time of submittal of an application, a schedule of projected fees shall be provided to the applicant. The application fees are due at time of submittal; the other applicable administrative fees, charges, consultant fees and direct expenses, if needed, shall be due thru the process cycle. Until the appropriate fees have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal. 
(1)  Voluntary annexation into the city. Application fee, $1,200.00. 
a.  Fee includes one public hearing advertisement for local planning agency meeting. 
b.  Fee includes two public hearing advertisements for city council meetings. 
c.  Any additional advertisements, if necessary, shall be billed to the applicant at direct incurred cost. 
d.  Costs for public notice signs and certified mailings are not included. (See article IV, public participation). 
(2)  Comprehensive plan amendments, small scale. Application fee, $1,200.00, plus $20.00 per acre or fraction thereof. 
a.  Fee includes one public hearing advertisement for local planning agency meeting. 
b.  Fee includes one public hearing advertisement for city council meeting. 
c.  Any additional advertisements, if necessary, shall be billed to the applicant at direct incurred cost. 
d.  Costs for public notice signs and certified mailings are not included. (See article IV, public participation) 
e.  Consultant fees for the preparation of the report and processing are not included. 
(3)  Conventional comprehensive plan amendments. Application fee, $2,500.00, plus $10.00 per acre or fraction thereof. 
a.  Fee includes one public hearing advertisement for local planning agency meeting. 
b.  Fee includes two public hearing advertisements for city council meeting. 
c.  Any additional advertisements, if necessary, shall be billed to the applicant at direct incurred cost. 
d.  Costs for public notice signs and certified mailings are not included. (See article IV, public participation) 
e.  Consultant fees for the preparation of the report and processing are not included. 
(4)  Zoning changes. Application fee, $600.00. 
a.  Fee includes one public hearing advertisement for local planning agency meeting. 
b.  Fee includes one public hearing advertisement for city council meeting. 
c.  Any additional advertisements, if necessary, shall be billed to the applicant at direct incurred cost. 
d.  Costs for public notice signs and certified mailings are not included. (See article IV, public participation). 
(5)  Lot split request and minor replat request. 
a.  Application fee, $50.00. 
b.  Expenses for advertising, mailing and other administrative fees shall be billed to the applicant at direct incurred cost. 
(6)  Right of way vacations. Application fee, $600.00. 
a.  Fee includes one public hearing advertisement for local planning agency meeting. 
b.  Fee includes one public hearing advertisement for city council meeting. 
c.  Any additional advertisements, if necessary, shall be billed to the applicant at direct incurred cost. 
d.  Costs for public notice signs and certified mailings are not included. (See article IV, public participation). 
(7)  Variances and special exceptions. 
a.  Application fee for variance, $800.00. 
1.  Fee includes one public hearing advertisement for board of adjustment meeting. 
2.  Any additional advertisements, if necessary, shall be billed to the applicant at direct incurred cost. 
3.  Costs for public notice signs and certified mailings are not included. (See article IV, public participation). 
b.  Application fee for special exception, $800.00. 
1.  Fee includes one public hearing advertisement for board of adjustment meeting. 
2.  Any additional advertisements, if necessary, shall be billed to the applicant at direct incurred cost. 
3.  Costs for public notice signs and certified mailings are not included. (See article IV, public participation). 
c.  Appeals. Applicants shall pay all the cost of advertising, public notices, mailing, administrative fees and attorney cost incurred by the city. 
(7)  Out-of-city utility request for water and/or sewer. 
a.  Residential water and/or sewer request, $30.00. 
b.  Commercial water and/or sewer request, $100.00. 
c.  Impact fees, if necessary. See section 102-377 for computation. 
d.  Until all applicable fees, charges, consultant fees and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal. 
(8)  Construction and demolition (C & D) landfills. 
a.  Initial preliminary review, $200.00. 
b.  Schedule of fees and requirements shall be provided upon completion of preliminary review. 
(d)  General review fees. 
(1)  Fee schedule. 
a.  Archival research fee-researching for requested files, $25.00. 
b.  Alcohol beverage certificate of compliance $50.00. 
c.  Business tax receipt inspection and zoning approval, $20.00. 
d.  Final site inspection; i.e. site, landscaping, parking, signage etc. $50.00. 
e.  Land clearing/protected tree removal $75.00. 
f.  Landscape plans submitted separate from a development order application $25.00. 
g.  Public notice sign, $10.00 per sign. 
h.  Research and written interpretation of land development regulation city code, $40.00 per item. 
i.  Signature/notary, $5.00. 
j.  Zoning and code compliance plan review for permitting, $25.00. 
k.  Zoning/future land use designation information letter, $10.00 per parcel. 
l.  Zoning verification/compliance letter, or comprehensive plan consistency letter, $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 1604, § 2, 5-23-16) 
Sec. 102-353. - Concurrency evaluation review fees. 
(a)  The following fees are hereby established for concurrency evaluation review in the city: 
Multifamily project: $25.00 per building. 
Commercial project: $25.00 per building. 
Single-family home: $25.00. 
(b)  The fees specified above shall be payable to the city upon submittal of an application that requires an application for concurrency evaluation by the city. Generally, all major development of regional impact, subdivision or PUD, multifamily dwellings, and commercial development will require a concurrency evaluation by the city. Concurrency evaluation is separate and apart from the review and processing fees contained in section 102-352. 
(c)  This article shall take effect immediately upon its adoption. 
(Ord. No. 1604, § 2, 5-23-16) 
Sec. 102-354. - Plan review requirement and penalty for noncompliance. 
    Any person who performs any and all work or development requiring a permit or plans review as set forth in sections 102-351 and 102-352 of this article shall obtain the appropriate permits and/or ensure that plans are reviewed and approved prior to commencing work, or shall be subject to penalties as set forth in section 102-356 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1604, § 2, 5-23-16) 
Sec. 102-355. - Reserved. 
Sec. 102-356. - Penalties. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any order or notice given pursuant to and by authority of this article shall be subject to a misdemeanor charge and subject to a fine of $500.00 for each day of violation. 
(Ord. No. 1604, § 2, 5-23-16) 
Sec. 102-357. - Reserved. 
Sec. 102-358. - Life safety annual permit fees. 
(a)  Generally. Florida Fire Prevention Code requires permits for various operations as defined within the code, and extraordinary fees. Fees for annual permits, and extraordinary services are established as follows. 
(b)  Annual permit fees. Permit is valid for one year unless revoked. 
(1)  Automatic fire suppression system. Installation of or modification to any automatic fire suppression system. Maintenance does not require a permit, $65.00. 
(2)  Bonfires and outdoor rubbish fires, $13.00. Cooking fires are exempt. 
(3)  Bowling lanes. Refinishing and surfacing of bowling lanes and bowling pin refinishing, $65.00. 
(4)  Calcium carbide. Storage in cylinders or containers, $33.00. 
(5)  Combustible fibers as listed in Florida Fire Prevention Code section 12-1, $33.00. 
(6)  Compressed gases. Storage, handling or use of compressed gases. Installation or modification of any compressed gas system, $33.00. 
(7)  Cutting and welding. Cutting and welding operations within the jurisdiction, $13.00. 
(8)  Covered mall buildings. Permit is required annually for facilities that utilize the mall area for exhibits or displays. Exhibits and displays include community services projects, sidewalk sales or holiday sales. Other trade shows or exhibits held in the mall shall require a separate trade show/exhibit permit, $65.00. 
(9)  Dust explosion prevention. Installation, modification or operations of the following: 
Grain bleacher or elevator; starch, flour or feed mill; malt house; wood floor manufacturing plant; aluminum, coal, cocoa, magnesium, spices, sugar or other facility that pulverizes material subject to dust explosion; any central dust collecting system; any equipment that produces significant amounts of dust subject to explosion, $33.00. 
(10)  Exhibit and trade shows. Operation of all exhibits and trade shows held with the jurisdiction, $65.00. 
(11)  Amusement parks. Alteration, construction or operation of amusement park fire protection on safety features, $65.00. 
(12)  Fire alarm and detection systems and related equipment. Installation of or modification to fire alarm and detection systems and related equipment. Maintenance is not considered a modification and does not require a permit, $65.00. 
(13)  Fire pumps and related equipment. Installation of or modification to fire pumps and related fuel tanks, jockey pumps, controls and generators. Maintenance is not considered a modification and does not require a permit, $65.00. 
(14)  Fireworks, possession, storage, manufacturer sale or discharge of fireworks within jurisdiction, $65.00. 
(15)  Flammable or combustible liquids. Storage, use, handling or transport of class I, class II, or class IIIA flammable or combustible liquids, $33.00. 
(16)  Flammable finish application. The spray application of flammable or combustible liquids. Installation or modification of any spray rooms or booth, $277.00. 
(17)  Grandstands, folding and telescopic seating, tents and membrane structures. Construction, location, erect in, or placement of grandstands and bleachers, folding and telescopic seating, tents and membrane structures, $65.00. 
(18)  LP gas. 
a.  Storage, $65.00. 
b.  Installation or modification of any LP gas system, $65.00. 
c.  Operation of any cargo tankers that transport LP gas, $33.00. 
(19)  Lumber yards and woodworking plants. Storage of lumber exceeding 50,000 board feet, $65.00. 
(20)  Pesticides and herbicides, storage of, $65.00. 
(21)  Private fire hydrants. Installation, modification or removal from service any private fire hydrants, $17.00. 
(22)  Repair garages and service stations. Operation of repair garages and service stations, $33.00. 
(23)  Standpipe systems. Installation, modification, or removal from service and standpipe system. Maintenance is not considered modification and no permit is required, $65.00. 
(24)  Special outdoor events, carnivals and fairs. The location and operation of special outdoor events, carnivals and fairs, $65.00. 
(25)  Tar kettles. Permit shall be obtained at least two working days prior to placement of a tar kettle, $33.00. 
(26)  Carnivals, $65.00 (Exception: Carnivals or portions of carnivals within the jurisdiction of the department of agriculture and consumer services). 
(27)  Combustible materials. Storage in any building or upon premises in excess of 2,500 cubic feet in gross volume of combustible empty, packing cased, pallets, boxed, barrels or similar containers or rubber tires, or baled cotton, rubber or cork or similar combustible material, $65.00. 
(28)  Dry cleaning. Dry cleaning by use of cleaning solvents, cleaning fluids or cleaning solutions, $65.00. 
(29)  Hazardous materials. To store, handle or use hazardous material, to construct, install, repair, abandon, remove, place temporarily out of service, close or substantially modify a storage facility for handling hazardous material, $65.00. 
(30)  Spraying or dipping. For spraying and dipping operations, $33.00. 
(31)  Places of public assembly, $65.00 (Exception: Places of assembly used solely for religious worship). 
(c)  Extraordinary fee rate. Extraordinary fee rate is established at $98.00 per hour for each vehicle and crew used for all hours and part of hours involved. 
(Ord. No. 1604, § 2, 5-23-16) 
Sec. 102-359. - Life safety plan review fees. 
(a)  Schedule of life safety plan review fees. 
(1)  Site plan or revised site plan ..... $20.00 
(2)  Temporary use structure/site plan ..... 25.00 
(3)  Mobile vendor ..... 25.00 
(4)  Building plan review (minimum 15.00) ..... 0.04 square feet 
a.  First revision of building ..... no charge 
b.  Second revision of building ..... 1/4 first fee 
(5)  Fire protection. 
a.  Sprinkler (up to 25 heads) ..... 30.00 
b.  Sprinkler (more than 25 heads) ..... 00.25 
per head plus $30.00 
c.  Revised sprinkler plan ..... 10.00 
d.  Standpipe, per riser ..... 25.00 
e.  Underground ..... 15.00 
f.  Fire pump ..... 25.00 
(6)  Pre-engineered system. 
a.  Hood/inert gas ..... 30.00 
(7)  Fire alarm, per system 
a.  Revised ..... 10.00 
(Ord. No. 1604, § 2, 5-23-16) 
Secs. 102-360-102-370. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIX. - WATER AND SEWER IMPACT FEE ORDINANCE 

Sec. 102-371. - Applicability. 
    This chapter shall apply to the incorporated areas of the city and to the unincorporated areas of the county which are provided water and sewer service by the city. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-372. - Intent and purpose. 
(a)  This article is intended to implement and be consistent with the Crestview comprehensive plan and land development regulations. 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to regulate the use and development of land so as to assure that new development bears a proportionate share of the cost of the capital expenditures necessary to accommodate impact of development on water and sewer facilities and to assist in limiting further degradation of water and sewer facilities as contemplated by the Crestview comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-373. - Findings and determinations. 
    The city makes the following findings and determinations: 
(1)  The existing water and sewer systems in the city are not sufficient to accommodate anticipated new development without decreasing the levels of service. 
(2)  The acceptable level of service (LOS) in the city for potable water is 125 gallons per capita per day, while sanitary sewer is 108 gallons per capita per day. 
(3)  Existing revenue sources are not sufficient to fund capital improvements necessary to accommodate new development. 
(4)  New development should contribute its fair share of the costs of providing new facilities necessary to accommodate said new development. 
(5)  Impact fees provide a reasonable and fair method of regulating new development in the city to ensure that such new development pays its fair share of the capital costs of governmental services and facilities necessary to accommodate the new development. 
(6)  The impact fees set forth herein are not established at a rate to correct existing deficiencies. 
(7)  The impact fees set forth herein establish a fair and conservative method of assessing a fair share of cost for new developments. 
(8)  The impact fees set forth herein will not fully pay for the costs of capital improvements to the water and sewer systems necessitated by new development, and the city recognizes that the shortfall will have to come from other revenue sources. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-374. - Rules of construction. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall be liberally construed so as to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare of city citizens. 
(b)  For the purposes of administration and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise stated, the following rules of construction shall apply to the text of this article: 
(1)  In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this article and any caption, illustration, summary table, or illustrative table, the text shall control. 
(2)  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. 
(3)  The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designated for," "maintained for," or "occupied for." 
(4)  The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity. 
(5)  Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or," or "either/or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
a.  "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply. 
b.  "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singularly or in any combination. 
c.  "Either/or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singularly but not in combination. 
(6)  The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-375. - Definitions. 
(a)  Feepayer means a person who is obligated to remit or who has remitted all or a portion of the impact fee described herein. 
(b)  Capital improvement includes land acquisition, right-of-way acquisition, site improvements, engineering fees, permitting fees, building and equipment, but excludes maintenance and operation. 
(c)  Living unit means any temporary or permanent unit utilized for human habitation. 
(d)  Impact fee means the fee required to be paid in accordance with this article. 
(e)  Comprehensive plan means that plan which may consist of several maps, data and other descriptive matter, for the physical development of the city or any portion thereof, indicating the general location for major streets, parks, open space, or other public utilities, zoning districts, land use or other similar information. The comprehensive plan shall be based upon, and include, appropriate studies of the location and extent of present and anticipated population, social and economic resources and problems, and other useful data regarding the future development of the city. The comprehensive plan is the plan adopted by the city that meets the requirements of F.S. § 163.3177. 
(f)  ERU (water) means equivalent residential unit defined as having the average demand of 350 gallons per day. (See chapter 15, comprehensive plan.) 
(g)  ERU (sewer) means equivalent residential unit defined as having the average demand of 280 gallons per day. (See chapter 15, comprehensive plan.) 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-376. - Imposition of water and sewer impact fees. 
(a)  Any person who, after the effective date of this article, seeks to develop land by applying for a development permit/building permit to make an improvement to land which will generate additional demand on the water and sewer systems shall be assessed a water and sewer impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this article. 
(b)  No development permit/building permit for any activity requiring payment of an impact fee pursuant to section 102-377 shall be issued unless and until the water and sewer impact fee hereby required has been assessed and a notice of assessment signed by the person applying for the issuance of the development permit/building permit. Payment of the water and/or sewer impact fee shall be as specified in section 102-378. 
(c)  Any development activity in progress prior to the effective date of this article with prepaid water and/or sewer tap fee shall not be required to pay a water and/or sewer impact fee. 
(d)  All septic tank users will be assessed an impact fee as directed by the city council within the specified timeframe as determined by the city council as sewer service becomes available to those areas not served by city sewer. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-377. - Computation of the amount of water and sewer impact fee. 
(a)  Water impact fees. A water impact fee which represents the capital cost of the capacity expansion as described in table 1 will be charged and paid in the manner described herein. The city reserves the right to also require additional contributions or in-kind contributions including but not limited to constructed donated facilities, as may be necessary to extend services or to further expand the system to facilitate the providing of services to the feepayer's property and, if any oversizing is required, the feepayer shall bereimbursed as approved by the city. The city additionally reserves the right to amend this article so as to prospectively adjust the fees and charges assessed herein. The applicant/feepayer will be required to build or to provide the cost of construction of the distribution system and all water facilities onsite regardless of size necessary to provide service to the land development activity. 
Table 1. Allocation of Estimated Construction Costs 
Projects Amount Estimated R.I.B. field $4,470,000.00 Estimated R.I.B. field engineering fees 330,000.00 Estimated wastewater treatment plant and capacity upgrade 22,580,000.00 Estimated engineering fees 2,420,000.00 3 1.4 MGD water wells 3,000,000.00 3 elevated storage tanks (500 K gallon) 3,000,000.00  
The residential water impact fee charged shall be $ 1,000.00 for each equivalent residential unit. 
(b)  Commercial water impact fees. The impact fee for commercial water users will be determined as follows: 
(1)  Calculation. The average daily flow (as determined by the city) will be divided by ERU (water) and then multiplied by the residential water impact fee as stated above. 
(2)  Adjustments to the commercial water system impact fee. As to commercial uses, or residential units having commercial uses, the city in its discretion may assess an adjusted or additional water impact fee if at any time the usage of the connected unit changes or if it is determined by the city that the projected annual use will be more or less than the actual annual amount used. 
(c)  Sewer impact fee. A sewer impact fee shall be assessed by the city, which represents the capital cost of the system's capacity of expansion as reflected in table 1. The city reserves the right to also require additional contributions or in-kind contributions, including but not limited to donated constructed facilities, as may be necessary to extend services or to further expand the sewer system to facilitate the installation of services to the feepayer's property and, if any excessive fees have been incurred, the feepayer shall be reimbursed as approved by the city. The city additionally reserves the right to amend this article so as to prospectively adjust the fees and charges assessed herein. The applicant/feepayer will be required to build or to provide the cost of construction of the improvements to the sewer system including all wastewater facilities onsite regardless of size necessary to provide service to the land development activity. 
The sewer impact fee charged shall be $2,900.00 for each equivalent residential unit. 
(1)  Commercial impact fees. The average daily flow (as determined by the city) will be divided by ERU (sewer) and then multiplied by the residential sewer impact as stated above. 
(2)  Adjustments to the commercial sewer system impact fees. As to commercial users or residential units having commercial uses or residential units which have been converted to legal commercial uses, the city in its discretion may assess an adjusted or additional sewer impact fee if at any time the usage of the connected unit changes, or if it is determined by the city that the projected annual use will be more or less than the actual annual amount used. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 1028, § 2, 12-11-00; Ord. No. 1185, § 2, 8-8-05; Ord. No. 1399, § 2, 7-28-08) 
Sec. 102-378. - Payment of water and sewer impact fees. 
(a)  Fees are collected at a time which is known and predictable and when relevant to the initial use of services. The city has set collection times for water and sewer impact fees at building permit issuance, where a building permit is required, and at the time of the connection permit, where a building permit is not required. The obligation to pay the fee shall run with the land. 
(b)  All funds collected shall be properly identified as water and sewer impact fees and promptly transferred for deposit into the appropriate water and sewer impact fee trust fund to be held in a separate account as determined in section 102-380 and used solely for the purpose specified in this article. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 1028, § 3, 12-11-00; Ord. No. 1185, § 3, 8-8-05) 
Sec. 102-379. - Water and sewer impact fees trust fund established. 
    Separate water and sewer impact fee trust funds are hereby established. Funds withdrawn from these accounts must be used in accordance with the provisions of section 102-380. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-380. - Use of funds. 
(a)  The collecting and administering of governmental funds shall be entitled up to but not more than five percent of the funds collected to compensate for the administrative expenses of collecting and administering the water and sewer impact fees. All remaining funds collected from impact fees shall be used for the purpose of capital improvements and expansion of the water and sewer facilities associated with the systems. Such improvements shall be a necessity for new growth and development in and adjacent to the city corporate limits which impacts the facilities. Funds may also be utilized to retire bonded indebtedness incurred in the construction of projects made necessary by new growth and development. 
(b)  No fund shall be used for periodic or routine maintenance. 
(c)  Funds shall be used exclusively for capital improvements or expansion of facilities for which the funds were collected. Funds shall be expended in the order in which they were collected. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-381. - Refund of fees paid. 
(a)  If a development permit/building permit expires, then the feepayer, his heirs, successors or assigns, shall be entitled to a refund from the water and sewer impact fees paid as a condition for its issuance except that the city shall retain five percent of the fees to offset the costs of refunding. 
(b)  Any funds not expended or encumbered by the end of the calendar quarter immediately following six years from the date the water and sewer impact fee payment was received shall, upon application of the current owner, within 180 calendar days of the expiration of the six-year period, be returned to the current owner with interest at the rate of six percent per annum. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-382. - Exemptions and credits. 
(a)  Exemptions. The following shall be exempted from payment of the water and sewer impact fees: 
(1)  Alterations or expansion of an existing residential dwelling unit where no additional living units are created. 
(2)  The construction of residential accessory buildings or structures which are not dwelling units. 
(3)  The replacement of a destroyed or partially destroyed building or structure with a new building or structure of the same ERU count. 
(4)  Government buildings constructed by the city. An exemption must be claimed by the feepayer at the time of the issuance of a development permit/building permit or mobile home permit. Any exemptions not so claimed shall be deemed waived by the feepayer. 
(b)  Credits. 
(1)  No credit shall be given for site-related improvements. 
(2)  All capital improvements for water and sewer systems required under a city-approved development order for land development activity generating demand on the system, except for these improvements deemed site-related, shall be credited against the water and sewer impact fee assessed against said land development activity. However, the city council reserves the right to determine the amount to be credited by using city-prepared engineering and construction cost estimates. No credit given to land development activity generating demand on the system shall exceed the assessed water and sewer impact fee for said land development activity. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-383. - Fiscal review. 
    The water and sewer impact fee schedule reflected in section 102-377 shall be examined at least once during the budgetary process by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-384. - Penalty and enforcement provision. 
    The city or any feepayer shall have the power to sue in civil court to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Secs. 102-385-102-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XX. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 102-401. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common loadbearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter loadbearing walls is new construction. 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the interpretation by the administrative assistant of any provisions of this article or a request for a variance. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation system. 
    Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
    Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear walls, or breakaway walls. 
    Existing construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before enactment of this article which establishes the area of special flood hazard. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed before the enactment of this article which establishes the area of special flood hazard. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
    Floor means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
    Functionally dependent facility means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking facility or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood processing facilities. The term does not include longterm storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a building. 
    Historic structure means any structure: 
(1)  That is listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register: 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; applicable non-elevation design requirements of Title 44, Code of Federal Regulations, Section 60.3. 
    Manufactured home means a dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site manufacturing facility for installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying that it is built in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 as amended in 1977, '78, '79, '80 and '87. The term "one-family dwelling" shall include manufactured homes when placed on permanent foundations designed for and occupied exclusively by one family. Manufactured homes include two distinguishable types described as follows: 
(1)  Residential design manufactured homes (RDMH), hereinafter referred to as RDMH are manufactured homes meeting residential design standards contained herein manufactured on or after July 13, 1994. 
(2)  Standard design manufactured homes (SDMH), hereinafter referred to as SDMH, are manufactured homes meeting the HUD Code and which have been manufactured on or after June 15, 1976, but not meeting residential design standards contained herein. 
    Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article, the term is synonymous with national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD). 
    National geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    New construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced after enactment of this article which establishes the area of special flood hazard. The term also includes any subsequent improvements to such structure. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; 
(4)  And designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (PL 97-348)), includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally aboveground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other manmade facilities or infrastructures. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building (including electrical, plumbing and heating/air conditioning), taking place during a two year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building. The market value of the building should be: 
(1)  The appraised value of the building prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
(2)  In the case of damage, the value of the building prior to the damage occurring. 
    This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage of the actual repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the code enforcement official, which have been cause for issuance of a citation or condemnation, and which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
    Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
    Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 980, § 5, 6-14-99; Ord. No. 1139, § 2, 11-10-03) 
Sec. 102-402. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-403. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction or substantial improvement; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage; and 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-404. - Objectives. 
    The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(7)  Insure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area; and 
(8)  Comply with the requirements of the national flood insurance program so as to ensure the availability of flood insurance for residents and property owners. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-405. - Application. 
    This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-406. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study, for the city dated subsequent to the enactment of this article, with accompanying maps and other supporting data, and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. In addition, upon annexation to the city, the areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study for the unincorporated county, with accompanying maps and other supporting data, and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared to be apart of this article. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-407. - Establishment of development permit. 
    A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provision of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. "Development" means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-408. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
Sec. 102-409. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
Sec. 102-410. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-411. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-412. - Penalties for violation. 
    Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than 60 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as are necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Secs. 102-413-102-420. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 102-421. - Designation of local administrator. 
    The administrative assistant is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-422. - Permit procedures for building construction. 
    Application of a development permit for constructing or substantially improving a structure shall be made to the administrative assistant on forms furnished by the administrative services department prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, earthen fill, storage of materials or equipment, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor (including basement), or the lowest surface of any heating or air conditioning ductwork installed below the lowest floor, of all proposed buildings or substantial improvements. 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any proposed nonresidential building or substantial improvement will be floodproofed. 
c.  Signed, sealed certificate, separate from the submitted plans, from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed building will meet the floodproofing criteria in section 102-442(2). 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse, swamp, marsh, lake, or pond will be altered, relocated, or created as result of proposed construction. 
e.  Description of the type, extent, and depth of proposed fill and the elevation in relation to mean sea level of the top surface of the fill. 
f.  Description of the type, extent, and depth of proposed excavation in relation to mean sea level. 
g.  Plot plan, to scale, illustrating the locations of all proposed construction, fill, excavating, and other aspects of the development. 
h.  Copy of the proposed stormwater management report and floodplain study, if any, complete with technical supporting data. 
i.  No-rise certification, pursuant to section 102-442(1), if located in a regulatory floodway. 
(2)  Construction stage. Floor elevation or floodproofing certifications. 
a.  Upon placement of the lowest floor it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the administrative assistant a certification of the elevation of the top of the lowest floor, as built, in relation to mean sea level, or the lowest surface of any heating or air conditioning ductwork installed below the lowest floor. Said certification shall be made on a FEMA elevation certificate form No. 81-31, or a form containing at least the same information, and shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same, except that in A zones for which flood elevations have not been provided or determined and in AO zones, the administrative assistant may certify the lowest floor elevation. 
b.  When floodproofing is utilized for a nonresidential building, the permit holder shall submit to the administrative assistant a floodproofing certification at the time the exterior walls are completed to the required floodproofed elevation. Said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same, utilizing the FEMA floodproofing certificate form No. 81-65, or the equivalent. 
c.  Any additional work undertaken prior to submission and approval of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
d.  The administrative assistant shall review the floor elevation survey data or floodproofing certification submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed. 
e.  Failure to submit the elevation or floodproofing certifications or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-423. - Permit procedures for other developments (including subdivisions). 
    Application for a development permit for developments other than the construction of buildings, such as bridges, subdivisions, shopping centers, and other large construction projects that include substantial site development or alteration, shall be made to the administrative assistant on forms furnished by the administrative services department office prior to any development activities, and shall include, but not be limited to, the following plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, earthen fill, storage of materials or equipment, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Plot plan, to scale, illustrating the locations of all proposed construction, fill, excavating, and other aspects of the development. 
b.  Grading and drainage plans. 
c.  Stormwater management plans. 
d.  Floodplain studies, including computer modeling of hydrology. 
e.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse, swamp, marsh, lake, or pond will be altered, relocated, or created as a result of proposed construction. 
f.  Description of the type, extent, and depth of proposed fill and the elevation in relation to mean sea level of the top surface of the fill. 
g.  Description of the type, extent, and depth of proposed excavation in relation to mean sea level. 
h.  Topographic mapping. 
i.  No-rise certification for projects within a regulatory floodway, prepared pursuant to section 102-442(1). 
(2)  Conditions of approval (mapping of flood hazard areas). 
a.  If the project proposes to alter the boundaries of a regulatory floodway or the configuration of the watercourse contained within the floodway, the applicant shall submit the proposed grading and drainage plans, stormwater management plans, floodplain studies, and all supporting computer modeling to the FEMA region IV office for a conditional letter of map revision. The project will not receive final approval until the proposed alteration of the watercourse and/or floodway boundaries has been approved by FEMA. 
b.  If a proposed project will alter the boundaries of the area of special flood hazard as shown on the FEMA flood insurance rate maps, the applicant shall submit the approved grading and drainage plans, stormwater management plans, floodplain studies, and all supporting computer modeling to the FEMA region IV office for a conditional letter of map revision, within 30 days of receiving final approval. 
c.  Within 30 days following completion of the entire project or a phase thereof, the applicant shall submit engineer's certified copies of the final, constructed grading and drainage plans and stormwater management plans to the FEMA region IV office for a issuance of a final letter of map revision. 
d.  The administrative assistant shall be provided copies of all related correspondence, and shall sign the required community acknowledgment form. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-424. - Duties and responsibilities of the local administrator. 
    Duties of the administrative assistant, as the local administrator of this article, shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Advise permittee that additional federal or state permits may be required, and if specific federal or state permit requirements are known, require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the development permit. 
(3)  Notify adjacent communities, the state department of community affairs, division of emergency management; West Florida Regional Planning Council; and Northwest Florida Water Management District prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification along with a copy of the notice to the FEMA region IV office. 
(4)  Assure that the flood-carrying capacity of said watercourse is not diminished by the proposed alteration or relocation. 
(5)  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved buildings, in accordance with section 102-442(2). 
(6)  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or substantially improved buildings have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 102-442(2). 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a particular building, the administrative assistant shall obtain certification from a registered professional engineer or architect, in accordance with section 102-442(2). 
(8)  Determine whether a building or development site is located within an area of special flood hazard by referencing the FEMA flood insurance study and accompanying maps. If detailed topographic mapping is available, the boundary of the area of special flood hazard shall be plotted on such mapping utilizing the base flood elevations provided in the flood insurance study. This more detailed definition of the boundary of the base flood shall be utilized as best available data for the purposes of regulating the area of special flood hazard. If there are significant discrepancies between the boundary as shown on the FEMA maps and the topographic mapping available, the administrative assistant shall so advise the FEMA region IV office. 
(9)  Within numbered A and AE zones along rivers, streams, lakes, swamps, and marshes, determine the appropriate base flood elevation for each individual building site utilizing the flood data tables (for lakes) and the stream profiles contained in the FEMA flood insurance study. The base flood elevations printed on the FEMA maps are illustrative only. The administrative assistant shall interpolate the base flood elevation at a site between two given base flood elevation markers by referring to the stream profiles and measuring the distance of the site upstream or downstream from a cross section shown on the FEMA map. 
(10)  Within coastal AE or numbered A zones, for which stream profiles are not provided, determine the base flood elevations (BFEs) by interpolating along a line perpendicular to and running between the midpoints of two adjoining zones, utilizing the printed BFE shown on the FIRMs as the BFE at the midpoint of each zone. The printed BFEs are the average within each zone. The zone boundaries (gutter lines) of the coastal numbered A and AE zones actually denote an elevation midway between the printed BFE in one zone and that of the adjoining zone. 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and the natural grade of actual field conditions) the administrative assistant shall make the necessary interpretation, and shall utilize the most accurate topographic mapping available. The elevations published in the FEMA flood insurance study, as portrayed in the profile sheets, shall be the ruling reference for delineating the boundary of the floodplain. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. Property may not be excluded from the area of special flood hazard as a result of filling, unless a letter of map revision has been approved by FEMA. 
(12)  Where the administrative assistant has determined all or a portion of a property to be located outside of the flood hazard area, yet it is shown as being within the flood hazard area on the FEMA maps, the applicant shall be advised of the need to obtain a letter of map amendment or revision from the FEMA region IV office and shall be given an application packet utilizing forms provided by FEMA. While the property may be exempt from the requirements of this article, flood insurance purchase will remain mandatory until FEMA authorizes a letter of map amendment or revision. 
(13)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 102-406, then the administrative assistant shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of division 3 of this article. Base flood elevations may be estimated using topographic maps or scientific engineering methodology. Base flood elevation and floodway data shall be developed and provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments (including industrial parks, shopping centers, public facilities, and manufactured home parks and subdivisions) which are greater in size than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres. Such data shall be submitted to FEMA region IV office within 30 days of receipt and acceptance by the community for review as a possible map revision. 
(14)  When a development project will cause a reconfiguration of the flood hazard area due to grading filling, channel alteration or relocation, development of a stormwater management system, or the excavation of lakes, the administrative assistant shall require the applicant to submit and obtain approval from FEMA of a conditional letter of map revision. Where a floodway is being impacted, this must be obtained prior to construction. Following completion of all or each phase of such a development, the administrative assistant shall require the applicant to submit to FEMA the as-built topographic and hydrologic information to obtain a final letter of map revision. 
(15)  The office of the administrative assistant shall serve as the official map repository for FEMA flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and floodway maps, and flood hazard boundary maps for the community, together with letters of map amendment (LOMAs) and letters of map revision (LOMRs). At least one copy of all current and superseded maps, LOMAs and LOMRs shall be maintained for public use and viewing. 
(16)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the administrative assistant and shall be open for public inspection. Copies of all development permits and summary supporting documentation shall be filed by geographic area for ease of coordinating all floodplain development activities. 
(17)  Obtain a no-rise certification, pursuant to section 102-443(1), or a conditional letter of map revision from FEMA prior to issuance of final approval of a proposed development located within a regulatory floodway. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Secs. 102-425-102-440. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 102-441. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(2)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(3)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(4)  New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(5)  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, including ductwork, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(7)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(8)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(9)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building which is in compliance with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if said nonconformity is not furthered, extended, or replaced. 
(10)  The flood-carrying capacity of a watercourse shall not be diminished by any relocation of alteration or bridge construction. 
(11)  Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around structures to guide stormwater runoff away from them. 
(12)  The cumulative effect of proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the flood elevation more than one foot at any point in the community. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-442. - Specific standards for A zone flood hazard areas. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard area, areas denoted with an A prefix on the flood insurance rate map where base flood elevation data have been provided, as set forth in section 102-405 or section 102-424, the following provisions are required, in addition to the general standards of section 102-441: (The A zone designation is assigned to flood hazard areas along streams, swamps, and marshes, as well as to coastal areas inland of the high hazard velocity area, known as the V zone.) 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential building (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, together with all mechanical and electrical equipment, including laundry facilities and food freezers, and including any basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood or one foot above the crown of the adjoining road whichever is highest. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (3) of this section. The floor of an attached garage may be placed below the base flood elevation, provided the openings required in subsection (3) of this section are installed and all mechanical and electrical equipment, including laundry facilities and food freezers, are elevated above the base flood elevation. One switch and outlet connected to a ground-fault interrupt breaker may be installed below the base flood elevation, and all construction below that elevation shall be of flood-resistant materials. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or nonresidential building (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, together with all mechanical and electrical equipment, and including any basement and/or ductwork installed below the lowest floor, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation or one foot above the crown of the adjoining road, whichever is highest. Buildings located in all A zones may be floodproofed to an elevation one foot above the required lowest floor elevation noted above, in lieu of being elevated, provided that all areas of the building below the required elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in subsection (7) of this section. The floor of an attached garage or loading dock may be placed below the base flood elevation, provided the openings required in subsection (3) of this section are installed and all mechanical and electrical equipment are elevated above the base flood elevation. One switch and outlet connected to a ground-fault breaker may be installed below the base flood elevation, and all construction below that elevation shall be of flood resistant materials. 
(3)  Elevated buildings. New construction or substantial improvements of elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood elevation shall be designed to preclude finished living space and shall be designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings (in walls or doors) having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot abovegrade; and, 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both direction. 
b.  Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
d.  Use of such enclosed areas shall be limited to parking, storage, and building access. 
(4)  Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. 
a.  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved, together with all mechanical and electrical equipment, on individual lots or parcels, in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, or in substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, must meet all the requirements for new residential construction contained in subsections (1) and (3) of this section, including installation on permanent foundation systems, elevation, and anchoring. At minimum, a permanent foundation system shall constitute reinforced piers placed on poured footings, or other foundation elements of equivalent strength. Any additions to manufactured homes subject to provisions of this subsection shall also be considered new construction since they must be supported by an independent foundation system. Additions must therefore comply with the provisions contained in subsections (1) and (3) of this section, including elevation. This may necessitate elevating of an existing manufactured home to match the required elevation of the addition. 
b.  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision or individual lots or parcels must be elevated so that: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated on a permanent foundation no lower than the level of the base flood elevation or one foot above the crown of the adjoining road, whichever is greater. 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength, of no less than 36 inches in height abovegrade. 
3.  The manufactured home must be securely anchored to the adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
4.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision or individual lots or parcels on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, any manufactured home placed or substantially improved must meet the standards of subsections (4)b.1 and 3 of this section. 
5.  Any additions to manufactured homes subject to provisions of this subsection shall be considered new construction subject to the provisions contained in subsections (1) and (3) of this section including installation on permanent foundation systems, elevation, and anchoring. 
c.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
2.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new construction, including anchoring and elevation requirements of subsections (4)a or b.1 and 3 of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached structures. 
(5)  Accessory structures. Structures that represent a minimal investment and that are subordinate to and accessory to the primary structure or use on the property (e.g. storage sheds, detached garages, gazebos, and barns) may be exempted from the elevation requirement of subsection (2) of this section, provided the following criteria are met: 
a.  The structure is not used for human habitation, including occupancy as a workplace, for extended periods of time; 
b.  The structure is designed and constructed so as to have a low potential for damage during a flood (e.g. using flood resistant materials as provided in FEMA Technical Bulletin No. 88-2, and any subsequent revisions thereto); 
c.  The structure shall be located on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters (e.g. parallel to a stream, perpendicular to the ocean); 
d.  The structure is firmly anchored to prevent flotation, per section 102-441(1); 
e.  All electrical service, heating/cooling equipment, and other mechanical or electrical equipment is either elevated above the elevation required by subsection (1) of this section, or is floodproofed. One electrical switch and outlet connected to a ground-fault interrupt breaker is allowed below the base flood elevation. 
(6)  Temporary structures. Certain types of structures (e.g. fruit stands, construction site offices) may be sited temporarily on property without having to comply with the general standards of section 102-441, or the elevation standard of subsection (1) of this section, provided the following criteria are met: 
a.  The structure is mobile, or can be made so, and is capable of being removed from the site with a minimum of four hours warning. 
b.  The structure does not remain on the property for 180 days or more. 
c.  The applicant submits a plan for the removal of the structure, containing the following documentation: 
1.  The name, address, phone number and emergency contact point of the individual responsible for the removal of the temporary structure. 
2.  The time at which the structure will be removed (i.e. a minimum of 72 hours in advance of the projected landfall of a hurricane). 
3.  A copy of a contract or other suitable instrument with a trucking company to ensure the availability of removal of the structure when needed, together with the name, address, and emergency phone number of the responsible trucking company agent. 
4.  Designation, accompanied by documentation (e.g. signed consent of the property owner), of a site outside the special flood hazard area to which the temporary structure will be moved. 
5.  Signatures of the applicant, property owner on which the temporary structure will be placed, and owner of the temporary structure, agreeing to abide by the terms of the removal plan. 
A temporary development permit shall be issued when a temporary structure is approved, and the expiration date shall be clearly marked on the face of the permit. The original copy of the removal plan shall be attached to the permit, and the documentation shall be kept on file in the administrator's office for a period of at least five years. A copy of the permit, together with the removal plan, shall be provided to the local emergency management coordinator. 
(7)  Substantially improved buildings. Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building (including electrical, plumbing and heating/air conditioning), taking place during a two year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building. Substantially improved buildings must be elevated and otherwise brought into conformance with the requirements for new construction contained in this division. In determining substantial improvement, the administrative assistant shall utilize data for the market value of the structure and the value of the improvements that are justifiably comparable. Substantial improvement calculations shall include the cost of labor and mechanical, electrical and plumbing systems, cabinetry, finishes, and any other improvements that will be permanently affixed to the structure, except for exterior decks and porches. If the improvement project is conducted in phases, the total of all costs associated with each phase, beginning with issuance of the first permit, shall be utilized to determine whether substantial improvement has occurred. Interpretation and determination of substantial improvements shall rely on applicable FEMA publications and policy guidance. 
a.  Rehabilitations, reconstructions, and renovations. When an existing building is rehabilitated, reconstructed, or renovated, with no or only minimal additions, and the total improvement costs meet the definition of substantial (equal or exceed 50 percent of the value of the structure), the existing structure must be elevated and otherwise brought into conformance with this division. 
b.  Lateral additions. When the substantial improvement is a lateral addition to an existing structure, only the addition is required to be elevated and conform with the standards of this division, unless the common wall between the existing building and the addition is substantially removed or improvements are being made to the existing structure which, independently from the addition, equal or exceed fifty percent of the value of the structure. In such cases, the lateral addition is deemed to constitute only one part of a reconstruction or renovation, and both the existing structure and the addition must conform to this division. 
c.  Vertical additions. When the substantial improvement is a vertical addition to an existing structure, the improvement is classified as a renovation or reconstruction, and the existing structure must be elevated and brought into conformance with this division. 
(8)  Improvements to post-FIRM structures. Any improvements made to buildings for which permits were issued on or after the effective date of the flood insurance rate map, post-FIRM buildings, shall conform to the standards of this division. 
(9)  Historic buildings. Any improvements to historic buildings may be exempted from one or all of the standards contained in this division, provided the request for an exemption is approved as a variance, as provided in section 102-461 of this article and the proposed improvements are certified by a certified local government or the state historic preservation officer as maintaining the historical integrity and classification of the building. 
(10)  Functionally-dependent structures. Functionally-dependent structures may be exempted from one or all of the standards contained in article IV, provided that a request for an exemption is approved as a variance, as provided in section 102-461 of this article. 
(11)  Standards along streams with no floodways. Where no floodway has been designated along a stream in an A zone for which base flood elevations have been provided on the flood insurance rate map, no encroachments, including fill material or structures shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
At a minimum, in both A zones with base flood elevations, and in unnumbered A zones, no encroachments, including fill material or structures shall be located within a distance of the stream bank equal to five times the width of the stream at the top of bank, or 20 feet each side from top of bank, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 980, § 6, 6-14-99) 
Sec. 102-443. - Specific standards for floodways. 
    Located within the A zone areas of special flood hazard established in sections 102-405 and 102-406, are areas designated as floodways. The floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and create the potential for erosion. Protection of a floodway is critical for maintaining the ability of the stream to carry the 100-year flood. The following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments shall be prohibited, including fill, new construction (including enclosed accessory structures), substantial improvements and other developments unless certification (with supporting technical data) by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge. This certification shall be based on an evaluation utilizing methodologies specified by the FEMA region IV office. No development will be allowed that causes more than a 1.0000 ft. rise in the base flood elevation. 
(2)  If the above subsection (1) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this section. 
(3)  A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision provided the anchoring standards of section 102-441(2), the elevation standards of section 102-442(1) and the encroachment standards of subsection (1) of this section, are met. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 980, § 7, 6-14-99) 
Sec. 102-444. - Standards for unnumbered A zones. 
    Located within the A zone areas of special flood hazard established in section 102-422 are areas denoted with the letter A with no suffix, referred to as unnumbered A zones. These are areas where special flood hazards exist but where no base flood data has been provided. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material or structures shall be located within a distance of the stream bank equal to five times the width of the stream at the top of bank or 20 feet each side from top of bank, whichever is greater. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings or manufactured homes shall be elevated or floodproofed in accordance with the design standards of section 102-442, to: 
a.  Elevations established in accordance with section 102-424(11), if available; or 
b.  At least three feet above highest adjacent natural grade. 
(3)  For all development projects, including mobile home parks and subdivisions, greater than five acres or 50 lots, whichever is lesser, base flood elevation and floodway data shall be provided in accordance with section 102-424(13), as part of the development proposal. 
(4)  Accessory or temporary structures shall be permitted per section 102-442(5) and (6), respectively. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-445. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 102-406, are areas designated AO on the flood insurance rate maps as shallow flooding areas. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential buildings shall conform to the design standards of section 102-442, and shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated, at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential buildings shall conform to the design standards of section 102-442, and shall: 
a.  Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement shall be elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade; or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely floodproofed to or above that level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  Accessory or temporary structures shall be permitted per section 102-442(5) or (6), respectively. 
(4)  No encroachments, including fill material or structures shall be located within a distance of the stream bank equal to five times the width of the stream at the top of bank or 20 feet each side from top of bank, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-446. - Standards for subdivision proposals (including nonresidential). 
    The following applies: 
(1)  All subdivision proposals, including industrial and commercial subdivisions, shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(2)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(3)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(4)  Base flood elevation and floodway data shall be provided in accordance with section 102-424(13) for subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including shopping centers and manufactured home parks and subdivisions) which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres. 
(5)  The base flood boundary, floodway and/or V zone boundary if applicable, and the applicable base flood elevation for the building site on each lot shall be clearly marked on all recorded subdivision plats be they for residential, commercial, or industrial use. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Secs. 102-447-102-460. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 102-461. - Application of division. 
    The following applies: 
(1)  The board of adjustment as established by the city council shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(2)  The board of adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the administrative assistant in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(3)  Any person, with standing, aggrieved or adversely affected by the decision of the board of adjustment may appeal such decision to the Circuit Court in and for Okaloosa County, Florida, as provided by law. Nothing herein shall obviate an aggrieved or adversely affected party from compliance with F.S. § 163.3215, where applicable. 
(4)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continuing designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(5)  In rendering decisions on such applications, the board of adjustment shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this article, and the: 
a.  Danger that materials may be swept onto other land to the injury of others; 
b.  Danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
c.  Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
d.  Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
e.  Necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, in the case of a functionally dependent facility; 
f.  Availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
g.  Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
h.  Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
i.  Safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
j.  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
k.  Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
(6)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above, and the purposes of this article, the board of adjustment may render a decision and attach such conditions to the granting of variances by the board of adjustment as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(7)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(8)  Conditions for variances: 
a.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and in the instance of a historical building, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building; 
b.  Variances shall only be issued upon a: 
1.  Showing of good and sufficient cause. 
2.  Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship. 
3.  Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
c.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the building is to be built and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
d.  The administrative assistant shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Secs. 102-462-102-480. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXI. - SUBDIVISION REGULATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; planning board, § 2-61 et seq.; subdivision of land, § 2-69; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; stormwater management, § 30-51; landscape development, ch. 42; solid waste and recycling services, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks, and certain other public places, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 90. 
State Law reference- Platting, F.S. § 177.011 et seq.; comprehensive planning, F.S. § 163.3161 adoption of subdivision regulations, F.S. § 163.3194. 

Sec. 102-481. - Purpose. 
    This article sets forth the requirements for application and review of subdivision development plans submitted for approval. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-482. - Building permit required. 
    No development activity may be commenced without a building permit and no building permit may be issued without a final development order or land development certificate issued by the planning director or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-483. - Preapplication procedures. 
(a)  Prior to filing for a formal and scheduled review of proposed subdivision plans or proposed site plans, if required by this chapter, the applicant should request the director or his designee to set a time for discussion of the proposed plans. During the discussion, checklists will be provided to the applicant so that the applicant will have quick and ready access to requirements imposed by this article. 
(b)  Comments made by any persons associated with the city during any preapplication conference or discussion shall not be construed as either approval or rejection of the proposed development or development plans. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-484. - Subdivision regulations and procedures. 
    The public health, safety, comfort, economy, order, appearance, convenience, and general welfare require the harmonious, orderly and progressive development of land within the state and its incorporated municipalities and counties. In furtherance of this general purpose, municipalities by F.S. chs. 163, 166 and 177, are authorized and empowered to adopt, amend or revise and enforce measures relating to land subdivision. It is the intent of this article to secure or to ensure: 
(1)  The establishment of standards of subdivision design and innovation which will encourage and lead to the development of sound and economically stable communities, and the creation of healthful living environments. 
(2)  Installation by the land developer to prescribed standards, those necessary improvements which shall not become a charge on the citizens and taxpayers in other portions of the city. 
(3)  The efficient, adequate, and economic supply of services to existing and new land developments. 
(4)  The prevention of traffic hazards and the establishment of safe and convenient means for the circulation of traffic, both vehicular and pedestrian, within new land developments and from new land developments into and from established areas. 
(5)  That for those lands subject to periodic or seasonal flooding, subdivision and development shall include provision for protective flood control measures and drainage facilities. 
(6)  Regulation of land subdivision is intended to aid in promoting land development in accordance with orderly physical patterns; to encourage orderly, timely, optimum and compatible land development. 
(7)  It is the further intent of the city to cooperate with developers working in the city in providing the mechanism by which adequate community facilities can be provided for all citizens. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-485. - General requirements for subdivisions. 
(a)  No person shall subdivide any land within the city nor shall any person begin any land disturbing activity or construction work in any subdivision, with the exception of exclusions indicated in section 102-497 of this article, unless the requirements of this article are met. 
(b)  In any subdivision for which compliance with this article is required, no certificate of land use, no building, electrical, or plumbing permit shall be issued by any public official until the subdivision has been approved, the final plat recorded, or complies with the facilities requirements of section 102-492. 
(c)  No road, right-of-way, or easement on or across divided property, shall be accepted or maintained by the city unless a final plat conveying such road is approved as provided herein. 
(d)  Any person who sells or offers to sell any parcel of land not in compliance with this article (except as provided in section 102-497), violates or refuses to comply with, or resists enforcement of this article or statutory requirements of F.S. chs. 163, 166, and 177 shall be subject to the penalties specified in section 1-11 of the city Code. 
(e)  The requirements of this article are in addition to any applicable federal and state regulations. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 102-486. - Preliminary plat approval process. 
(a)  Preapplication conference. Before preparing the preliminary plat, the developer should request a conference with the administrative services department to discuss plans for a subdivision. See figure A. 
Figure A 
PROCEDURAL FLOW DIAGRAM 
(b)  Preliminary plat. 
(1)  A preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision conforming to the design principles specified in section 102-487 of this article and the preliminary plat requirements specified in section 102-488 of this article shall be prepared for the developer by a professional surveyor and mapper and registered engineer. All plats shall be considered "preliminary plats" during the review process. A plat shall only become a "final plat" after approval and acceptance of dedications (if any) by the city council, and recording in the official records of the clerk of circuit court. 
(2)  The developer shall file with the administrative services department written application for approval of the preliminary plat with four copies of the preliminary plat and appropriate review fees as established by city Code. The submittal shall include a development narrative describing the proposed stormwater management system, wetlands protection provisions, recreation and conservation provisions, potable water supply, traffic impact and circulation. At the option of the developer, a copy of the covenants and restrictions may also be submitted for early review. The administrative services department shall date stamp all submittals and distribute them appropriately. 
(3)  The administrative services department shall review the preliminary plat prior to scheduling a review by the technical review committee (TRC) as outlined in article II of this chapter. 
(4)  The technical review committee findings and recommendations will be presented to the local planning agency for consideration during their review of the preliminary plat. 
(5)  The local planning agency findings and recommendations will be represented to the city council for consideration and action. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 988, § 2, 1-22-01) 
Sec. 102-487. - General principals of design and minimum requirements for the layout of subdivisions. 
(a)  Generally. In laying out a subdivision the developer shall comply with the design principles and requirements set out in this section. 
(b)  Dedication, ingress and egress. A developer shall provide adequate ingress and egress to the tract to be subdivided, including all necessary roads, easements, swales and rights-of-way, as well as drainage structures. An all-weather access shall lead to an established and publicly maintained road system. The developer shall prepare necessary deeds, agreements, and easements for the ingress and egress system and shall attempt to acquire such rights of easements. However, the city may assist in acquisition of such easements when such acquisition is in the public interest or governmental action is necessary to acquire the property and the developer advances all costs and expenses incurred by the city in taking such action. 
(c)  The street and block layout. 
(1)  Streets. The street layout of the subdivision shall be in general conformity with a plan for the most advantageous development of adjoining areas and the entire neighborhood. This shall apply to all streets, including private streets. 
a.  Where appropriate to the design, proposed streets shall be continuous and in alignment with existing, planned, or platted streets with which they are to connect. 
b.  Proposed streets may be required to extend to the boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided where such an extension is required to connect with streets in an existing, platted, or planned subdivision. The extension or connection requirement by the city will be based upon traffic circulation or public safety issues and compatibility of adjacent land uses. 
c.  In a proposed subdivision of 50 lots or more adjacent to an existing or platted subdivision where extension of proposed streets to the boundaries would dead end with no feasible street connections, there shall be at least two entrance streets into or a loop street through the proposed subdivision. 
d.  If the proposed subdivision is adjacent to an undeveloped area, at least one proposed street shall terminate at a boundary line of the undeveloped area. A temporary turning circle shall be required at the end of that street or streets with an outside diameter of 60 feet. This requirement may be waived if the traffic pattern of the subdivision contains more than one exit to a city or county road or if traffic circulation or public safety requirements do not dictate a street terminus at a boundary line of the undeveloped area. 
e.  If an existing half-width public or private street or other right-of-way easement is parallel and contiguous with the boundary of a proposed subdivision, the other half-width right-of-way will be dedicated in the proposed subdivision and shall be the width necessary to create a right-of-way along the entire boundary of the proposed subdivision which meets minimum width requirements as set forth in article VIII of this chapter. If the additional right-of-way required to continue the existing dedicated road or other easement in a continuous, orderly manner is not in the proposed subdivision, the developer will prepare the agreement or easement for dedicating the additional right-of-way required and will attempt to obtain such right-of-way. However, the city may assist in acquisition of such right-of-way when in the public interest, where governmental action is necessary to acquire the property and the developer advances all costs and expenses incurred by the city in taking such action. 
f.  A cul-de-sac or local dead-end street shall not exceed 1,320 feet in length. 
(2)  Blocks. 
a.  Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots of appropriate depth, unless prevented by exceptional topography or other physical conditions. In the case of primary and secondary highways and collector streets, where it may be desirable to limit direct access to the major arterial, through lots may be approved provided that a suitable nonaccess easement is recorded on that portion of the lots directly adjacent to the primary, secondary, or collector street. The length of blocks shall not generally exceed 1,320 feet. 
b.  In any block over 600 feet in length and where necessary for a school or other pedestrian generator, the administrative services department may require that a pedestrian way, not less than 20 feet wide, be dedicated near the center and entirely across such block. 
(d)  Right-of-way (streets, alleys, and easements for utilities and drainage). 
(1)  All right-of-ways shall conform to design standards as specified in article VIII of this chapter. 
(2)  All right-of-ways shall be installed at the expense of the developer and shall be warranted for a period of 18 months and shall be guaranteed by a 24 month defect security, except that the developer shall not be responsible for the expense of paving on any nonaccess highway or primary thoroughfare, secondary or collector street accepted for maintenance by the city. If the road has not been accepted for maintenance by the city the developer shall bring the road into compliance with city standards. 
(e)  Lots. Every lot shall conform with the appropriate requirements of article VII of this chapter and meet state requirements for on site treatment of sanitary sewage when connection to the city sewage treatment system is not available. 
(f)  Design innovations. Upon receipt of certification by the registered professional engineer of the developer, the administrative services department may recommend to the city council experimental methods in the design of a subdivision and in installation of improvements. Where such experimental methods and design innovations are authorized, the developer may be required to post a defect security in the amount and manner prescribed by law covering any maintenance for improvements which may be accepted by the city. Such security shall become effective upon acceptance of the final plat and shall be in an amount determined by the administrative services department to be sufficient to cover 50 percent of the initial cost of the improvements. The warranty period shall run for 18 months on street paving, water, sewer or storm drainage improvements and shall be guaranteed by a 24-month defect security. 
(g)  Nonresidential subdivisions. Nonresidential subdivisions are restricted types of planned industrial/commercial developments, districts or parks. Each shall be developed according to a comprehensive plan which shall include detailed provisions for types of industries, public access, access streets, interior streets, truck loading docks, off-street parking, traffic circulation, drainage, utilities, including fire protection and proposed covenants and restrictions. Covenants and restrictions shall be incorporated as legal requirements in deeds of sale or leases, and provide for effective control of the land, buildings and industrial/commercial operations which the nonresidential subdivision is designed to attract. Block planning and phase development may be included in the comprehensive plan. 
(1)  The development plans for a nonresidential subdivision with supporting documents shall be reviewed by the administrative services department. 
(2)  The administrative services department may recommend to the city council modifications from the standard terms of the subdivision regulations with conditions and safeguards which will secure substantially the objectives of this article while providing flexibility for development. If approved, any modifications from the standard terms of this article shall be noted on the final plat prior to recording. 
(3)  Improvements within a nonresidential subdivision may be governed by the approved development plan rather than by other standards specified in this article. After approval, no changes may be made in the approved development plan except that minor variations, extensions, alterations or modifications consistent with the purposes and intent of the approved development plan may be authorized by the city council on the recommendation of the administrative services department. All other modifications of the approved development plan shall require the same procedures as the original approval. 
(h)  Planned unit developments. Where a development is submitted as a planned unit development (PUD), the applicant shall submit a development plan and supporting documents indicating the concepts and methods of development to be used. After detailed study of the PUD, the administrative services department may meet with the developer to conduct a project review which should include, but not be limited to, the following subjects: 
(1)  Provisions for infrastructure improvements such as water, sewer, electrical, gas, storm drainage and traffic circulation. 
(2)  Location and dimensions of all rights-of-way for streets, pedestrian ways, utilities, watercourses, green ways and easements, as well as proposed subdivision of land. 
(3)  Areas proposed to be conveyed, dedicated or reserved for parks, parkways, playgrounds, school sites, public buildings and similar public or semipublic uses. 
(4)  Covenants, conditions, restrictions, agreements and grants which govern the use, maintenance and continued protection of the planned unit development in any of its common areas. 
(5)  Specified standards applicable to various portions of the planned unit development including modification of subdivision standards approved by the administrative services department. 
(i)  Development plan. After study and review of the development plan, the administrative services department shall make appropriate recommendations to the city council. If approved, any modifications from the standard terms of the subdivision article shall be noted on the final plat prior to recording. All construction of improvements within the planned unit development will be governed by the approved development plan, rather than by other standards specified in this article. However, all roads must be curbed and paved and said requirement shall not be waived. After approval, no changes may be made in the development plan except that minor variations, extensions, alterations or modifications of structures or other improvements which are consistent with the purposes and intent of the improved development plan may be authorized by the city council on the recommendation of the administrative services department. All other modifications of the development plan shall require the same procedures as the original planned unit development plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 988, § 3, 1-22-01; Ord. No. 1337, § 2, 6-25-07) 
Sec. 102-488. - Preliminary plat requirements. 
(a)  Preliminary plat preparation. The preliminary plat of a proposed residential or nonresidential subdivision shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a professional surveyor and mapper. The sheet size shall be 24 inches x 36 inches. 
(b)  Vicinity sketch. A vicinity sketch of a minimum scale of 400 feet to the inch shall accompany the preliminary plat. Such a vicinity sketch shall show all adjacent existing subdivisions and their names, the tract lines of acreage parcels of land, and all street and alley lines immediately adjoining the proposed subdivision, and between it and the nearest highway or thoroughfares and zoning and land use designations. The sketch shall be referenced to easily recognized physical features. 
(c)  Scale. The minimum horizontal scale of the preliminary plat shall be 100 feet to the inch. 
(d)  Preliminary plat information. The preliminary plat shall conform to the requirements set forth in F.S. ch. 177 and in addition shall include and show the following features and information: 
(1)  The approximate dimensions of proposed lots including the area of each in square feet. 
(2)  Special flood hazard areas shall be shown where the proposed subdivision or any part thereof is in an area subject to 100-year flooding. 
(3)  Land use designations and zoning classifications of adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 988, § 4, 1-22-01) 
Sec. 102-489. - Subdivision construction plans, approval process (required improvements). 
(a)  After approval of the preliminary plat, the developer shall submit to the administrative services department four sets of construction plans conforming to the requirements of section 102-490 of this article with a letter requesting approval. A complete set of drainage plans must be included in the construction plans, as well as a geotechnical report, prepared by a registered engineer, with technical specifications, drainage calculations and erosion control plans, in accordance with the requirements of section 102-491 of this article. 
(b)  Subdivision construction plans, and preliminary and final plats require official council action prior to issuance of development orders. 
(c)  The procedure for approval of the construction plans shall be the same as the procedure for approval of preliminary plats as set forth in section 102-486. 
(d)  Subdivision construction plans may be submitted for review simultaneously with the preliminary plat for proposed subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 988, § 5, 1-22-01) 
Sec. 102-490. - Construction plans; minimum requirements. 
    Construction plans for improvements to be installed shall be prepared by an engineer, whose embossed seal shall appear on such plans. Complete detailed drainage and erosion control plans shall be included. A vicinity sketch referenced to an easily recognized land mark shall be included. All sheets of the construction plans shall be 24 inches × 36 inches in size. These plans shall be revised as necessary and shall be approved by the city. Plans may be submitted to the administrative services department simultaneous with the request for preliminary plat approval as set forth in section 102-486. After approval, the planning director shall issue a development order authorizing installation of improvements. Copies of all required regulatory agency permits shall be provided to the city before improvements are installed. 
(1)  Plans and profiles. Plans and profiles of each proposed street, including private streets, at a horizontal scale of 50 feet or less to the inch, and vertical scale of five feet or less to the inch, with existing and tentative grades indicated; including plans and profiles of proposed sanitary sewers, swales, water mains, storm sewers, with grades, length and sizes indicated for each. Where the height of the water table is less than two feet below ground level or is uncertain and the public services department requires a typical boring for each lot, these heights shall be shown. 
(2)  Streets and utilities. Typical cross sections of each proposed street, including private streets, at a horizontal scale of ten feet or less to the inch, and vertical scale of five feet or less to the inch at a minimum interval of 100 feet or less, showing the width of pavement, the rights-of-way, ribbon curbing, the location and width of sidewalks when installed, and the location of the utility mains, storm sewers, swales with proposed direction of flow, retention and distribution of stormwater in accordance with city, state, and federal laws, articles and regulations and existing grade. Location of existing sewers, water mains, culverts with pipe sizes and other underground structures within and immediately adjacent to the tract. The city may reduce the required number of cross sections in subdivisions utilizing curbs and gutters. 
(3)  Grading. A complete grading and erosion control plan shall be submitted as part of the construction plans with location of any protected trees within the subdivision. 
(4)  Benchmarks. A minimum of two benchmarks referenced to USCG datum shall be shown on the plans, not more than 1,500 feet apart. Benchmarks shall not be required at closer intervals than 600 feet. Plans shall indicate the location, elevation and description of all benchmarks to include section, township, and range reference with departures and distances to location. 
(5)  Sidewalks. All sidewalks constructed in the city shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  The concrete shall have a minimum strength of 2,500 pounds per square inch (PSI). 
b.  The minimum width of sidewalks shall not be less than four feet. 
c.  The sidewalk shall not be less than four inches thick. At driveways a minimum thickness of six inches or four inches with woven wire fabric reinforcement shall be required. 
d.  All sidewalks shall be constructed with one-fourth inch in 12 inches slope. 
e.  One-half inch expansion joints shall be at 30-foot intervals or less, with control joints at ten-foot intervals. 
f.  Location of proposed improvements such as sidewalks, bikeways, or bridle paths shall be included on construction plans. 
(6)  Drainage plans. The developer shall submit drainage calculations and plans based on a critical duration storm, up to, and including a 25-year, 24-hour storm event. The calculations and plans shall be in accordance with specifications as required by the administrative services department and shall include design and performance standards pursuant to F.A.C. section 17-25.025 and section 17-3.051. Storm events and duration shall be based on FDOT, zone 1, rainfall intensity duration curves. The plans shall include all necessary calculations and documentation demonstrating the adequacy of the proposed facilities. The administrative services department may require that the design of drainage construction for major channels or under major roads be predicated upon a more severe storm. Compliance with rules and regulations of state and federal regulatory agencies, including, but not limited to, the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP) and the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), is the responsibility of the developer and/or his engineer and proof of such compliance in the form of permits (when required by the above agencies) must be submitted prior to the approval of such drainage plans. 
(7)  Drainage plan provisions. Drainage plans shall include provisions which incorporate natural drainage features into the overall drainage pattern when such incorporation does not negatively impact sensitive natural resources. Channeling runoff directly into water bodies or functioning wetlands is prohibited. Calculations for capacity of retention or detention facilities shall indicate the capacity of the facility to retain or detain at least the first inch of runoff for the design storm event. Detention or retention facilities located adjacent to water bodies or functioning wetlands shall be designed so that the shorelines are sinuous rather than straight and so that water/land interfaces are curvilinear and maximize space for growth of littoral vegetation. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 988, § 6, 1-22-01) 
Sec. 102-491. - Minimum requirements for the installation of improvements in subdivisions. 
(a)  Generally. All of the improvements required under this article shall be constructed according to plans approved by the city with respect to construction details, subject to inspection and certified testing laboratory data supplied by the developer. 
(b)  Road and street construction. Rights-of-way and drainage easements shall be cleared as required and left in a clean and neat condition and shall be sodded with grass or shall otherwise be protected as required by the public services department. Standard specifications, where referred to herein, shall mean "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, Florida State Department of Transportation," as they may be amended from time to time. Applicable sections of the standard specifications shall apply to all streets. These specifications are on file with the public services department. 
(1)  Stabilized subgrade. Subgrade stabilization shall be done in accordance with applicable portions of the standard specifications. Unsuitable materials such as stumps, roots, muck, etc., will be removed to at least a depth of two feet below the subgrade. The subgrade and shoulders shall be stabilized to a depth of six inches and to the width of three feet beyond the curb or pavement edge as appropriate. The stabilized area shall be free of muck, roots and other objectionable materials. The subgrade and shoulders shall be stabilized to obtain a minimum limerock bearing ratio of 40 and compacted to a minimum of 96 percent and an average of 98 percent of maximum density as determined by modified AASHO T180. 
(2)  Excavation and embankment. Excavation and embankment shall be done in accordance with the appropriate section of the standard specifications to lines and grades indicated in the construction plans. 
(3)  Concrete curb and gutter. When required, streets and roads shall be constructed with concrete ribbon curbs (see article VIII of this chapter). Concrete curb and gutters or lay back curb shall be required if deemed necessary by the city and designed to the specifications in article VIII of this chapter. 
(4)  Base. Base shall be constructed of the materials shown on the plans, which materials shall conform to the specifications below and as approved by the public services department. Thickness and density of the base shall be measured under direction of the public services department at intervals of not less than 200 feet, in holes through the base of not less than three inches in diameter. Where the compacted base is deficient by more than one-half inch, the contractor shall correct such areas by scarifying and adding material for a distance of 100 feet in each direction from the edge of the deficient area, and the affected area shall be brought to the required state of compaction and to the required thickness and cross section. The following is required: 
a.  Sand-clay base. The material shall conform to the appropriate section of the standard specifications and shall be primed and constructed according to the appropriate section of the standard specifications. 
b.  Shell stabilized base. The materials shall conform to the appropriate section of the standard specifications and shall be primed and constructed according to the appropriate section of the standard specifications. 
c.  Limerock stabilized base. The material shall conform to the appropriate section of the standard specifications and shall be primed and constructed according to the appropriate section of the standard specifications. 
d.  Sand-asphalt base. The material used shall conform to the appropriate section of the standard specifications and shall be tacked and constructed in accordance with the appropriate section of the standard specifications. 
e.  Soil cement. The material used shall conform to the appropriate section of the standard specifications and shall be primed and constructed in accordance with the appropriate section of the standard specifications. 
(5)  Type S-1 surfacing asphalt. An asphaltic concrete surface material one and one-half inches thick after compaction shall be required on all roads and two inches thick after compaction shall be required on all culs-de-sac. The surface shall be type S-1 asphaltic concrete and shall meet all specifications as given in the appropriate section of the standard specifications, or equivalent, as determined by the public services department. The surface shall be constructed in accordance with the appropriate section of the standard specifications. 
(6)  Other surfacing. Other materials may be used, subject to approval of specifications by the city. 
(7)  Inspection. During the construction, a field inspection of each phase will be made by the public services department. It is the developer's responsibility to notify the public services department 24 hours before a phase of construction will be ready for inspection and testing. 
(8)  Required inspection notifications-Public services department. 
a.  Erosion control measures. 
b.  Subgrade. 
c.  Base and prime. 
d.  Curbing and pavement. 
e.  Pipe after joints are cemented or secured. 
f.  Pipes at backfill. 
g.  Headwall-footings. 
(c)  Street name markers and traffic control devices. Street name markers and traffic control devices shall be installed in accordance with specifications of the public services department to include but not be limited to speed limit signs, stop signs, striping and stop bars. 
(d)  Water supply and sewerage. 
(1)  City and noncity operated systems. 
a.  Water distribution system. Where a central system is provided, the subdivision shall be provided with a complete water distribution system, including fire hydrants, on water lines adequate to serve the area being platted. In areas that have, or plan to have, two or more dwelling units per acre, a distribution system capable of delivering the equivalent of a six-inch PVC pipe shall be installed and connected to an existing six-inch water main (or larger). Water distribution systems shall be in compliance with applicable AWWA and NFPA standards and the City of Crestview Water and Sewer Manual. Nominal six-inch hydrants with standard hydrant threads shall be installed at not greater than 500-foot spacing in residential subdivisions and not greater than 300-foot spacing in commercial subdivisions. 
b.  Sewage system. In every subdivision, provision shall be made for the satisfactory disposal of sanitary sewage. Where a sewer utility system is available pursuant to definition in state statutes, a central sewer collection system shall be installed by the developer for connection to the sewer utility system. 
c.  Level of service standard. It is the responsibility of the applicant for subdivision approval and/or developer of such subdivision to provide the city with documentation which provides calculations to illustrate what impact the subdivision will have on the water and sewer level of service standards. Calculations shall be provided on forms provided by the city. 
(2)  Stubs. Where sewer services are required by this article, stubs on sewer services for each lot shall be provided to a point at least ten feet beyond the curb. Stubs shall be provided at a reasonable depth. The utilities contractor shall record measurements of stubs from the nearest manhole to each lateral and provide these measurements to the public services department. Stubs shall be inspected and approved by the city prior to covering with soil. Locations of laterals and stubs shall be indicated by temporary markings on the curb or pavement. 
(3)  Inspection of water distribution and sewage systems. During the construction, a field inspection of each phase will be made of all components of potable water distribution systems and sanitary sewage systems, to include lift stations, by the public services department and fire department. It is the developer's responsibility to notify the public services department and fire department 24 hours before a phase of construction will be ready for inspection and testing. 
Testing of water distribution systems shall be in compliance with the applicable AWWA and NFPA standards. In the event of a conflict between these two standards the most stringent shall apply. 
(4)  Required inspection notifications of water distribution systems-Public services department and fire department. 
a.  Diameter of pipe. 
b.  Type of pipe. 
c.  Depth of installation. 
d.  Proximity of other utilities. 
e.  Thrust blocks. 
f.  Hydro-static pressure test. 
g.  Flow test. 
(5)  Required inspection notifications of sewage systems public services department. 
a.  Diameter of pipe. 
b.  Type of pipe. 
c.  Depth of installation. 
d.  Leak test. 
e.  Telemetry. 
f.  Pump start up by factory representative. 
(e)  Drainage. 
(1)  Drainage system. The developer shall provide an adequate drainage system for any subdivision, including all necessary swales, ditches, canals, greenbelts, outfalls, box culverts, pipe, retention basins, etc. The drainage system shall be designed to accommodate off-site and on-site contributions. The system shall lead to a positive drainage outlet. The developer shall prepare the necessary agreements and easements for disposition of surface waters beyond the limits of the subdivision and shall attempt to acquire necessary rights of easements; provided, however, the city may assist in acquisition of such easements when it is in the public interest and where governmental action is necessary for proper disposition of water and the developer advances all costs and expenses incurred by the city. 
No drainage system shall provide for the use of ponds, lakes, settling basins, or other such structures unless the developer has obtained prior approval from the appropriate agencies. They shall be constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices and standards adopted by the city council. The developer may dedicate such structure to the city, or to owners of property within the subdivision. The fact of such dedications shall be noted on the face of the plat. 
(2)  Drainage plans. In accordance with the requirements of section 102-490(6) of this article, drainage plans shall be submitted to the administrative services department and approved by the city council. The drainage system within the project boundaries shall be designed and constructed to collect, control and dispose of the first one inch of runoff from a 25-year critical duration storm up to, and including, a 24-hour event as determined by the FDOT rainfall intensity duration curves, zone 1 area. 
(3)  Filling. Low lying land on a building site shall be filled with suitable soil approved by the city. 
(4)  Velocity of runoff. Maximum velocity of drainage in open unpaved channels shall not exceed three feet per second. 
(5)  Storm sewers and manholes. Materials and installation procedures for storm sewers and manholes shall be in accordance with the appropriate sections of the standard specifications or approved equivalents. Minimum pipe diameter shall be 15 inches or elliptical equivalent. Storm sewers, manholes, and inlets shall be of the following types: 
a.  Concrete pipe. 
1.  Standard concrete pipe shall conform to ASTM designation L-76-70, class II. 
2.  Reinforced concrete pipe shall conform to ASTM designation C-76-70, class III or IV. 
b.  Metal pipe. Corrugated steel pipe shall conform with the basic requirements of AASHO M36 allowing for the exceptions of the appropriate section of the standard specifications. All pipe will be bituminous coated on all sides. 
c.  Manholes and inlets. 
1.  Material. 
i.  Concrete. The minimum compressive strength required at 28 days is 2,500 pounds per square inch for concrete material. 
ii.  Reinforcing steel. The material for reinforcing steel shall be billet-steel bars for concrete reinforcement (ASTM designation A615) of intermediate or hard grades, or equivalent. 
iii.  Brick. Brick material shall be hard, burned brick meeting AASHO specification No. M-114 grade MW. 
iv.  Other. Other approved materials. 
2.  Frames, covers and grates. Cast iron frames, covers and grates shall conform to the drawings in all essentials of design. All castings shall be made of clean, even grain, tough, gray cast iron. The quality of iron in the castings shall conform to the current ASTM specifications for class 20 gray iron castings. The castings shall be smooth, true to pattern and free from projections, sand holes or defects. The portion of the frame, cover or grates which are in contact shall be machined so that no rocking is possible. The castings shall be coated with coal tar pitch varnish. 
3.  Steps. Manhole steps shall be Clow national cast iron manhole steps No. A-1483, or other approved material. 
(6)  Drainage easements and rights-of-way. The use of open ditches or swale drainage, where practical, should be limited to road rights-of-way or drainage easements. When open ditches are utilized on a drainage easement an access area for the maintenance of these ditches shall be provided with a sufficient width to carry cleanup equipment. In any case, a minimum width necessary for the water course plus 10 feet shall be provided. The 10 feet shall all be on one side of the watercourse area and no drainage easements shall be less than 15 feet in width. 
(7)  Natural watercourse. A natural watercourse (live flowing creek) shall be shown on the plat. The existence of control and regulation of the state department of environmental protection over such areas shall be appropriately shown or noted on the plat. 
(8)  Open ditches or swales. The use of open ditches or swales may be allowed provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  In easements. 
1.  All ditches and/or swales shall be stabilized. 
2.  Bank slopes shall be six to one or flatter, unless permanent concrete stabilization is provided. 
3.  Velocity of water shall not exceed three feet per second in grassed swales or six feet per second in paved ditches. Velocities greater than six feet per second may be allowed with appropriate energy dissipators. 
b.  In road rights-of-way. 
1.  Swales shall be kept to a minimum depth. 
2.  Bank slopes shall be six to one or flatter with a four-foot shoulder at a slope of 0.06 foot to one foot. 
(9)  Erosion control. Erosion control measures shall be provided to prevent sedimentation and/or erosion of wetlands, city rights-of-way, or adjacent property. 
(10)  Minimum slopes. The minimum slope for ditches, roadway centerlines, swales, and gutters shall be three-tenths percent. 
(11)  Subdrains, subsoil drains and trench drains. Subdrains, subsoil drains, and trench drains shall be required where soil and water conditions warrant. 
(12)  Inspection. During the construction, a field inspection of each phase will be made by the public services department. It is the developer's responsibility to notify the public services department 24 hours before a phase of construction will be ready for inspection and testing. 
(13)  Required inspection notifications public services department. 
a.  Erosion control. 
b.  Diameter of pipe. 
c.  Type of pipe. 
(f)  Utilities. Where appropriate to the design of the subdivision, the developer is encouraged to consider placing all utilities underground. 
(g)  Final construction drawings. After installation of improvements, the developer shall provide certified test results for potable water, subgrade, base and asphalt densities, and pavement thickness to the administrative services department and shall submit a letter requesting city acceptance of improvements for maintenance along with two sets of certified final construction drawings, and the certification by the developer's engineers to the city for construction improvements. The administrative services department will cause a physical inspection of the improvements to be accomplished by the administrative services, public services and other departments. Upon department approval, the administrative services department will forward their letter, together with any recommendations produced by the public services department and accompanying drawings to the city council, which shall, in any event, act to approve, accept, or reject the improvements within 30 days of the submittal of the approved system for acceptance. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 988, § 7, 1-22-01) 
Sec. 102-492. - Installation and maintenance of improvements. 
(a)  After preliminary plat and construction plan approval by the city council and issuance of a development order by the planning director, the applicant may begin the installation of required improvements. Before any final plat may be approved by the city, and before any lot may be sold or any building permit issued in the proposed subdivision, one of the following must be satisfactorily completed: 
(1)  The developer may secure any necessary permits and install all required improvements as approved in the preliminary plat and construction plans and certified to the administrative services department; 
(2)  The developer may post with the city a performance bond or surety instrument established in article II in the form recommended by the planning director sufficient to cover the full cost of required improvements as approved in the preliminary plat (or part thereof if developed in accordance with section 102-493(c), and construction plans; the amount to be based on estimates provided to and approved by the administrative services department. The bond or surety instrument shall be released upon satisfactory installation and certification of all improvements; 
(3)  The developer may post with the city a cashiers' or certified check or an acceptable letter of credit for an amount necessary to complete all improvements required in the preliminary plat (or part thereof if developed in accordance with section 102-493(c), and construction plans; the amount to be based upon estimates approved by the administrative services department; a cashiers' or certified check or a letter of credit to be released upon satisfactory installation and certification of all improvements. The amount of the check or letter of credit may be reduced at the discretion of the administrative services department based upon completion and certification of improvements in a phased situation; or 
(4)  The developer may recommend to the city (subject to legal sufficiency) any method of assuring proper installation of improvements in a subdivision not heretofore specifically permitted. The city council may accept any such alternate procedure provided that it unquestionably guarantees installation and certification of all required improvements. 
(b)  During the 18-month warranty period and prior to release of the required 24-month defect security, the city will cause improvements to be inspected from time to time. The developer shall be notified of any deficiencies identified during the inspections and will be given 30 days to correct them. If deficiencies remain after 30 days the city will notify the developer of the city's intention to correct the deficiencies with compensation from the defect security bond instrument on file. No notice shall be required in emergency situations where the defect poses a safety hazard or detriment to the public health and welfare. 
(c)  No building permits will be issued within a subdivision after 18 months from the date of preliminary acceptance of the subdivision if final acceptance of the subdivision has not been accomplished. 
(d)  Any damage to city infrastructure, including street pavement, curbing, swales, road shoulders, water and sewer piping during construction within the subdivision will be the responsibility of the individual permittee. No certificate of occupancy will be issued until all damage has been repaired, inspected and accepted by the city. 
(e)  Each permittee is responsible for maintaining erosion control measures at all construction sites to prevent silting and erosion from affecting the construction site, adjoining properties and rights-of-way. An affidavit acknowledging responsibility will be completed prior to issuing a building permit. 
(f)  Any monument destroyed or disturbed during construction of infrastructure shall be replaced by the developer's surveyor. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 988, § 9, 1-22-01; Ord. No. 1337, § 3, 6-25-07) 
Sec. 102-493. - Final plat-Approval process. 
(a)  After satisfactory compliance with one of the requirements in section 102-492, the developer shall submit a letter to the administrative services department requesting approval of the final plat. This plat shall be submitted within 12 months from the date of approval of the preliminary plat, unless for sufficient cause the time has been extended. Otherwise, full resubmission of the preliminary plat shall be required. Any request for extension should be made to the administrative services department prior to the expiration date with sufficient documentation to warrant extension of expiration date of the development order. 
(b)  Each final plat shall be prepared and signed by all those required pursuant to F.S. ch. 177 (the Plat Act), as amended. 
(c)  If the developer wishes to submit a final plat for approval for a portion of an approved preliminary plat, he may do so, provided that one or more of the requirements of section 102-492 above has been met for the area included in the final plat and defect security has been posted. 
(d)  The developer shall submit three original Mylars of the final plat to the administrative services department, along with one copy of all covenants and restrictions, if any. 
(e)  The administrative services department shall approve the final plat for submission to the city council for final approval or return it disapproved with written comments, and/or marked prints within 15 working days from the date of request for final approval. 
(f)  If the administrative services department approved the plat for presentation to the city council, the administrative services department shall forward vicinity and location maps, and copies of easements, and its recommendations to the city council for action. No final plat shall be forwarded to the council for final approval until such time as all items required by this section have been submitted to the administrative services department and the plat has been approved for conformity by a professional surveyor and mapper either employed by or under contract to the city. 
(g)  If the developer has previously subdivided and sold lots, whether platted or unplatted, and has failed to correct defects in improvements as required by section 102-492(b) and the city has been required to expend funds to correct said defects or damage, no further plats for subsequent developments shall be approved for said developer until the developer has reimbursed the city for correction costs incurred. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 988, § 10, 1-22-01) 
Sec. 102-494. - Same-Requirements. 
    When improvements have been installed, or otherwise provided for in accordance with this article, the final plat shall be submitted within not more than 12 months after approval of the preliminary plat and shall conform in every respect with the requirements specified in section 102-488 of this article for a preliminary plat. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 988, § 11, 1-22-01) 
Sec. 102-495. - Same-Filing process. 
(a)  Following approval by the city council, the Mylars shall be signed by the council president and city clerk. 
(b)  The developer shall transmit the signed Mylars, fees, and other required documents to the clerk of circuit court, who shall sign the plat and shall reserve plat book and page number for recording. 
(c)  Upon recording of the plat, one Mylar copy and two blue line copies shall be returned to the administrative services department. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 988, § 12, 1-22-01) 
Sec. 102-496. - Fees. 
    Appropriate fees shall be charged and collected for processing the preliminary plat. The developer shall pay all recording fees to the county. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 988, § 13, 1-22-01) 
Sec. 102-497. - Minor subdivisions, large lot parcels for commercial subdivisions, variances and boundary line exemptions. 
(a)  Minor subdivisions. Minor subdivisions, defined as the platting of real property into no more than two lots, parcels, tracts, blocks, sites, units or any other division of land, need not comply with the requirements and specifications of this article. Land conveyed in such developments may be described by metes and bounds, and shall be recorded by deed. This exemption will not apply to parcels located on deeded city rights-of-way where the actual roadway has not been constructed and has not been accepted for perpetual maintenance by the city or to division of contiguous property under the same ownership more than one time during a period of 12 months. 
(b)  Large lot parcels for commercial use. Subdivision of land into one acre parcels or larger in size for commercial use need not comply with the platting requirements of this article if no new city streets or roads are constructed. 
(c)  Variances. As to dimensional requirements in this article, in any particular case where the developer can show that exceptional topographic conditions prevent strict compliance with dimensional requirements and result in undue hardship to the developer, and the other conditions or qualifications for a variance are objectively met by the developer, application may be made to the board of adjustment for variance. 
(d)  Boundary line exemptions. Conveyances which are executed solely to resolve boundary line disputes or to increase or decrease the size of adjoining parcels of property and which do not create developable parcels of property separate and apart from the existing parcels are exempted from the platting requirements of this article. However, a copy of the conveyance instrument must be filed with the administrative services department for posting to the base map of the city. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 988, § 13, 1-22-01) 
Sec. 102-498. - Reversion of subdivided land to acreage. 
(a)  Vacation by the city council. The city council, by its motion and upon resolution, may order the vacation and reversion to acreage of all or any part of a subdivision within its jurisdiction, provided that the city council shall hold a public hearing thereon in accordance with requirements of F.S. ch. 177, which is hereby adopted by reference. 
(b)  Access to individually owned parcels. No owner of any parcel of land in a subdivision shall be deprived of reasonable access to such parcel by reversion to acreage. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 988, § 15, 1-22-01) 
Secs. 102-499-102-530. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXII. - MOBILE AND MANUFACTURED HOUSING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 980, §§ 8 and 9, adopted June 14, 1999, amended the Code by repealing former art. XXII, §§ 102-531-102-537, and adding a new art. XXII, §§ 102-531-102-539, to read as herein set out. Former art. XXII pertained to mobile homes, and derived from Ord. No. 897, adopted October 14, 1996. 

Sec. 102-531. - Definitions. 
    Anchoring means the same definition as set forth in section 102-204(b)(1) of this Code. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the same definition as set forth in section 102-401 of this Code. 
    Foundation means the site built supporting parts upon which the manufactured home is placed, whether constructed to encompass the perimeter of the home or in the form of piers and including all exterior materials required to physically screen, veneer or shield. 
    Manufactured home means the same definition as set forth in article III, Definitions, of this chapter and is a dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site manufacturing facility for installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying that it is built in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 as amended in 1977, '78, '79, '80 and '87. The term "one-family dwelling" shall include manufactured homes when placed on permanent foundations designed for and occupied exclusively by one family. Manufactured homes include two distinguishable types described as follows: 
(1)  Residential design manufactured homes (RDMH), hereinafter referred to as RDMH are manufactured homes meeting residential design standards contained herein manufactured on or after July 13, 1994. 
(2)  Standard design manufactured homes (SDMH), hereinafter referred to as SDMH, are manufactured homes meeting the HUD Code and which have been manufactured on or after June 15, 1976, but not meeting residential design standards contained herein. 
    Manufactured housing means the same definition as set forth in article III, Definitions, of this chapter. 
    Mobile home means a structure fabricated prior to June 15, 1976 and transportable in one or more sections, which is eight feet or more in width and which is built on an integral chassis and designed to be used as a one-family dwelling when connected to the required utilities and includes plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 9, 6-14-99) 
Sec. 102-532. - Residential design manufactured homes (RDMH). 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of this regulation to encourage the provision of affordable housing in a general residential environment by permitting the use of residential design manufactured housing. RDMH as defined herein, in residential districts in which similar dwellings constructed on site are permitted, subject to the requirements and procedures set forth herein to assure similarity in exterior appearance between such residential design manufactured housing and other one-family dwellings which have been constructed under these and other applicable regulations on contiguous or other lots in the same zoning district. 
Manufactured homes approved as RDMH either individually or by specific model, shall be permitted in R-1A, R-1, R-2, or C-1 zoning districts in which similar residential occupancy is permitted as defined below, subject to all minimum district standards and other requirements applying generally to such residential use in such zoning district, including but not limited to, minimum lot area and width, minimum yards, percentage of lot coverage, off-street parking requirements and approved foundations as described herein. 
(b)  Compatibility. The following standards shall be used in making a determination of the similarity of RDMH homes, with permanent foundations, as provided in this paragraph, and site built homes: 
(1)  Minimum width of main body. Minimum width of the main body of the RDMH as located on the site shall not be less than 20 feet, as measured across the narrowest portion. This is not intended to prohibit the offsetting of portions of the home. 
(2)  Minimum roof pitch, minimum roof overhang, roofing materials. Minimum pitch of the main roof shall not be less than four inches of rise for every foot of horizontal run. Minimum roof overhang shall be one foot. In cases where site built housing generally has been constructed in adjacent or nearby locations with roof pitches less than one to four feet then the RDMH may have less roof pitch similar to the site-built houses. Any roofing material used for site-built housing may be used for an RDMH. 
(3)  Exterior finish; light reflection. Any material may be used for exterior finish which is generally acceptable for site-built housing provided, however, that reflection for such exterior shall not be greater than from siding coated with clean white gloss exterior enamel paint. 
(4)  Transportation equipment. All transportation equipment must be removed from each RDMH upon delivery to the site for installation and the RDMH shall be placed upon a permanent foundation and anchored within 48 hours of delivery to the site. 
(5)  Approved foundations required in residential districts. No RDMH shall be placed or occupied for residential use on a site in zoning districts referred to above until such foundation plans have been submitted and approved by the building official as to the appearance and durability of the proposed foundation and being acceptable as similar or comparable in appearance to foundations of residences built on adjacent or nearby sites. All homes shall be placed on permanent foundations, which for the purposes of this section shall be: 
a.  Installation of the manufactured home according to chapter 15C-1, Florida Administrative Code, by a manufactured home installer licensed by the Florida Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles; and 
b.  Construction of a permanent, perimeter wall, meeting wind load requirements of 100 miles per hour, extending at a minimum from the ground surface to the bottom starter of the exterior wall surfaces of the home as certified by a professional civil or structural engineer, who can demonstrate knowledge or background of structural engineering applications, and who is registered in the state. 
c.  The building official may predetermine and establish general approval for specific types, varieties or designs of foundations and veneer or screening materials to be used in connection with future installations of an RDMH. 
d.  Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any RDMH, a certification must be submitted to the building official assuring that the housing unit has been anchored to the foundation as required by chapter 15C-1, Florida Administrative Code. Such certification shall be prepared by a professional civil or structural engineer, who can demonstrate knowledge or background of structural engineering applications, and who is registered in the state. 
(6)  Site orientation. RDMH shall be placed on the lot or parcel so that its long axis is parallel with the street. A perpendicular or diagonal placement may be permitted if there is a building addition or substantial landscaping so that the narrow dimension of the unit, as so modified and facing the street, is no less than 50 percent of the unit's long dimension. 
(7)  Garages/carports required. All RDMH shall be required to be provided with a garage or carport. This requirement may be waived upon request of the developer when it is determined by the building official that such a requirement would be inconsistent with development in the surrounding neighborhood. When required, the exterior materials of the garage or carport must be the same as the RDMH. 
(8)  Electrical service. RDMH units must have their electrical service and meter installed upon the housing unit in accordance with the currently adopted edition of the National Electrical Code. 
(9)  A landing shall be provided on the exterior side of all egress door openings. Landing width shall be no less than the width of the door it serves and the depth shall not be less than 36 inches (914mm). The landing may be one step lower than the inside floor level but not more than seven inches (178 mm) lower. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 9, 6-14-99) 
Sec. 102-533. - Procedures for approval of residential design manufactured homes (RDMH). 
    Approval for any RDMH shall be authorized by the building official. 
(1)  Applications for RDMH approval. Applications for approval of manufactured homes as RDMH shall be submitted to the administrative services department on the form made available by that department. Such applications shall include all information necessary to make determinations as to conformity with the standards herein, including elevations or photographs of all sides of RDMH, exterior dimensions, roof pitch, exterior finish, and the like. 
(2)  Foundation specifications. Where there has been prior approval of foundations proposed to be used, as provided in the standards herein, detailed specifications or descriptions of such foundations shall be required. Where it is proposed to use foundations not previously approved specifications or descriptions shall be supplied in sufficient detail for determinations as provided in the standards herein. 
(3)  Other permits required. Upon determination by the building official that the manufactured home meets the RDMH standards, application shall be made by the manufactured home installer/transporter for a permit to move the structure pursuant to the procedure specified in the permit schedule, of the land development code. Permits for construction of the foundation and connections to the required utilities such as electrical, potable water, sanitary sewer and gas are required and shall be secured prior to moving the RDMH to the site. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 9, 6-14-99) 
Sec. 102-534. - Standard design manufactured homes (SDMH). 
(a)  SDMH placement. Standard design manufactured homes (SDMH) shall be placed only in manufactured home communities, manufactured home parks and manufactured home subdivisions. 
(b)  Governmental temporary use. Any local, state, or federal government agency may utilize a SDMH for temporary public purposes in any zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 9, 6-14-99) 
Sec. 102-535. - Mobile homes. 
    Due to the lack of comprehensive implementation of federal building and safety standards for transportable structures manufactured prior to June 15, 1976, no mobile home manufactured before June 15, 1976, shall be permitted except in licensed mobile home parks or manufactured home subdivisions. Mobile homes lawfully existing in the city on the effective date of Ordinance 700 and 897 may continue to exist as stated in article IX, section 102-163. The sale, resale installation or transportation of a mobile home that was imported in violation of this subsection is strictly prohibited. The building official may grant limited waivers for the sole purpose of transporting a substandard mobile home out of the city or to a permitted site for demolition and disposal. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 9, 6-14-99) 
Sec. 102-536. - Maintenance. 
    All manufactured and mobile homes, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a decent, safe and sanitary condition. Any principle or accessory structures, their decorative elements, or any device or safeguard required by this or any other code applicable to manufactured homes or mobile homes when installed, shall be maintained in the same good working order and condition as when the certificate of occupancy or completion was issued. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 9, 6-14-99) 
Sec. 102-537. - Outside storage of recreational vehicles. 
(a)  Applicability. The provisions of this section for the storage of recreational vehicles designed as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use which either has its own mode of power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle, van conversions, park trailers, fifth-wheel trailers, and other similar type vehicles, including trailers used to transport such vehicles, shall apply to all parcels within the city limits of Crestview, Florida, that are assigned the single-family dwelling district zoning. 
(b)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to regulate the outdoor parking and storage of recreational vehicles, as defined in 102-537(d). This section is adopted in an effort to promote off street parking, safe vehicular traffic flow, to preserve peace and good order, to promote the aesthetic beauty of the community and to enhance the value of the property therein; and to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Crestview. 
(c)  Generally. Recreational vehicles, except as provided in section 102-538, which are used or intended to be used for living and sleeping purposes are prohibited except in licensed trailer and recreational vehicle parks. 
(d)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms have the meanings indicated: 
    Recreational vehicle means any vehicle used for recreational purposes such as, over-sized vehicles, travel trailers, camping trailers, motorhomes, private motor coaches, any vehicle designed as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use which either has its own mode of power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle, van conversions, park trailers, fifth-wheel trailers, and other similar type vehicles. 
    Yard, front means that area between the front building line and the front property line. The front yard is established by the greatest extent of the building face not to include any eaves, windows, ledges, stairs, stoops, columns or any other structural encroachments into the yard area. (See Figure 102-537.1.) 
    Yard, rear means that area between the rear building line, otherwise known as rear façade or face and the rear lot line, bounded on both sides by the side property lines. 
    Yard, side means that yard area which is not considered to be a front or rear yard. Generally, that area between the front and rear building lines bounded by the side property line. 
Figure 102-537.1. Yard and Building Line Diagram

(e)  Outside storage of recreational vehicles. 
(1)  Recreational vehicles shall not be lived in, slept in, or otherwise used as a residence or for residential or commercial purposes to include storage, except as provided in section 102-538. 
(2)  Recreational vehicles shall not be connected to any water or sanitary sewer line, or utility apparatus, except as provided in section 102-538. 
(3)  One Recreational vehicle may be stored in parcel in a single-family dwelling district zoning, provided such recreational vehicle shall: 
a.  Be set back a minimum of three feet from the property lines. 
b.  Any electrical service connection to a recreational vehicle shall be done in a lawful, safe and secure manner in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications and applicable Florida Building Code. 
(4)  The provisions of this section are not intended to nor shall they be interpreted as in any way preempting the requirements of any private agreement and/or covenant. 
(f)  Permit requirements. 
(1)  Prior to the addition of any water proof, impermeable or impervious surface, a building permit must be obtained from the City of Crestview. 
Figure 102-537.2. Approved Outside Recreational Vehicle Storage Locations Diagram

    *Note-Figure 102-531.1 is for illustrative purposes only. 
(Ord. No. 1634, § III, 3-12-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1634, § III, adopted March 12, 2018, repealed the former § 102-537, and enacted a new § 102-537 as set out herein. The former § 102-537 pertained to house cars and camp trailers used for living and sleeping purposes prohibited except in licensed trailer park and derived from Ord. No. 980, adopted June 14, 1999. 
Sec. 102-538. - Temporary use of recreational vehicles. 
(a)  Emergency temporary use. Recreational vehicles designed as temporary living quarters for recreation, camping, or travel use which either has its own mode of power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle, such as park trailers, fifth-wheel trailers, and other similar type vehicles, may be temporarily used for residential purposes in the event of a flood, fire, or other natural disaster which leaves the main dwelling uninhabitable, provided the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The parcel must be located within the single-family dwelling district zoning; 
(2)  Prior to the occupancy of a recreational vehicle, a temporary use permit, which allows the recreational vehicle to be temporarily used in a residential capacity, must be obtained from the City of Crestview Building and Inspection Department; 
(3)  The temporary use permit is valid for 180 consecutive days, however, if the continuation of the construction elements is necessary for the structure to return to acceptable condition and there is a valid, open building permit for the construction activities, the temporary use of the vehicle may be continued via new permit or an extension of permit for an extension period of 90 days. 
(4)  The recreational vehicle shall be fully licensed and ready for highway use; 
(5)  Any electrical service connection to a recreational vehicle shall be done in a lawful, safe and secure manner in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications and applicable Florida Building Code; 
(6)  Any potable water connection to a recreational vehicle must be completed under the regulations and inspection of the public services department and must have the required backflow protection device installed prior to use. 
(7)  Recreational vehicles must be pumped out by a Florida licensed and bonded wastewater hauler or taken to a fully licensed wastewater receiving station. Under no circumstance, shall connection be made to any sanitary sewer service or any disposal of wastewater be disposed of in a manner inconsistent with this Code of Ordinances and Florida law. 
(b)  The provisions of this section are not intended to nor shall they be interpreted as in any way preempting the requirements of any private agreement and/or covenant. 
(Ord. No. 1634, § III, 3-12-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1634, § III, adopted March 12, 2018, repealed the former § 102-538, and enacted a new § 102-538 as set out herein. The former § 102-538 pertained to storage of camp trailers, other types of house trailers and derived from Ord. No. 980, adopted June 14, 1999. 
Sec. 102-539. - Variances. 
    Where strict adherence to all of the provisions of this article would cause unnecessary hardship, the owner may ask for a variance and follow the procedures for securing a variance as set forth in section 102-36. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 9, 6-14-99) 
Secs. 102-540-102-569. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXIII. - LANDSCAPE DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 102-570. - Purpose and objectives. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to establish protective regulations for the recognition, protection and preservation of specific native (indigenous) trees and landscapes that have attained certain dimensions or status to warrant protection. It further encourages the planting of new trees and landscape to enhance the general health and welfare of the citizens of the city by establishing regulations to preserve the ecological balance of the environment, control erosion, sedimentation and stormwater runoff, provide shade and reduce heat and glare, abate noise pollution, and buffer incompatible land uses. 
(b)  The following objectives apply: 
(1)  Environmental benefits. To aid in stabilizing the environment's ecological balance by contributing to the process of oxygen regeneration, groundwater recharge, air purification and stormwater runoff retardation, while at the same time aiding in noise, glare and heat abatement. 
(2)  Native vegetation. To ensure that the local stock of native vegetation is replenished. 
(3)  Vehicle use areas. To clearly delineate and buffer the bounds of vehicular use areas, particularly public rights-of-way, so that distraction of movement, noise and glare from one area does not adversely affect the activity of another area. 
(4)  Access to site. To limit physical site access to established points of ingress and egress. 
(5)  Energy conservation. To promote energy conservation by maximizing the shading and cooling effects of trees and shrubs. 
(6)  Property values. To promote and protect the property values within the community by conserving and creating a more aesthetically pleasing and functional environment. 
(Ord. No. 1338, § 2, 6-25-07) 
Sec. 102-571. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessway means the principal means of ingress and egress to a parcel of land from a public right-of-way. 
    Architectural planter means a permanent container within which plantings may be placed to meet the requirements of this article. 
    Buffer area. The terms "buffer area," "buffer yard" "buffer zone" and "buffer strip" are synonymous to each other as utilized within this article. It is the designated area between different zoning districts. 
    Comprehensive plan means an ordinance adopted pursuant to the Florida Growth Management Act to manage development and growth of the city. 
    Crown means the main point of branching or foliage of a tree or plant. 
    Crown spread means the distance measured across the greatest diameter of a plant. 
    Developed area means the portion of a plot or parcel of land, excluding public right-of-way, upon which a building, structure, pavement, landscape material, or other improvements have been placed. 
    Drip line means the outer perimeter of the crown of a plant. 
    Ground cover means natural mulch or low-growing plants other than deciduous varieties installed to form a continuous cover over the ground. 
    Impact fee means a fee levied for development to help defray costs associated with the impact of development upon existing services. 
    Interior area means the entire parcel to be developed, exclusive of the front perimeter landscape area. 
    Land development regulations means any ordinance, foundation documents, rules and regulations adopted to carry out the goals, objectives and policies of the comprehensive plan. 
    Landscape plan means the placement of landscape material including, but not limited to, trees, shrubs, vines, lawn grass, ground cover, landscape water features, and nonliving durable material commonly used in landscaping, including, but not limited to, rocks, pebbles, sand, landscape fabric, brick pavers, earthen mounds, but excluding impervious surfaces for vehicular use. Fifty percent of such area shall be living material. 
    New construction means any development for which an application for a building permit must be made prior to the initiation of any improvements. Also, in the case of vehicular use paving, any preparation or pavement (asphalt or concrete) of a site intended for any type of vehicular use begun after the enactment of this article. 
    Planting area means any area designed for landscape material installation having a minimum of 50 square feet and a minimum depth as measured perpendicular to the adjacent property line, of five feet, and consisting of suitable growing medium with proper drainage. 
    Protected tree means native (indigenous) trees protected and identified by species and size in section 102-579. 
    Redevelopment means the demolition or removal of the principal structure or more than 50 percent of the impervious surface of a site. Redevelopment also applies to properties or structures undergoing a change of occupancy or which are being reoccupied after being vacant for six months or more. 
    Right-of-way means a way legally designated for use by the city, county or state as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, alley, other vehicular use facility, or utility easement. For the purpose of this article, the rights-of-way shall be those as recorded in subdivision plats and/or shown on the county section and city zoning, land use or utility maps. 
    Shade tree means any species of tree identified in section 102-579 that is well-shaped, well-branched and well-foliated, which normally grows to an overall height of at least 25 feet and normally develops an average mature spread of crown greater than 20 feet in the city. 
    Shrub means a woody perennial plant differing from a perennial herb by its persistent and woody stems and from a tree by its low stature and habit of branching from the base. 
    Tree means any self-supporting, woody plant of a species which normally grows to an overall height of at least 12 feet and normally develops an average mature spread of crown greater than 12 feet in the city. 
    Tree removal means any act which causes a tree to die within a period of two years, such acts including, but not being limited to: 
(1)  Cutting; 
(2)  Inflicting damage upon a root system by machinery, storage of materials, or soil compaction; 
(3)  Changing of the natural grade above or below a root system or around the trunk; 
(4)  Inflicting damage on a tree; 
(5)  Permitting infection or pest infestation; 
(6)  Excessive pruning; or 
(7)  Paving with concrete, asphalt or other impervious material within such proximity as to be harmful to a tree. 
    Vehicular use area means any ground surface area, excepting public rights-of-way, used by any type of vehicle, whether moving or at rest, for the purpose of, including, but not limited to, driving, parking, loading, unloading, storage or display, such as, but not limited to, new and used car lots, activities of a drive-in nature in connection with banks, restaurants, service or filling stations, grocery or convenience stores, and other vehicular uses under, on, or within buildings. 
    Vines means any of a group of woody or herbaceous plants which may climb by twining or which normally require support to reach mature form. 
    Visual screen means a barrier of living or nonliving landscape material put in place for the purpose of separating and obscuring from view those areas so screened. 
(Ord. No. 1338, § 2, 6-25-07) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 102-572. - Applicability and scope. 
(a)  Application of article. The requirements and standards of this article shall apply to all new development and redevelopment in the city except public rights-of-way 
(b)  Exemptions. 
(1)  All existing single-family and duplex users are exempt from this article except as provided for in section 102-580; provided however, that all single-family and duplex users shall replace protected trees with a protected tree species or a species identified on the tree replant list in section 102-579. The replacement tree shall measure a minimum of 1.5 inches in diameter, four feet above grade. A replacement ratio of one to one shall be applied. Trees identified as diseased or dead shall not be required to be replaced. 
(2)  All new single-family and duplex users are exempt from this article; provided however, that new single-family and duplex users shall plant one tree in the front yard within ten feet of the right-of-way, if there is no existing tree in the front yard. 
(Ord. No. 1338, § 2, 6-25-07) 
Sec. 102-573. - Landscape development categories. 
    Landscape developments shall consist of six landscape development categories: open space landscape, front perimeter landscape, interior parking landscape, buffer zone landscape, publicly owned property, and public utility development (policy 12.A.3.1). 
(1)  Open space landscape. All land uses not specifically exempted from the provisions of this article shall devote a percentage of the total area to open space and other landscaping as determined by the land use in section 102-574(a). 
All property for land utilized for principal structures, accessory structures and vehicular use areas shall be landscaped and permanently maintained with trees, shrubs, indigenous plants and ground cover. 
(2)  Front perimeter landscape. A minimum ten-foot-wide strip of land abutting the right-of-way shall be landscaped. Where a property abuts two or more streets, a ten-foot wide strip of land abutting all rights-of-way shall be landscaped. Width of sidewalks shall not be included within the ten-foot-wide front perimeter landscape area. 
a.  Material requirements. 
1.  Tree count. The total tree count requirement within the front setback perimeter landscape area shall be determined by using a ratio of one tree for each 25 linear feet of lot frontage, or fractional part thereof, with 75 percent of said trees being indigenous trees and 50 percent of the trees being shade trees. 
2.  Surface cover. The remainder of the front perimeter landscape shall be landscaped with grass, ground cover, shrubs, hedges, other landscaping treatment or native plants, excluding paving. 
b.  Use of front perimeter landscape. 
1.  Overhang areas. Vehicles may overhang no more than two feet into perimeter landscape areas. The overhang area shall not be included as part of the landscape area requirement established in section 102-574(a). 
2.  Fencing. Fencing shall not encroach into the right-of-way and shall meet all of the requirements for fences as established in section 102-167(d) 
3.  Accessways. All accessways through the perimeter landscape areas shall meet the following aisle width maximum and separation minimums: 15-foot one-way drives, no less than 20 feet apart, and 27-foot two-way drives, no less than 20 feet apart, except as otherwise required by the state department of transportation. 
Common ingress and egress to parking areas owned by adjacent landowners are permitted. Such common entryways to parking areas will be treated as a single parking area and must meet all requirements of this chapter. Such common entries will only be permitted if there is a written agreement among the owners of the parking areas, which is acceptable to the city, and a copy of the agreement is filed with the administrative services department. Such agreement shall be created in perpetuity, by written instrument in a form recordable in the public records of the county, and be an irrevocable covenant running with the land, with authority vested in the city to enforce the covenant. 
(3)  Interior parking landscape. The following criteria shall apply regarding interior parking landscape: 
a.  Overhang areas. Vehicles may overhang no more than two feet into landscape areas. The overhang area shall not be included as part of the landscape area requirement established in section 102-574(a). 
b.  Generally. Interior portions of off-street parking facilities which are not specifically designed as parking spaces or maneuvering areas shall not be paved for vehicle use. Said areas shall be planted and permanently maintained with trees and shrubs and finished with ground cover or other landscape material. 
c.  Maximum number of continuous parking spaces. Landscaping areas with a minimum dimension of nine feet and a minimum total area of 171 square feet shall be provided to break up excessively long, continuous runs of parking spaces. No parking bay shall contain more than 15 continuous parking spaces without being broken up by a landscaped area. These landscaped areas must have one tree that measures a minimum of 1.5 inches in diameter, four feet above grade at time of planting. 
(4)  Termination of parking rows. Each row of interior parking spaces shall be terminated at each end by a landscaped area which shall be a minimum of 100 square feet with a minimum dimension of ten feet. These landscaped areas must have one tree that measures a minimum of 1.5 inches in diameter, four feet above grade at time of planting. 
(5)  Screening. Where a parking lot adjoins a residential zone or use, or fronts on a street adjoining a residential zone or use, directly across the street, a solid wall, fence, or approved compact hedge not less than four feet high shall be erected along the lot line(s), except that within a visibility triangle the height requirement shall be reduced to two feet. 
(6)  Garage parking spaces. For every 2,500 square feet of garage parking spaces, 171 square feet of exterior green area is required. No credit shall be given for planters on multilevel parking. 
(7)  Protection from encroachment. All interior landscaping areas shall be protected from vehicular encroachment. 
(8)  Exemptions. Single-family detached residences are exempt from interior parking landscape requirements. 
(d)  Buffer zone landscape. The following criteria shall apply to buffer zone landscape requirements: 
(1)  Generally. 
a.  Buffer zone landscaping shall be required between multifamily and single-family zones and land uses, industrial and commercial zones and land uses and between industrial, commercial or public land and any residential zone or land use. It shall be the responsibility of the higher density zoning district property owner to provide and maintain the buffer zone. In no instance shall it be the responsibility of the single-family zoning district property owner. The planting area within this required buffer shall be allowed to be credited as part of the required minimum landscaped area specified in section 102-574(a). 
b.  For buffers between incompatible zoning districts, the property owner, lessee, or agent requesting approval of the site plan for a building permit shall be responsible for providing the buffer zone, regardless of the land use intensity permitted in the zoning district in which the proposed development is located. This responsibility shall also apply to properties which are proposed for development and adjacent to a vacant parcel in an incompatible zone. For buffers between incompatible land uses within a cumulative zone, such developments adjacent to a vacant parcel shall not be responsible for providing the buffer requirement. The development within the cumulative zone creating the incompatible use relationship shall be responsible for providing the buffer. 
c.  For purposes of this article, industrial has the highest density zoning or use, followed by in descending order by commercial, public land, multi-family residential and finally single family residential. 
d.  If the board of adjustment or other statutory city board determines that the construction of a landscape buffer area required by this article would create a hardship for the renovation of existing structures or vehicular use areas, they may recommend to the city council to approve a buffer area with a width of no less than five feet, provided such buffer area meets the visual screening requirements of this article. 
(2)  Buffer zone material requirements. 
a.  A landscaped buffer zone consisting of shrubs, hedges, trees, vines, grass, ground cover or other landscape treatment at least ten feet in depth shall be provided. Such landscaped buffer shall be designed to provide a visual barrier not less than six feet in height and shall form a continuous, 75 percent or greater opacity visual barrier within three years of planting. Such landscaped barrier shall be located adjacent to the common lot line between the incompatible zoning districts or land uses. Existing native vegetation may be incorporated into buffer zones and credited toward the minimum standard. Section 102-579 lists species and size of vegetation that are recommended to meet this requirement. 
1.  Within the buffer zone, one tree for each 25 linear feet of required buffer strip, or fractional part thereof, shall be required, with a minimum of 50 percent of the trees being shade trees. Trees shall be spaced so as to allow mature growth of shade trees. 
2.  Grass or other ground cover shall be planted on all areas of the buffer zone required by this section which are not occupied by other landscape material. 
b.  A six-foot-high masonry wall or wooden fence set in a ten-foot-wide landscaped buffer area may be substituted for the required six-foot-high planted buffer. It shall be the responsibility of the higher density zoning district property owner to provide and maintain the wall or fence. 
1.  In addition, one tree for each 25 linear feet of such landscaped barrier, or fractional part thereof, shall be required, with a minimum of 50 percent of the trees being shade trees. 
2.  Each such planting area shall be landscaped with grass, ground cover or other landscape material, excluding paving, in addition to the required tree. 
(3)  Buffer zones along waterfront property. Vegetated buffer strips shall be retained in their natural state along the banks of all natural watercourses, water bodies or wetlands. The width of the buffer shall be sufficient to prevent erosion, trap the sediment in overland runoff, provide access to the water body and allow for periodic flooding without damage to the structures. These areas may be mowed or trimmed as desired. 
(e)  Publicly owned property. All publicly owned property shall be developed in compliance herewith. In addition, all parks are to be landscaped employing every energy conservation landscape method practicable for the particular site. It is the intent of this article that each park and other open area be an example and inspiration for the entire community as well as comply with the city comprehensive plan. 
(f)  Public utility development area. A public utility development area shall be developed in compliance with this chapter. Additionally, each public utility development area shall comply on each side and back line with the buffer zone landscape requirements as required between industrial or commercial and any residential zone. It shall be the responsibility of the public utility to provide and maintain the buffer zone. 
(Ord. No. 1338, § 2, 6-25-07) 
Sec. 102-574. - Landscape development standards. 
    To ensure the attainment of the objectives of this article, the design and installation of required landscaping shall be consistent with the following standards, unless it can be demonstrated that alternative design and installation plans will meet the objectives of this article. The landscape development standards provided as follows shall apply whenever a landscape plan is required: 
(1)  Landscape area requirements. Commercial land uses shall devote a minimum of 20 percent of the total development area to landscape development, industrial land uses shall devote a minimum of 18 percent of the total development to landscape development and mixed-use land uses shall devote a minimum of 25% of the total development area to landscape development as defined in policy 7.A.3.4 of the city comprehensive plan. The minimum landscape area requirements of single-family and two-family dwelling units shall be set forth in section 102-578(c)(1) and (2) of this article. 
(2)  Installation. All landscaping shall be installed in a sound, workmanlike manner and according to accepted good planting practice with the quality of plant materials as hereinafter described. All elements of landscaping, not including plant material except hedges, shall be installed so as to meet all the provisions of this article. 
(3)  Visibility at intersections in all districts. At any street intersection, no plant, tree, shrubbery or any other obstruction shall be allowed to grow in a manner which would impede or restrict the vision of pedestrians or vehicle operators to oncoming traffic. 
(4)  Tree protection. 
a.  During development activity, preserved trees shall be protected from activities which may injure or kill them. Tree protection techniques found in the tree protection manual for builders and developers, state department of agriculture and consumer services, division of forestry, or equivalent techniques shall be used. 
b.  Exclusive of the principal structure area, when a protected tree must be removed or relocated, an indigenous tree shall be replaced. No protected tree may be removed or relocated without a tree removal permit from the city. 
(5)  Plant material standards. 
a.  Quality. Unless otherwise provided herein, plant material as described in Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants, 1998, state department of agriculture, shall be credited on the landscape development requirements of this article. 
b.  Native vegetation. To receive credit, the applicant shall utilize a minimum of 75 percent plant material native to the Northwest Florida area in meeting these landscaping requirements. Portions of a development left in the natural state shall be credited in meeting these landscaping requirements. 
c.  Shrubs and hedges. Shrubs shall be a minimum of 12 inches in height when measured immediately after planting. 
d.  Trees. Trees shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Size. Trees shall measure a minimum of 1.5 inches in diameter, four feet above grade at time of planting. For tree species that have multiple trunks, such as crepe myrtle, the diameter shall be determined by adding together the diameters of the main trunks at four feet above grade and the tree must have a total diameter of 1.5 inches. Trees having an average mature spread of crown less than 20 feet may be arranged in groupings so as to create the equivalent of 20-foot crown spread. 
2.  Tree planting area. The planting area for each tree shall be a minimum of 100 square feet with a minimum width of five feet around the trunk of the tree and shall be maintained in either vegetative landscape material or pervious surface cover. 
3.  Protection from damage by roots. Trees of species whose roots are known to cause damage to public roadways or other public works shall not be planted closer than 12 feet to such public works, except willow trees shall be no closer than 50 feet to those public works. 
e.  Grass and ground covers; artificial materials; planters; protection of endangered plants. Vines, ground cover, lawn grasses, synthetic plant material and architectural planters shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Lawn grasses. Lawn grasses shall be subject to the following: 
i.  Lawn grasses and ground cover, or vines planted for credit on the landscaping requirements, shall be perennial species capable of thriving in the county. 
ii.  Grasses may be sodded, sprigged, plugged or seeded except that solid sod shall be used in swales or other areas subject to erosion. 
2.  Synthetic plant material. No credit shall be granted for use of artificial plant material. 
3.  Abovegrade planters. Credit shall be given for use of permanent architectural planters. Shrubs shall have a planting area of not less than ten square feet and a depth of not less than 18 inches while trees shall have a planting area of not less than 12 square feet and a depth of not less than four feet. 
4.  Indigenous endangered plants. Endangered plants shall be protected under the provisions of applicable federal and state laws. 
(6)  Site preparation standards. To the extent feasible, the performance of development activities and revegetation of altered sites shall be consistent with the following standards: 
a.  Development shall not involve the unnecessary removal of any native vegetation. Where removal of native trees is necessary, efforts should be made to transplant such trees. 
b.  Site alteration shall occur in planned stages or increments and not exceed the minimum area necessary to prepare the site for the succeeding phase of development. 
c.  Adequate erosion control measures shall be put into effect prior to commencing site alteration on each increment. 
d.  Vegetated buffer strips shall be retained in their natural state along the banks of the all natural watercourses, water bodies or wetlands. The width of the buffer shall be sufficient to prevent erosion, trap the sediment in overland runoff, provide access to the water body and allow for periodic flooding without damage to structures. 
(Ord. No. 1338, § 2, 6-25-07) 
Sec. 102-575. - Landscape plan procedure. 
    A landscape plan shall be required as a condition of obtaining any building permit or development order, except for building permits for new single family or duplex residential structures, as specified in section 102-572. The plan shall be submitted to the administrative services department. 
(1)  Contents of landscape plan. The landscape plan shall include the following information: 
a.  The location by species and size of all trees, shrubs and landscape material to be retained or placed on the site. 
b.  Location of proposed structures, driveways, parking areas and other improvements to be constructed or installed. 
c.  Location of irrigation systems to be provided, if any, or manual outlets for watering. 
d.  Landscape and tree protection techniques proposed to prevent damage to vegetation, during construction and after construction has been completed. 
e.  Information, written and graphic, submitted to the administrative services department as required in section 102-580 and any tree removal permit, if issued. 
(2)  Installation of trees and landscape materials. All landscape materials and trees depicted on the approved landscape plan shall be installed within one year of the date of issuance of the building permit for the site. 
(3)  Development order issuance. No development order shall be issued until a landscape plan has been submitted and approved, including a tree removal permit, if required, by the administrative services department. 
(4)  Building permit issuance. No building permit shall be issued until a landscape plan has been submitted and approved, including a tree removal permit, if required, by the administrative services department. 
(5)  Certificate of occupancy issuance. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the administrative services director, or his designee, has determined after final inspection that required site improvements have been installed according to the approved application and landscape plan. In lieu of the immediate installation of the landscaping material and trees, the city may require a performance bond or other security in an amount equal to the cost of the required improvements in lieu of withholding a certificate of occupancy, and may further require that improvements be satisfactorily installed within a specified length of time. The administrative services department will finalize contractual documents. 
(Ord. No. 1338, § 2, 6-25-07) 
Sec. 102-576. - Procedures for granting variances and exemptions and conflict with other ordinances. 
(a)  The board of adjustment or other statutory board of the city shall be responsible for considering all variances to this article. Developers or designated agents shall initiate all requests in writing to the board and pay administrative and legal notice fees as required. Each application shall contain administrative data, drawings, etc., as may be directed by administrative policy or other ordinances. 
(b)  Prior to making a specific recommendation or finding to the city council, the board of adjustment shall conduct a public hearing after having advertised the hearing once at least ten days prior to the hearing in a newspaper published within the city. At this hearing, the public shall be given an opportunity to be heard before the board makes a finding or recommendation. 
(c)  After the board of adjustment has held the public hearing called for in this section, a specific finding or recommendation shall be made to the city council for final approval. The variance shall not become effective until approval by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1338, § 2, 6-25-07) 
Sec. 102-577. - Maintenance. 
    The legal owner of record as appears on the current tax assessment roll or the designated lessee or agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of all landscape areas, which shall be maintained so as to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance at all times and shall be kept free from refuse and debris. Maintenance shall include the replacement of all dead plant material. Dead plant material shall be replaced within a time appropriate to the growing season of the species in question, not to exceed one year. 
(Ord. No. 1338, § 2, 6-25-07) 
Sec. 102-578. - Protected trees. 
(a)  Generally. Where protected trees are identified on a site proposed for lot, parcel or tract clearing within the applicable zoning districts, the number of such trees which shall be required to be preserved shall be based on a ratio of one tree for each 3,600 square feet of impervious surface area or fraction thereof. The front perimeter, open space and interior parking landscape areas required in section 102-573 shall be located on the site to incorporate the preservation of such trees, where possible. 
(1)  Tree credits. Any existing protected trees located on the subject private property with the crown extending over the planned paved parking area, perimeter or interior landscaped areas shall be eligible for credit against the number of protected trees required to be preserved on the site. The following credit schedule may be applied for preserving existing trees onsite: 
Credit Schedule 
Diameter of Existing Crown Spread of Preserved Tree (feet) or Diameter of Tree Trunk of Preserved Tree (inches) Number of Trees Credited 90 or greater 36 or greater 7 60 to 89 30 to 35 6 50 to 59 26 to 29 5 40 to 49 20 to 25 4 30 to 39 13 to 19 3 20 to 29 8 to 12 2 16 to 19 4 to 7 1  
Note: Such credits shall be subject to approval of the administrative services director, or his designee. 
(2)  Crown spread. Measurements shall be rounded off to the nearest whole foot and the tree trunk diameter measurement shall be rounded off to the nearest whole inch. Diameter of a tree shall be measured at a height of four feet above the natural grade. A reduction of required parking spaces may be allowed by the city administrative services director or his designee when the reduction would result in the preservation of a protected tree with a trunk of 12 inches in diameter or greater. The following reduction schedule shall apply: 
Reduction Schedule 
Number of Required Parking Spaces Reduction of Required Parking Spaces Allowable 1 to 4 0 5 to 9 1 10 to 19 2 20 or greater 10 percent of total number of spaces (total reduction regardless of number of trees preserved)  
(3)  Relocation, removal, replacement of protected trees. Where a proposed site plan cannot be designed to accommodate existing protected trees on the site, a permit shall be obtained from the administrative services department to remove any such protected tree as specified in section 102-580. Where practical, when proposed improvements necessitate removal of protected trees, such trees shall be relocated on the site in the required perimeter or interior landscape areas. If the relocation of such trees is impractical, the owner or his agent shall replace the removed protected tree with a protected tree species or a species identified on the tree replant list in section 102-579. The replacement tree shall measure a minimum of 1.5 inches in diameter, four feet above grade in order to comply with this section. A replacement ratio of one to one shall be applied. Trees identified as diseased or dead shall not be required to be replaced. 
(4)  New planting of protected trees. On sites proposed for development where no existing protected trees are identified, the owner or his agent shall be required to plant one new tree species identified in the protected tree list or the tree replant list (section 102-579), a minimum of 1.5 inches in diameter measured four feet above grade, for each 3,600 square feet of impervious surface area. New trees or replacement trees shall be planted within a time appropriate to the growing season of the species in question, not to exceed one year. 
(5)  Any new replacement tree, planted for credit, which dies within one year of planting shall be replaced by a tree of a minimum of three inches in diameter measured four feet above grade at the time of planting. 
(6)  If the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the administrative services director or his designee that the site cannot accommodate the total number of required new or replacement trees as a result of insufficient planting area or because of planned future disturbance or development of the property, the applicant shall provide a monetary contribution to the tree replacement reserve account. All contributions to the replacement tree reserve account shall be use to purchase and maintain trees on city property or along public rights of way as the city council may determine to protect, preserve and enhance tree cover in the city, to purchase lands for preservation as green belt areas or passive recreational uses, or to fund the landscape assistance program. The landscape assistance program is a local grant program to fund requests from existing development for assistance in landscaping. 
a.  The amount of such contribution shall be determined as follows: For every replacement tree which would otherwise be required, the contribution shall be equal to the retail value of a planted 1.5 inch caliper nursery grown shade tree. The retail value shall be calculated by taking an average of the median current retail price for a container grown, or a balled and burlapped, 1.5 inch caliper laurel oak, or equivalent species, multiplied by two. 
(b)  Road right-of-way tree protection zone. No person shall cut, remove, trim or in any way damage any protected tree in any street right-of-way or create any condition injurious to any such tree without first obtaining a permit to do so from the administrative services department. 
(1)  The administrative services department may issue an annual permit to public utility companies exempting them from the provisions of this subsection concerning tree preservation. 
(2)  In the event of flagrant or repeated disregard for the intent and purpose of this article, the administrative services department may revoke the permit. The reasons for revoking such a permit shall be provided in writing to the offender. 
(c)  New residential single-family and duplex homes. For new residential single-family and duplex homes located in A, R-1A, R-1, R-2 and R-3 zones, the private property owner of each lot shall plant one tree in the front yard within ten feet of the right-of-way, provided there is no existing tree in the front yard. 
(1)  Where a protected or replant tree species is required to be replanted, such tree shall be a minimum of 1.5 inches in diameter, measured four feet above grade. 
(2)  The location of an existing protected tree on the lot or the proposed location of a new protected or replant species, where required in this subsection (c), shall be identified on the plot plans submitted as part of the information required for a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 1338, § 2, 6-25-07) 
Sec. 102-579. - Protected tree list, tree replant list and vegetation list for buffer yard visual screen. 
(a)  Protected tree list. The following types of species comprise the protected tree list (* denotes shade trees): 
(1)  Species type A: Small, four-inch to seven-inch diameter trunk. 
Dogwood (Cornus florida) 
Redbud (Ceris canadensis) 
Ashe's magnolia (Magnolia ashei) 
(2)  Species type B: Medium, eight-inch to 13-inch diameter trunk. 
American holly (Ilex opaca) 
Southern magnolia (Magnolia grandiflora)* 
Eastern (or Southern) red cedar (Juniperus virginiana)* 
(3)  Species type C: Large, 14-inch and larger diameter trunk. 
Live oak (Quercus viginiana) 
Laurel oak (Quercus laurifolia)* 
Sweet gum (Liquidambar styraciflua)* 
Sycamore (Platanus occidentalis)* 
Pecan (Carya illinoensis)* 
Water oak (Quercus nigra)* 
Red maple (Acer rubrum)* 
(b)  Tree replant list. In addition to the three categories of trees identified in subsection (a), the following trees may be planted to meet the minimum tree replanting requirements in section 102-578(a)(3) and (4). Trees not on this list may be used only if approved by the administrative services director, or his designee. 
(1)  Species type A (small). 
Dahoon holly (Ilex cassine)* 
Fringe tree (Chionanthus virginicus) 
Red bay (Persea borbonia)* 
Swamp bay (Persea palustris)* 
Sassafras (Sassafras albidum) 
Yaupon (Ilex vomitoria) 
Wild olive (Osmanthus americanus) 
Scrubby post oak (Quercus margaretta) 
Southern crabapple (Malus angustifolia) 
Eastern Hophornbeam (Ostrya virginiana) 
Wax myrtle (Myrica cerifera)* 
Crepe myrtle (Lagerstroemia indica) 
Red buckeye (Aesculus pavia) 
Pindo palm (Butia capitata) 
Sago palm (Cycas revoluta) 
(2)  Species type B (medium). 
Cherry laurel (Prunus caroliniana)* 
Large-leafed magnolia (Magnolia macrophylla)* 
American hornbeam (Carpinus caroliniana) 
River birch (Betula nigra)* 
Florida maple (Acer barbatum)* 
Sweetbay (Magnolia virginiana)* 
Ginko (Ginko biloba)* 
Bradford pear (Pyrus calleryana "Bradford") 
Ash (Fraxinus spp.)* 
London planetree (Plantanus x acerfolia)* 
Sabal (cabbage) palm (Sabal palmetto) 
(3)  Species type C (large). 
Tulip tree (Liriodendron tulipifera) 
Willow oak (Quercus phellos) 
Black gum (Nyssa sylvatica) 
Southern red oak (Quercus falcata)* 
Shumard's red oak (Quercus shumardii)* 
Hackberry (Celtis laevigata)* 
White oak (Quercus alba)* 
Bald cypress (Taxodium distichum) 
Walnut (Juglans nigra)* 
Chinese elm (Ulmus parvifolia)* 
Hickory (Carya spp.)* 
Yellow buckeye (Aesculus flava)* 
Canary island date palm (Phoenix canariensis) 
(4)  Note: The following prohibited species may not be used to meet landscape requirements: 
Paper mulberry (Broussonetia papyrifera) 
Australian pine (Casuarina equisetifolia) 
Ear tree (Enterolobium cyclocarpum) 
Punk tree (Melaleuca spp.) 
Chinaberry (Melia azedarach) 
Brazilian pepper (Schinus terebinthifolius) 
Downy rosemyrtle (Rhodomytrus tomentosa) 
Bishopwood (Bischofia javanica) 
Chinese Tallow Tree or Popcorn Tree (Triadica sebifera) 
(c)  Vegetation list for buffer yard visual screen. 
(1)  One or more of the following classifications of vegetation shall be utilized for buffer yard visual screens. Vegetation not on this list may be used only if approved by the administrative services director, or his designee. 
Japanese privet (Ligustrum japonicum) 
Azalea (Rhododendron spp.) 
Japonese cleyera (Cleyera japonica) 
Wax myrtle (Myrica cerifera) 
Pampas grass (Cortaderia selloana) 
Silverthorn (Elaeagnus pungens) 
Cherry elaeagnus, Gumi (Elaeagnus multiflora) 
English holly (Ilex aquiifolium) 
Chinese holly (Ilex cornuta) 
Japanese holly (Ilex crenata) 
Yaupon holly (Ilex vomitoria) 
Oleander (Nerium oleander) 
Chinese juniper (Juniperus chinensis) 
Savin juniper (Juniperus sabina) 
Rocky mountain juniper (Juniperus scopulorum) 
Bottlebrush buckeye (Aesculus parviflora) 
(2)  Suggested planting sizes: 
a.  One-gallon plant: Approximately 15 to 24 inches in height. 
b.  Three-gallon plant: Approximately 24 to 36 inches in height. 
(Ord. No. 1338, § 2, 6-25-07) 
Sec. 102-580. - Tree removal permit. 
    No person shall cut, remove or damage any protected tree in a manner which causes the tree to die within a period of two years without first obtaining a tree removal permit. If a protected tree is to be removed, the individual making the request shall submit a written statement stating the reasons why tree removal is requested and provide graphic information in a format prescribed by the administrative services department on the location of the tree(s) prior to issuing a permit. A fee shall be charged by the city for processing and finalizing the permit process for commercial development. A single-family or duplex dwelling is exempt from all requirements but must replant a tree as required by section 102-572(b). 
(1)  Permit application information. 
a.  The following information shall be provided to the department before a tree removal permit shall be issued. 
b.  Residential, commercial and industrial development. Prior to commencing any development or activity, including removal of vegetation for site preparation, in any residential, commercial or industrial district, the owner, developer or his agent shall submit an accurately scaled drawing by a registered land surveyor, landscape designer or landscape architect, including the following information: 
1.  Location of all protected trees noting species, size and general condition. 
2.  Location of proposed structures, driveways, parking areas, required perimeter and interior landscaped areas, and other improvements to be constructed or installed. 
3.  Identification of trees to be preserved, trees to be removed, including dead trees, and trees to be replanted. 
4.  Proposed grade changes which might adversely affect or endanger trees, with specifications on how to maintain trees. 
(2)  Onsite inspection. Prior to the issuance of a tree removal permit, the administrative services department shall conduct an onsite inspection. 
(3)  Conditions of approval. The administrative services department may approve the permit if one or more of the following conditions is present: 
a.  Safety hazard. Necessity to remove trees which pose a safety hazard to pedestrians or vehicular traffic or threaten to cause disruption of public services or which pose a safety hazard to persons or buildings. 
b.  Diseased or weakened trees. Necessity to remove diseased trees or trees weakened by age, storm, fire or other injury. 
c.  Good forestry practices. Necessity to observe good forestry practices. 
d.  Construction of improvements. Necessity to remove trees in order to construct proposed improvements as a result of: 
1.  Need for access immediately around the proposed structure for construction equipment. 
2.  Need for access to the building site for construction equipment. 
3.  Essential grade changes. 
4.  Surface water drainage and utility installations. 
5.  Location of driveways, buildings or other permanent improvements. 
e.  Compliance with other ordinances or codes. Necessity for compliance with other city codes such as building, zoning, development, subdivision regulations, health provisions, land use regulations and other environmental ordinances. 
(4)  Review. The administrative services department shall have ten working days after receipt of a completed application filed pursuant to this article in which to approve or deny the requested permit. If an application is denied, the department shall specify to the applicant in writing the reason for such action. If no final action with respect to a completed application is taken within the required ten working days, the application shall be deemed to have been approved. 
(Ord. No. 1338, § 2, 6-25-07) 
Sec. 102-581. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Stop work order. Whenever, the administrative services director, or his designee, determines that a violation of this article has occurred, the following actions shall be initiated: 
(1)  Written notice. Immediately issue written notice by personal delivery or certified mail to the person violating this article stating the nature and location of the violation and specifying what remedial steps are necessary to bring the project into compliance. Such person shall immediately, conditions permitting, commence the recommended remedial action and shall have 15 working days after receipt of the notice, or such longer time as may be allowed by the administrative services director, or his designee, to complete the remedial action set forth in the notice. 
(2)  Remedial work and stop work orders. If a subsequent violation occurs during the fifteen working days referred to in subsection (a)(1), or if remedial work specified in the notice of violation is not completed within the time allowed, or if clearing and development of land is occurring without a permit, then the administrative services director, or his designee, shall issue a stop work order immediately. The stop work order shall contain the grounds for its issuance, and shall set forth the nature of the violation. The stop work order shall be directed not only to the person owning the land upon which the clearing and development is occurring, but also a separate stop work order shall be directed to the person actually performing the physical labors of the development activity or the person responsible for the development activity, directing him forthwith to cease and desist all or any portion of the work upon all or any geographical portion of the project, except such remedial work as is deemed necessary to bring the project into compliance. If such person fails to complete the recommended remedial action within the time allowed, or fails to take the recommended action after the issuance of such stop work order, then the administrative services director, or his designee, may issue a stop work order on all or any portion of the entire project. 
(3)  Notice of compliance; cancellation of notice of stop work order. Upon completion of remedial steps required by the notice referred to in subsection (a)(1), the administrative services director, or his designee, shall issue a notice of compliance and cancellation of the notice or stop work order. 
(b)  Penalty. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this article. 
(1)  The violation of any provision of this article, with the exception of unauthorized removal of trees, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00. 
(2)  Any person who knowingly or intentionally cuts down, removes, destroys or kills a tree specified in the protected tree list or tree replant list in section 102-579, without first obtaining a permit as provided in this section, shall be punished by a fine, as specified in the table below, for each tree unlawfully removed. That person shall also be responsible for reimbursing the city for the expense of having a forester, biologist, botanist, or other expert identify the number, size, and species of removed trees. 
Diameter of removed tree Fine 36 inches or greater Up to $500 per tree 28 to 35 inches Up to $400 per tree 20 to 28 inches Up to $300 per tree 13 to 19 inches Up to $200 per tree 4 to 12 inches Up to $100 per tree  
(Ord. No. 1338, § 2, 6-25-07) 
Secs. 102-582-102-599. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXIV. - ITINERANT VENDORS, MOBILE FOOD VENDORS, PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS 

Sec. 102-600. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to establish regulations for the location, approval and permitting of itinerant vendors, mobile food vendors, peddlers and solicitors. These administrative regulations are intended to provide orderly and effective management of temporary land use. 
(b)  The intent of this article is multifaceted and seeks to address the many concerns associated with itinerant vending. The following objectives apply: 
(1)  To aid and encourage small business development and entrepreneurialism, while protecting the interests of established "brick and mortar" businesses. 
(2)  To ensure that itinerant Vending locations are appropriate and will not create any unsafe or unsanitary condition nor put undue strain on nearby "brick and mortar" establishments. 
(3)  To ensure that the parking of vending vehicles or the placement of equipment, merchandise and any wares, will not adversely affect the public amenity and/or the aesthetics and functionality of the streetscape area. 
(4)  To protect the health, safety, and welfare of all citizens of and visitors to Crestview. 
(Ord. No. 1674, § 2, 1-14-19) 
Sec. 102-601. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this article, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commissary means a public food service establishment licensed by the division or a food establishment permitted by the department of agriculture and consumer services, which is utilized by a mobile food dispensing vehicle for the purpose of providing all required support services, including potable water and wastewater disposal that are not available on the mobile food dispensing vehicle. (61-C-0001 FAC.) 
    Division refers to the Division of Hotels and Restaurants of the Florida Department of Business and Professional Regulations. 
    Food code. this term as used in chapters 61C-1, 61C-3 and 61C-4, F.A.C., means paragraph 1-201.10(B), chapter 2, chapter 3, chapter 4, chapter 5, chapter 6, chapter 7, and sections 8-103.11 and 8-103.12 of the Food Code, 2009 Recommendations of the United States Public Health Service/Food and Drug Administration including Annex 3: Public Health Reasons/Administrative Guidelines; Annex 5: Conducting Risk-based Inspections, herein adopted by reference. A copy of the food code, as adopted by the division, is available on the division's Internet website www.MyFloridaLicense.com/dbpr/hr. A copy of the entire Food Code is available on the U.S. Food and Drug Administration Internet website. Printed copies of the entire food code are available through the National Technical Information Service, 5301 Shawnee Road, Alexandria, VA 22312. 
    Food establishment as utilized in the Food Code, this term shall apply to public lodging establishments and food service establishments as defined in F.S. ch. 509, according to the context of the applicable rule language. 
    Itinerant vendor means any and all persons, firms and corporations, as well as their agents and employees, who engage in the temporary and/or transient business which offers services, merchandise, wares, goods, and/or other articles for purchase from one or more stationary or mobile locations and who, for the purpose of carrying on such business may rent, lease, hire, or otherwise occupy a space in any building, structure or occupy any area on a lot or parcel of land or who occupies a vehicle, self-propelled or otherwise, through which any services, merchandise, wares, goods, and/or other articles, may be traded, bartered, sold, offered for sale, or exhibited for sale within the city. 
    Itinerant vending operations is a term used in this article that generally refers to the itinerant vending categories as a whole with respect to certain site requirements or components of an itinerant vending use. 
    Mobile food vendor means any itinerant vendor, which travels by self-propelled or non-self-propelled vehicle, trailer, wagon, or any other conveyance, from place to place, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting edible goods, such as meats, fish, vegetables, fruit, or other, which are sold, offered for sale, and/or exhibited for sale. The term mobile food vendor includes but is not limited to the terms lunch wagon, cart, ice cream truck, mobile food truck and others. 
    Peddler means any person who carries from place to place any goods wares or merchandise which may be sold, is exhibited for sale, and may or may not be immediately delivered, or bartered the same, shall be deemed to be a peddler. All persons who do not keep a regular place of business, open at all times during regular business hours and at the same place, who shall offer for sale goods, wares and merchandise, shall be deemed peddlers under this article. All persons who keep a regular place of business, open at all times in regular business hours and at the same place, who shall, elsewhere than at such regular place of business, personally or through their agents, offer for sale or sell and, at the time of such offering for sale, deliver goods, wares and merchandise, shall also be deemed peddlers as above. 
    Premises means the public food service or lodging establishment and the contiguous land or property under the control of the operator. The property may include all yards, alleys, driveways, sidewalks, and other exterior portions of the licensed premises. 
    Public food service establishments , as defined in F.S. § 509.013(5), are licensed in accordance with the following classifications and requirements: 
    Non-seating: 
(1)  Permanent. Permanent non-seating establishments are classified as those fixed public food service establishments for which the sole service provided is intended as take-out or delivery, or which do not otherwise provide accommodations for consumption of food by guests on the premises, or premises under the control of the operator. For the purposes of this section, establishments located at food courts and malls are classified in this manner as long as seating is not provided within the premises of the establishment itself. 
(2)  Mobile food dispensing vehicle. Mobile food dispensing vehicles are classified as any vehicle mounted public food service establishments which are self-propelled or otherwise movable from place to place and include self-contained utilities, such as gas, water, electricity and liquid waste disposal. 
(3)  Caterer. Caterers are classified as any public food service establishments where food or drink is prepared for service elsewhere in response to an agreed upon contract for a function or event. The term includes catering kitchens. For the purpose of this rule, the term "caterer" does not include those establishments licensed pursuant to F.S. ch. 500 or F.S. ch. 381, or any other location where food is provided or displayed for sale by the individual meal. A licensed public food service establishment that also provides catering services is not required to hold a separate catering license from the division. Caterers must meet all applicable standards of a public food service establishment as provided in rules 61C-1.004, 61C-4.010 and 61C-4.023, F.A.C. Separate independent caterers utilizing the equipment or premises of a licensed public food service establishment are deemed operators as defined by section F.S. § 509.013(2), of such public food service establishment and subject to all applicable requirements of law and rule. 
    Temporary public food service establishments and vendors: 
(1)  Temporary public food service establishments are classified as those establishments operated at temporary food service events as defined in F.S. § 509.013(8). If upon inspection the temporary public food service establishment does not meet minimum sanitation standards as provided in chapters 61C-l and 61C-4, F.A.C., food service operations shall be discontinued until corrections are complete and verified by the division of hotels and restaurants of the department of business and professional regulation. 
(2)  Public food service establishments that have a current license may operate one facility at a temporary event as part of the existing license. Each additional facility operated by the same licensee must acquire a separate temporary food service event license. 
    Self-sufficient mobile food dispensing vehicle means a public food service establishment classified as a mobile food dispensing vehicle that contains, as part of the vehicle, a three compartment sink for washing, rinsing, and sanitizing equipment and utensils; a separate hand wash sink; adequate refrigeration and storage capacity; full provision of power utilities including electrical, LP gas, or a portable power generation unit; a potable water holding tank; and a liquid waste disposal system in accordance with subparts 5-3 and 5-4 of the food code. 
    Solicitation means a request, directly or indirectly, for money, property, financial assistance, or any other thing of value on the plea or representation that such money, property, financial assistance, or other thing of value or a portion of it will be used for a charitable or sponsor purpose or will benefit a charitable organization or sponsor. The term includes, but is not limited to, the following methods of requesting or securing the promise, pledge, or grant of money, property, financial assistance, or any other thing of value: 
(1)  Making any oral or written request; 
(2)  Making any announcement to the press, on radio or television, by telephone or telegraph, or by any other communication device concerning an appeal or campaign by or for any charitable organization or sponsor or for any charitable or sponsor purpose; 
(3)  Distributing, circulating, posting, or publishing any handbill, written advertisement, or other publication that directly or by implication seeks to obtain any contribution; or 
(4)  Selling or offering or attempting to sell any advertisement, advertising space, book, card, coupon, chance, device, magazine, membership, merchandise, subscription, sponsorship, flower, admission, ticket, food, or other service or tangible good, item, or thing of value, or any right of any description in connection with which any appeal is made for any charitable organization or sponsor or charitable or sponsor purpose, or when the name of any charitable organization or sponsor is used or referred to in any such appeal as an inducement or reason for making the sale or when, in connection with the sale or offer or attempt to sell, any statement is made that all or part of the proceeds from the sale will be used for any charitable or sponsor purpose or will benefit any charitable organization or sponsor. 
    A solicitation is considered as having taken place regardless of whether the person making the solicitation receives any contribution. A solicitation does not occur when a person applies for a grant or an award to the government or to an organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under section 50l(a) of the Internal Revenue Code and described in section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code and is duly registered with the department. 
    Solicitor means any person, firm, or corporation as well as their agents and employees, who engage in any means of request, directly or indirectly, for money, property, financial assistance, or any other thing of value on the plea or representation that such money, property, financial assistance, or other thing of value or a portion of it will be used for a charitable purpose or will benefit a charitable organization or sponsor. The term shall also include, but is not limited to, taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise, subscriptions or personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sale or not; distributing, circulating, posting, or publishing any handbill, written advertisement, or other publication that directly or by implication seeks to obtain any contribution shall also be included in this term. 
    Temporary food service event means any event of 30 or fewer consecutive days in duration, advertised and recognized in the community, where food is prepared, served, or sold to the general public. 
(Ord. No. 1674, § 2, 1-14-19) 
Sec. 102-602. - Itinerant vendor, peddler, solicitor compliance certificate-Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, to engage in the business activities of itinerant and/or mobile vending, peddling or solicitation, within the City of Crestview, without first registering with the city by obtaining an itinerant vendor, peddler, and solicitor compliance certificate. 
(1)  Any itinerant vendor, peddler, a solicitor wishing to engage in the business activities of itinerant and/or mobile vending, peddling or solicitation, within the City of Crestview, shall make application to the growth management department on forms provided by the department. 
(2)  The growth management department of the City of Crestview shall issue to any itinerant vendor, peddler, or solicitor, a compliance certificate authorizing such itinerant vendor, peddler, or solicitor, to sell, exhibit for sale or offer for sale, in the City of Crestview, any goods, wares and merchandise only after such itinerant vendor, peddler, or solicitor shall have fully complied with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The itinerant vendor, peddler, and solicitors compliance certificate shall be valid from October 1st to September 30th of the following year and shall be based on the type of vending, peddling, and/or soliciting each applicant is proposing and the time of year in which application is made. A base annual registration fee shall be established with regards to the following categories: 
(1)  Itinerant vending categories. 
a.  Itinerant auto oriented sales/events. This category includes the itinerant sales of self-propelled vehicles and non-self-propelled vehicle trailers, to include but not be limited to cars, trucks, fifth-wheel trailers, trailers, campers, off-road vehicles, motorcycles, dirt bikes, boats, ski-dos, jet-skis, and others. This category includes temporary auto consignment lots. This category does not include the one-time sale of a single vehicle by a resident of the city. 
b.  Tent sales. This category includes itinerant sales of both seasonal and non-seasonal items which involve semi-mobile or stationary, temporary sales and sales events to include but not be limited to Christmas tree lots, firework stands, home mercantile product sales, used merchandise, garage type sales (offsite of a parcel land on which the primary use is residential in nature), farmer's markets, and others. This does not include those temporary sales events conducted on the premises, including the parking lot, of established commercial enterprises, performed exclusively by the owner and/or operator of the commercial enterprise or with the expressed permission from said owner or operator by a commercial vendor of new products which are sold within the commercial enterprise on the premises, within 15 feet of the primary structure. 
c.  Mobile vending truck/trailer. This category specifically refers to those itinerant vendors that travel by either self-propelled vehicle or are otherwise pulled or moved by a self-propelled vehicle. This category also includes mobile food dispensing vehicles (MFDV's) including trucks and trailers which utilize either a water and sewer connections or a commissary at another location and ice cream trucks. 
d.  Mobile food cart. Is synonymous with push cart, hand cart, hand-drawn cart, and hot dog stand/cart and are a class of MFDV. Push carts are any variety of small, light, non-motorized, self-propelled units, which are moved by hand and are used exclusively for the retail sales of flowers, plant, fruits, vegetables, beverages, pre-packaged food stuffs, hot dogs, sausages, and ice cream. 
(c)  Back ground investigation. 
(1)  Each applicant for an itinerant vendor, peddler, and solicitor compliance certificate shall agree, when making application, to submit to a limited background investigation. Upon receipt of such application, a copy shall be transmitted to the chief of police who shall make the following type investigations: 
a.  Commercial activities. The chief of police or designee shall cause an investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. The applicant shall include any and all employee information as deemed necessary by the chief of police. 
b.  A copy of all vendor's, solicitor's or peddler's application must be submitted to the chief of police for approval. 
(d)  Applicants for a compliance certificate under this article must file with the growth management department a signed application which shall give the following information: 
(1)  Name of the applicant and of each person who owns ten percent or more of the outstanding stock or equity interest in the licensed activity. 
(2)  A valid driver's license. 
(3)  The applicants' vehicles' make, model, color and tag number if applicable. 
(4)  Permanent home address, valid telephone number and email address of the applicant. 
(5)  The applicant shall provide their federal employer identification number and sales tax identification number. 
(6)  The address or parcel identification number of the planned vending site, including the property owner's name and telephone number. 
(7)  A notarized statement from the property owner(s) that the temporary use is allowed on the property. The statement must include the temporary use dates (including setup and take-down), location, description type and the name of the business and representative designated by the property owner. 
(8)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods, food or beverages to be sold. 
(9)  The address of the commissary, if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1674, § 2, 1-14-19) 
Sec. 102-603. - Temporary vending permit-Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, to engage in the business activities of itinerant and/or mobile vending, peddling or solicitation, within the City of Crestview, without first obtaining a Temporary Vending Permit. 
(1)  A temporary vending permit shall be issued upon such conditions as the growth management department may reasonably require, assuring compliance with the City of Crestview's Code of Ordinances. 
a.  All applications received for a particular location will be processed on a first come first serve basis. Any subsequent applications received may be issued once the prior applicant has vacated the premises. 
b.  A compliance certificate shall have been obtained prior to issuance of a temporary vending permit. 
c.  All vendors must adhere to all applicable state and local laws. 
(2)  Applicants for permit under this article must file a signed application with the growth management department. The application shall provide sufficient information to determine if the proposed site and temporary activity comply with this article and other provisions of the Code of Ordinances. 
(3)  In addition to the application, all applicants shall submit: 
a.  Copies of all applicable state licenses. 
b.  Insurance. 
1.  Proof of general liability insurance, such proof in a form acceptable to the city, issued by an insurance company that is licensed to do business in the State of Florida, protecting the applicant from all claims for damages to property or bodily injury, which may arise from operations under or in connection with the vendor's activity. 
2.  For all motorized mobile vending units, proof of auto liability insurance, such proof in a form acceptable to the city, issued by an insurance company that is licensed to do business in the State of Florida, protecting the applicant from all claims for damages to property or bodily injury, which may arise from the use of a motor vehicle in connection with mobile vending and shall be in an amount no less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence. 
3.  A signed and notarized hold-harmless agreement (form to be provided by city). 
c.  A site plan, accurate drawing or pictorial representation of the property to be used, rented, or leased for the temporary vending use, which shall include the following: 
1.  All existing and proposed structures on-site, 
2.  The structural dimensions and locations in relation to property lines, 
3.  The zoning district setback lines, 
4.  Locations of temporary sanitary facilities (Port-o-lets) and waste disposal, 
5.  Parking areas, 
6.  Signage, and 
7.  The means of ingress and egress for vehicular and pedestrian traffic; 
8.  Any additional information necessary to accurately portray the property and to identify the area to be utilized for the event; and 
9.  A description of the proposed use. 
10.  Mobile food carts are exempt from this requirement. 
(4)  Door to door solicitors and peddlers, in addition to subsections 102-602(1) through 102-602(3) above, must provide: 
a.  If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship. 
b.  A valid driver's licenses for all drivers and related proof of insurance. 
c.  The length of time and location for which the solicitation or peddling shall occur. 
d.  A signed and notarized hold-harmless agreement (form to be provided by city). 
(5)  Itinerant vending permit time-frames. 
a.  All applicable licensure, certificates and permits must be obtained prior to the installation of any temporary structures, lighting, signage, etc. 
b.  The application for a temporary vending permit for all uses shall be filed no less than 21 days prior to the date on which the permit is to take effect. 
c.  Duration of temporary vending permit (TVP) by itinerant vendor category. 
1.  Itinerant auto oriented sales/events. A TVP issued to an itinerant auto oriented sales/event use, shall be valid for a maximum of 15 consecutive days, two times per calendar year. Each 15-day period shall be separated by at least 30 days within the same calendar year. Dates of operation will include dates to assemble and dismantle equipment and/or structures. 
2.  Tent sales. A TVP issued to an itinerant tent sales use, shall be valid for a period not to exceed 15 consecutive days, three times per calendar year. Dates of operation will include dates to assemble and dismantle equipment and/or structures. 
3.  Mobile vending truck/trailer. A TVP issued to an itinerant mobile vendor truck/trailer use, shall be valid for period of time not to exceed one year (365 days) from the date of issuance. 
4.  Mobile food cart. A TVP issued to an itinerant mobile food cart use, shall be valid for a period of time not to exceed one year (365 days) from the date of issuance. 
5.  Solicitors. A TVP issued to a solicitor shall be valid for a period of time not to exceed one year (365 days) from the date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 1674, § 2, 1-14-19) 
Sec. 102-604. - Regulations, requirements, site restrictions. 
(a)  Use restrictions. 
(1)  Temporary vending operations and events shall only occur within commercial (C-1 and C-2), industrial (M-1) and downtown mixed use (DMU) zoning districts. 
(2)  At no time shall any temporary vending operations disrupt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic on or off-site. 
(3)  Itinerant auto oriented sales shall not be located on vacant and/or unimproved lands. 
(4)  Itinerant auto oriented sales/events and tent sales shall be limited to one temporary vending permit per parcel of land at any given time. 
(5)  Itinerant auto oriented sales/events and tent sales, when located on any parcel of land or lot of record, with an existing primary use building or structure, shall be limited to one temporary vending permit at any given time. 
(6)  Mobile vending trucks and trailers shall not be located on vacant and/or unimproved lands. 
(7)  There shall not be more than three mobile vending trucks and/or trailers on one parcel of land at any given time. 
(8)  Mobile food carts shall not be required to maintain the applicable zoning district yard regulations but at no time shall any mobile food cart become stationary within any public right-of-way, obstruct any vision triangle, and/or obstruct or detract from any vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow. 
(b)  Site requirements. 
(1)  At no time shall a mobile vending truck or trailer be closer than ten feet to one another mobile vending truck or trailer on the same parcel of land. 
(2)  All itinerant vending operations shall maintain the applicable zoning district setback standards, for the zoning district in which they are located. 
(3)  At no time shall any component of an itinerant vending operation be located within ten feet of any permanent structure onsite. 
(c)  Parking. 
(1)  At no time shall any temporary vending operations restrict the number of parking spaces to a level below what is required by this land development code for the permanent primary use onsite. 
(2)  Adequate parking areas, consistent with current zoning requirements for similar uses shall be maintained during such temporary vending uses. 
a.  Parking spaces required to fulfill the minimum requirements of a principal use, on site or adjacent to the itinerant vending use, as per section 102-151 of this Code may not be used by any itinerant vendor operation. 
b.  Parking shall only be allowed on designated parking areas identified on the approved site plan. 
(3)  No parking will be allowed on any public right-of-way. 
(d)  Traffic. 
(1)  Traffic generation shall not adversely impact the flow of traffic on an adjacent roadway. 
(2)  The use of any existing access drives on or connected to the property, parcel, or lot on which the itinerant vending use is located is required. 
(e)  Temporary structures. 
(1)  Only one temporary structure is allowed per permitted itinerant vending operation. 
a.  Itinerant auto oriented sales/events and tent sales shall be limited by the following: 
1.  The temporary structure may be a tent or a trailer that has been built as an office trailer. 
i.  Temporary structures do not include motor homes, camp trailers or the like. 
2.  The temporary structure may require a building permit to be obtained and subsequently require an inspection by the building and the fire department prior to operation. 
(f)  Sanitation. 
(1)  The site shall be kept clean of all debris, trash, waste, or other unsightly condition. 
(2)  Temporary sanitary facilities (Port-o-lets), shall be kept in a clean and working order. 
(g)  Signage. 
(1)  Any temporary signage shall be installed and maintained in compliance with chapter 102, Land Use Regulations, article XVI, Signs. 
(h)  Utilities. 
(1)  New temporary electrical poles shall not be provided. If one exists onsite it may be utilized for the temporary vending operation, provided it meets the following requirements: 
a.  Any use of power from the main structure onsite shall be in accordance with the Florida Building and Life Safety Codes and 
b.  The use of electrical cords is prohibited. 
(i)  Additional mobile food cart requirements. 
(1)  Location. 
a.  Mobile food carts shall be permitted to operate in commercial or downtown mixed use zoning districts in the downtown area, bounded by bowers avenue west to the south, by Ferdon Boulevard to the east, by James Lee Blvd. West to the north, and by Wilson Street to the west. 
b.  Mobile food carts shall only be located on properties where there is an existing use that is non-residential in nature. 
c.  Mobile food carts shall not be placed on an unimproved surface during the course of business. 
d.  Mobile food carts selling food and/or beverages shall not stop and conduct business within 100 feet of any indoor and/or outdoor eating establishment including another food cart. 
e.  No more than two mobile food carts shall be located on any block face at any given time except during organized and permitted events. 
f.  At no time, shall placement of a mobile food cart impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
g.  At no time, shall placement of a mobile food cart deteriorate any pedestrian or vehicular site triangle. 
h.  At no time, shall mobile food carts placement be in front of a buildings entrance, a fire hydrant, or emergency exit. 
i.  All applicable permits must be obtained prior to the installation of any temporary structure, lighting, signage, etc. 
(Ord. No. 1674, § 2, 1-14-19) 
Sec. 102-605. - Administration. 
(a)  Application shall be made to the growth management department, on forms provided by the department, for a compliance certificate and a temporary vender permit prior to any itinerant vending operation setup within the city limits. 
(b)  Upon approval of the compliance certificate application for operating as an itinerant vendor within the city limits, the applicant may submit a temporary use permit application for the specific location and timeframes for said operation. 
(c)  The growth management department shall review the application the duration of the permit and specifying such conditions as to, location, parking, traffic, access and any other conditions of the activity that may be required for permit issuance. 
(Ord. No. 1674, § 2, 1-14-19) 
Sec. 102-606. - Denial or revocation of itinerant vendor compliance certificate and/or temporary vending permit. 
(a)  The growth management department may revoke, suspend, or deny the issuance of any itinerant vending compliance certificate or temporary vending permit if it is determined that an applicant has: 
(1)  Been convicted of or entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to, a crime against the laws of this state or any other state of the United States, involving moral turpitude, fraudulent or dishonest dealing, or the illegal use or sale of a controlled substance. 
(2)  Has obtained a permit by fraud, false statement, misrepresentation, or failure to truthfully answer any question in the required permit application. 
(3)  Has failed to obtain required approvals from the state or obtain any applicable permits or licenses. 
(4)  Upon finding imminent and hazardous threats to public health and safety caused by any use, the growth management department may take reasonable steps to prevent public access thereto and to eliminate such hazard and may revoke or suspend a certificate permit. 
(5)  Not later than ten days after the filing of a completed application for a vendor's certificate, the applicant shall be notified by the growth management department of the decision on the issuance or denial of the license. If the issuance of the license is approved, the growth management department may issue a temporary use permit upon review of an application for said permit. 
(6)  If the temporary use permit is denied, the applicant shall be provided with a statement of the reasons therefor, which reasons shall be entered in writing on the application. 
(Ord. No. 1674, § 2, 1-14-19) 
Sec. 102-607. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No temporary vending permit shall be issued for any itinerant vendor operation in a residential zoning district. 
(b)  No solicitor, peddler or vendor shall enter into any house, building or other structure or upon any land, parcel, lot, or property, without the prior consent of the owner or occupant thereof where there is placed or posted on the premises in a conspicuous position at or near the usual means of ingress or visible from such location, a sign or other form of notice stating or indicating that the owner or occupant thereof forbids or otherwise does not desire persons engaged in such or similar activity to enter upon the premises. 
(c)  No solicitor or vendor shall conduct themselves or their business in an unlawful manner or in such manner as to constitute a breach of peace, is offensive to public decency or can be considered menacing to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or attempt to sell any commodity by means of vending such commodity upon any street, sidewalk, public area, public right-of-way or private property in the city, without first obtaining a compliance certificate with the city and securing the required temporary vending permit(s). 
(Ord. No. 1674, § 2, 1-14-19) 
Sec. 102-608. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The following activities are exempt from the provisions of the article: 
(1)  Salesmen representing wholesale houses or distributors who sell to local retail merchants from catalogues or samples. 
(2)  Sales of goods, wares, food, or merchandise at festivals, carnivals, celebrations or other special events sponsored and/or permitted by the appropriate governing body or authority. 
(3)  The sale of privately owned and used merchandise, at garage or yard sales conducted on the privately owned or rented premises used as a residence by the seller of such goods. 
(4)  The sale of farm, aqua cultural, grove, horticultural, floricultural, tropical porciculture, or tropical fish farm products, or other products manufactured there from, except intoxicating liquors, wine, or beer. 
(5)  Sales of goods or merchandise purchased with donated funds or donated by the owners thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any charitable, not-for-profit, or philanthropic purpose. 
(6)  Minors conducting home solicitation sales under the supervision of an adult, or solicitors, salespersons, or agents making calls or soliciting orders on behalf of a religious, charitable, scientific, educational, or veterans' institution or other not-for-profit organization are exempt from this article. 
(7)  Any public or nonprofit school which operates a carnival, fair, or other celebration, by whatever name known, which is in operation for three days or less and which includes the sale and preparation of food and beverages must notify the local county health department of the proposed event and is exempt from any temporary food service regulations with respect to the requirements for having hot and cold running water; floors which are constructed of tight wood, asphalt, concrete, or other cleanable material; enclosed walls and ceilings with screening; and certain size counter service. A school may not use this notification process to circumvent the license requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1674, § 2, 1-14-19) 
Sec. 102-609. - Appeals. 
    Appeals may be filed as provided elsewhere within the land development code. A permit may be reinstated provided that the applicant has met all conditions and requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1674, § 2, 1-14-19) 
Sec. 102-610. - Compliance certificate and/or permit nontransferable. 
    Neither the certificate nor the permit provided for in this article shall be transferable, nor give authority to more than one location, unless provided for by this article, by any person to sell or exhibit goods or merchandise. 
(Ord. No. 1674, § 2, 1-14-19) 
Sec. 102-611. - Display of certificate and permit. 
    Both the itinerant vending compliance certificate and the temporary vending permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises where the sale or exhibit is being conducted and shall remain displayed so long as any goods or merchandise are being sold or exhibited. 
(Ord. No. 1674, § 2, 1-14-19) 
Sec. 102-612. - Prerequisite for issuance of municipal or county occupational license. 
    A municipality or county may not issue an occupational license to any business coming under the provisions of this chapter until a license has been procured for such business from the division. 
(Ord. No. 1674, § 2, 1-14-19) 
Sec. 102-613. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person or business violating any provision of this article or any rule, order, or regulation made pursuant to this article shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $500.00. Each day the violation exists shall be considered a separate violation. The penalty provided for herein is cumulative to other remedies or enforcement processes the city may have, including those available under F.S. ch. 162, and section 1-11, General penalty; continuing violations, of the City of Crestview Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  For the purposes of this article, a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day a violation of this article exists, such time commencing on the day the offender is notified of the violation. 
(c)  No person or business shall be in violation of this article for catering activity, temporary sales of food, or vending machine activity in accordance with F.S. ch. 509, and Rule 61C-1.002(5)(a), Florida Administrative Code, so long as such person or business is not required to procure a license from the Florida Department of Business and Professional Regulation and/or the department of agriculture, for service of food to the public as a mobile food dispensing vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1674, § 2, 1-14-19) 
Sec. 102-614. - Reference. 
    F.S. chs. 500, Food Products and 509, Lodging and Food Service Establishments; Department of Business and Professional Regulations, Division of Hotels and Restaurants, Public Lodging and Food Service Establishments, Administrative Rules (September 2018) chapter 61C-1 Florida Administrative Code and chapter 61C-4 Public Food Service Establishments; US Department of Health and Human Services, FDA US Food and Drug Administration, Food Code 2017. 
(Ord. No. 1674, § 2, 1-14-19) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1983 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1983 Code, as updated through October 22, 1990, which are included herein. Sections of the 1983 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1983 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-1-16 1-1-1-16 2-1 2-1 2-16-2-18 2-26-2-28 2-41-2-49 2-61-2-69 2-61-2-63 2-81-2-83 2-76(a) 2-97 2-76(b), (c) 2-98 2-77 2-99 2-79-2-83 2-111-2-115 2-117-2-119 2-136-2-138 2-131-2-141 2-151-2-161 2-166 2-191 2-176 2-201 2-191-2-200 2-211-2-220 3-1-3-9 6-1-6-9 3-21, 3-22 6-31, 6-32 4-1-4-3 10-2-10-4 4-5 10-6 4-10, 4-11 10-7, 10-8 4-12-4-16 10-10-10-14 5-1-5-7 14-1-14-7 5-8 5-21-5-27 14-31-14-37 5-36-5-38 14-51-14-53 5-51-5-60 14-66-14-75 5-76, 5-77 14-96, 14-97 5-86-5-90 14-111-14-115 5-101-5-106 14-126-14-131 5-116-5-130 14-141-14-155 5-141-5-160 14-166-14-185 5.5-1-5.5-7 22-1-22-7 6-3 26-1 7-1-7-7 34-1-34-7 9-1-9-3 38-1-38-3 9.6-1-9.6-12 42-1-42-12 9.7-1-9.7-4 50-1-50-4 10-1-10-20 18-26-18-45 10-21 18-47 10-22 18-46 10-24-10-32 18-48-18-56 11-1 54-1 11-8-11-11 30-1-30-4 11-14, 11-15 54-2, 54-3 11-16(a) 30-26 11-16(b), (c) 30-27 11-16(d) 30-28 11-17-11-20 54-4-54-7 12-16-12-22 62-26-62-32 12-36-12-44 62-1 13-1-13-12 46-1-46-12 13.5-1-13.5-12 30-51-30-62 14-1-14-7 74-1-74-7 16-26-16-32 82-36-82-42 16-41-16-46 82-56-82-61 16-56 82-71 16-71, 16-72 82-91, 82-92 16-86, 16-87 82-116, 82-117 17-1, 17-2 86-1, 86-2 17-16-17-19 86-26-86-29 17-31 86-51 17-41-17-48 86-71-86-78 18-1-18-5 90-1-90-5 18-21-18-25 90-27-90-31 18-41-18-46 90-51-90-56 18-56-18-66 90-66-90-76 18-76-18-82 90-86-90-92 18-91-18-97 90-106-90-112 18-111-18-113 90-136-90-138 18-118, 18-119 90-139, 90-140 18-131-18-138 90-161-90-168 20-36, 20-37 102-36, 102-37 20-56-20-62 102-531-102-537 20-76 74-9 20-77-20-82 102-39-102-44  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE LAWS OF FLORIDA 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of Laws of Florida transferred from the Charter into the Code of Ordinances. 
Laws of Fla. 
Chapter Section  Section 
this Code 63-1249 6(c) 74-8 12(c) 2-29 14 2-192 18 46-13  
; - CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1983 Code, as updated through October 22, 1990, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1983 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede October 22, 1990, but which were never included in the 1983 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since October 22, 1990, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 700  2-11-91 1.01.00 102-1 1.02.00 102-2 1.03.00 102-3 1.04.00 102-4 1.05.00 102-5 2.01.00 102-21 2.02.00 102-22 2.03.00 102-23 2.04.00 102-24 2.05.00 102-25 2.06.00 102-26 2.07.00 102-27 2.08.00 102-28 2.09.00 102-29 2.10.00 102-30 2.11.00 102-31 2.12.00 102-33 2.13.00 102-34 2.14.00 102-35 2.15.00 102-38 102-331 3.00.00 102-51 4.00.00 102-61 4.01.00 102-62 4.02.00 102-63 4.03.00 102-64 5.00.00 102-81 5.01.00 102-82 5.02.00 102-83 5.03.00 102-84 6.00.01 102-101 6.02.00 102-102 6.03.00 102-103 6.04.00 102-104 6.05.00 102-105 7.00.00 102-116 7.01.00 102-117 7.02.00 102-118 7.03.00 102-119 7.04.00 102-120 7.05.00 102-121 7.06.00 102-122 7.07.00 102-123 7.08.00 102-124 7.09.00 102-125 7.10.00 102-126 7.11.00 102-127 7.12.00 102-128 7.13.00 102-129 7.14.00 102-130 7.15.00 102-131 7.16.00 102-132 8.00.00 102-146 8.01.00 102-147 8.02.00 102-148 8.03.00 102-149 8.04.00 102-150 8.05.00 102-151 9.00.00 102-161 9.01.00 102-162 9.02.00 102-163 9.03.00 102-164 9.04.00 102-165 9.05.00 102-166 9.06.00 102-167 10.00.00 102-181 10.01.00 102-182 10.02.00 102-183 10.03.00 102-184 10.04.00 102-185 10.05.00 102-186 11.00.00 102-201 11.01.00 102-202 11.03.00 102-203 11.04.00 102-204 11.05.00 102-205 12.00.00 102-216 12.01.01 102-217 12.02.00 102-218 12.03.00 102-219 12.04.00 102-220 13.00.00 102-241 13.01.00 102-242 13.02.00 102-243 14.00.00 102-261 14.01.00 102-262 14.02.00 102-263 14.03.00 102-264 14.04.00 102-265 15.01.00 102-281 15.02.00 102-282 15.03.00 102-283 16.00.00 102-301 16.01.00 102-302 16.02.00 102-303 16.03.00 102-304 16.04.00 102-305 16.06.00 102-306 16.07.00 102-307 16.08.00 102-308 16.09.00 102-309 17.01.00 102-326 17.02.00 102-327 17.03.00 102-328 17.04.00 102-329 17.05.00 102-330 17.06.00 102-332 17.07.00 102-333 18.00.00 102-351 18.01.00 102-352 18.02.00 102-353 18.03.00 102-354 18.04.00 102-355 18.05.00 102-356 749  4-22-91 3 42-3 5 42-9 759  2-10-92 3(4-31) 10-1 3(4-32), 3(4-33) 10-15, 10-16 3(4-34)-3(4-36) 10-51-10-53 3(4-37) 10-5 3(4-38) 10-54 3(4-39)-3(4-41) 10-17-10-19 3(4-42(a)) 10-9 3(4-42(b)) 10-20 3(4-43)-3(4-50) 10-21-10-28 760  1-13-92 3(19-16)-3(19-28) 94-26-94-38 764  3-23-92 1 70-1 3(8-1) 70-2 3(8-2)-3(8-21) 70-26-70-45 765  5-26-92 1, 2 2-241, 2-242 766  4-27-92 2 54-8 768  4-27-92 1, 2 90-26, 90-27 771  7-13-92 4-12 102-371-102-379 14-18 102-380-102-384 776  8-10-92 3(18-120) 90-141 777  8-10-92 4, 5 26-2, 26-3 779  8-24-92 3 58-1-58-3 780  9-29-92 1 62-2 781  9-28-92 1 62-1 782 10-12-92 2 2-98-2-100 70-2 3 70-44 4, 5 30-28, 30-29 783 10-12-92 1, 2 2-96, 2-97 784 12-28-92 3(20.05.00) 102-401 3(20.00.02)-3(20.00.04) 102-402-102-404 3(20.01.01)-3(20.01.08) 102-405-102-412 3(20.02.01)-3(20.02.04) 102-421, 102-424 3(20.03.01)-3(20.03.06) 102-441-102-446 3(20.04.01) 102-461 785  1-11-93 3(21.01.00), 3(21.01.01) 102-481, 102-482 3(21.02.00) 102-483 3(21.03.00)-3(21.03.14) 102-484-102-498 790  1-25-93 2 90-27 3 90-165 791  3- 8-93 26-3 792  4-26-93 62-1 793  4-26-93 2, 3 2-171 796  8-23-93 2 94-26 3 94-28 4 94-30 5, 6 94-32, 94-33 797  9-13-93 2 102-406 3 102-442(1), (2), (4) 798  6-28-93 2 102-305 799 11-22-93 2 102-36, 102-36.1 3 102-38(b)-(d) 4 102-84 X.c., e. 5 102-129(c) 6 102-129(f) 7 102-129(b) 8 102-308(k)(3) 9 102-461 800  9-13-93 2 14-32, 14-37 801  9-27-93 2 90-138 805 11-22-93 2       Rpld 38-1-38-3 3       Added 38-1-38-5 806 11-22-93 2 14-4(b), (d), (e), (g) 807 11-22-93 2 14-1(a), (c), (d), (f) 808 11-22-93 2 14-5(b), (d), (e) 809 11-22-93 2 14-2(a), (d) 810 11-22-93 2 14-8 811 11-22-93 2 14-166 812 11-22-93 2 14-9 813 12-13-93 4 102-62-102-64 817 12-13-93 2 90-137(b) 818 12-13-93 2 18-57 819 12-22-93 1-7 Adopting ordinance, p. ix 820  1-10-94 3, 4       Rpld 6-31, 6-31 5-7       Added 6-31-6-33 823  1-24-94 2 70-2, 70-26, 70-27, 70-29, 70-30, 70-33, 70-34, 70-36, 70-37, 70-39, 70-40, 70-42-70-44       Rpld 70-28, 7-32 825  4-11-94 2, 3 102-130 826  2-28-94 2 14-185 827  2-28-94 2 90-27(2) 830  6-13-94 2 102-129(c) 831  6-13-94 2 90-138 840  8-22-94 2 102-36(b), (c) 3 102-36.1(l) 841  8- 8-94 3 74-11-74-15 842  9-26-94 2 102-129 3 102-351 4 70-2, 70-27, 70-29 5 70-46-70-51 6 18-58 844  9-26-94 2 86-72-86-73.1, 86-75-86-80 846 10-10-94 2 2-201 847 10-10-94 1, 2 26-2, 26-3 852 10-24-94 2 58-1 853 11-14-94 2 32-1-32-12 856  4-10-95 1 90-139 857  5-23-95 2 102-129 858  5- 8-95 2 102-352 862  9-11-95 2 2-98-2-110 856 10- 9-95 2 14-1 3-7 14-4-14-7 828  2-12-96 2 102-301, 102-305, 102-305.1, 102-306, 102-306.1, 102-308 839  2-12-96 2 102-37 3 102-351, 102-352 854  4- 8-96 2 102-377 866  2-26-96 2       Rpld 2-151-2-161 3       Added 2-151-2-162 878  4-22-96 2 102-61-102-64 885  5-28-96 2       Rpld 2-191, 2-192 888  5-28-96 2 90-1, 90-6-90-8 893  7-22-96 2 34-1, 34-2 897 10-14-96 3       Rpld 102-1-102-5, 102-21-102-44, 102-51, 102-61-102-64, 102-81-102-84, 102-101-102-105, 102-116-102-132, 102-146-102-151, 102-161-102-167, 102-181-102-186, 102-201-102-205, 102-216-102-220, 102-241-102-243, 102-261-102-265, 102-281-102-283, 102-301-102-309, 102-326-102-333, 102-351-102-356, 102-371-102-384, 102-401-102-412, 102-421-102-424, 102-441-102-446, 102-461, 102-481-102-498, 102-531-102-537       Added 102-2-102-5, 102-21-102-44, 102-51, 102-61-102-64, 102-81-102-84, 102-101-102-105, 102-116-102-123, 102-125, 102-127-102-132, 102-146-102-151, 102-161-102-167, 102-181-102-186, 102-201-102-205, 102-216-102-219, 102-241-102-243, 102-261-102-265, 102-281-102-283, 102-301-102-309, 102-326-102-333, 102-351-102-356, 102-371-102-384, 102-401-102-412, 102-421-102-424, 102-441-102-446, 102-461, 102-481-102-498, 102-531-102-537 904 10-14-96 2 2-62, 2-63 932  8-25-97 2 18-35 3 18-53 4 18-56 935  9-28-98 2 102.133 3 102.129 938  1-26-98 2 14-166 945  5-26-98 3 2-96-2-110 946  6-22-98 2 90-26-90-31 968 11-23-98 2 2-201 969 12-14-98 1 10-5(a) 973  2- 8-99 2 34-1(a), 34-2(b) 978  4-26-99 2       Added 86-49 979  6-14-99 2 102-301, 102-302 102-304, 102-305 102-306, 102-307 102-308 980  6-14-99 2 102-128(e) 3 102-129(e) 4 102-163 5 102-401 6 102-442 7 102-443 8       Rpld 102-531-102-537 9       Added 102-531-102-539 982  5-24-99 2       Added 2-120-2-126 987  9-27-99 2       Added 74-10 988  1-22-01 2-7 102-486-102-491 9-15 102-492-102-498 989  1-22-01 2 102-149 3 102-151 990  1-10-00 2-4 102-129(c)-(e) 998 10-11-99 2 82-40 3 82-60 5       Added 82-90 1000 10-11-99 2       Added 74-25-74-27 1009 10-11-99 2 14-166(b) 1015  1-10-00 3 82-40 4 82-60 6 82-90 1016 12-28-99 1-8       Added 82-131-82-138 1022  3-27-00 2       Rpld 2-120-2-126 3       Added 2-120-2-127 1023  3-13-00 2       Added 6-10 1024  3-27-00 2 90-138 1025  4-24-00 2 58-1(16) 3 58-3 1028 12-11-00 2 102-377 3 102-378 1030  7-10-00 2 90-138 1031  8-28-00 2 102-219 1033  8-28-00 2 34-1, 34-2 1034  4-23-01 2 6-7 1035  8-28-00 2 58-1 1036 10- 9-00 2 102-302 1038 10-23-00 1 90-27 2 90-138 1039 11-27-00 2, 3 90-27 2, 4 90-138 1045 12-29-00 2       Added 74-10.1 1055  3-12-01 2 102-301 3 102-302 4 102-304 5 102-305 6 102-305.1 1066  8-28-01 2 2-151-2-154 2-156, 2-157      2-163, 2-164 1067  8-28-01 2       Added 2-128-2-130 1070  9-10-01 2 1-2, 1-4 1-7 1073 11-26-01 2 90-2, 90-3 3 90-27 4 90-30, 90-31 5 90-138 6 90-139(e) 1074 12-10-01 2 14-3 1076  1-14-02 2 90-2 3 90-27 1079  2-25-02 2 90-88(c) 1080  3-25-02 2 90-161 90-163-90-165 90-168 1085  4-22-02 2       Rnbd 82-91, 82-92       as 82-92, 82-93       Added 82-91 1061  8-26-02 2, 3       Rpld 10-1-10-28 10-51-10-54       Added 10-1-10-10 10-12-10-23 1091  6- 3-02 2 74-12 1101 10-28-02 2 102-129 1109  2-24-03 2 6-7 1113  5-28-03 2 6-1 3 6-7 1120  7-14-03 2 102-129 1139 11-10-04 2 102-401 1142  4-12-04 2 102-301-102-309 1156 10-11-04 2 14-3(b) 1157 10-25-04 2 102-149 3 102-150 4       Added 102-152 1163  1-24-05 2, 3 102-129(e), (f) 1166  2-14-05 2 102-351 3 102-352 4       Added 102-357 5       Added 102-358 1176  5- 9-05 2 2-151 3 2-152 4       Rpld 2-156 1177  5- 9-05 2 2-129(b)(1) 1179  6-13-05 2 102-304 3 102-305 4 102-306 1185  8- 8-05 2 102-377 3 102-378 1200 11-14-05 2 102-167(a)-(c) 1247  3-27-06 2       Added 24-1-24-12 1248  4-10-06 4 102-129(a) 5       Rnbd 102-129(e), (f)       as 102-129(f), (g)       Added 102-129(e) 1249  4-10-06 4 102-130 1285  8-28-06 2 102-351 1286  8-28-06 2 102-219 1308 10- 9-06 2       Added 102-106 1312 11-13-06 2 ch. 24(note) 1323  4- 9-07 2 102-117 3 102-118 4 102-119 5 102-121 6 102-129 1334  4-23-07 2       Added ch. 34, art. I(tit.) 3       Added 34-21-34-31 1335  6-25-07 2 102-147 3 102-149 4 102-150 5 102-151 6 102-152 1336  6-25-07 2 102-35 1337  6-25-07 2 102-487 2 102-492 1338  6-25-07 2       Added 102-570-102-581 1339  6-25-07 1       Rpld 42-1-42-12 1340  6-25-07 2       Rpld 102-220(c), (d), (e), (f) 3 102-220(tit.) 1361  6-25-07 2 90-139 1375 10-22-07 2 102-26 3 102-28 1376 10-22-07 2-5 102-61-102-64 1399  7-28-08 2 102-377 1417  8-24-09 2 102-151 1418  7-13-09 2       102-129 1419  1-26-09 2       Added ch. 86, art. V, 
86-90-86-110 1422  5-26-09 1 18-57 1423  5-26-09 2 102-62 1426  6- 8-09 2       Rpld 102-357 1432  9-28-09 2       Added 86-111-86-114 1439 10-25-10 2 102-351, 102-352 1440  9-27-10 1 62-2 1441  9-27-10 1 62-1 1443 10-24-10 2 50-1, 50-4       Added 50-5-50-7 1462  6-13-11 2 2-98 1465  8- 8-11 2 90-139 1466  7-25-11 2 102-129(c) 1468  8-22-11 1 6-6 1469  8-22-11 1 58-1(2) 1471  9-26-11 1 54-7(a)(2) 1472  9-26-11 1 58-1(10) 1473 11-28-11 1 102-129(f)(1)dd., nn. 1482  9-10-12 2 22-5 1483  9-24-12 2 90-168 1487 12-10-12 2 86-114 1490  1-29-13 2 90-27 3 90-31 4       Added 90-32 5 90-138 6 90-141 1499  8-26-13 1-3 62-1 1500  8-26-13 1-3 62-2 1511  9-23-13 23 102-351 1513 10-28-13 1       Rpld 14-1-14-9 14-31-14-37 14-51-14-53 14-66-14-75 14-96, 14-97 14-111-14-115 14-126-14-131 14-141-14155 14-166-14-185       Added 14-1-14-15 1514 10-28-13 2       Rpld 2-29 1519  5-12-14 2 10-1 3       Rpld 10-3       Added 10-3 4-6 10-5-10-7 7 10-10 8, 9 10-12, 10-13 10 10-15 11-13 10-17-10-19 14, 15 10-21, 10-22 16       Rpld 10-23 1529  7-14-14 2 10-7 3 10-10 4 10-17 1578 11-10-14 2       Rpld 74-11-74-15       Added 74-11-74-18 1596 12-14-15 2 86-114 1598  1-25-16 2 2-102, 2-107 1601  5- 9-16 2 90-138 1602  5- 9-16 2 90-27(4) 1604  5-23-16 2       Rpld 102-351-102-358       Added 102-351-102-354, 102-356, 102-358, 102-359 1608 11-14-16 1-8 62-2 1611 11-28-16 II 6-1, 6-7, 6-10(a)       Added 6-11 1615  2-13-17 II       Added 18-76-18-79 1624  8-14-17 2 86-114 1625  8-14-17 II 18-77 1627 12-11-17 1 62-2 1628 10- 9-17 1-7 62-1 1634  3-12-18 III       Rpld 102-537, 102-538       Added 102-537, 102-538 1674  1-14-19 2       Added 102-600-102-614 1675  1-14-19 II       Added 2-180 1682  3-25-19 II 90-137  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Florida Stautes. 
F.S. 
Section Section  
this Code 1.01 1-2 7.46 1-2 34.07 24-12 34.191 1-11 ch. 49 2-122 ch. 50 102-62 55.03 74-10.1 55.03, 55.04 34-5 60.05 2-122 2-126 ch. 75 Char. Art. V ch. 97 et seq. Ch. 26 chs. 97-106 Char. Art. I, § 4 98.031 et seq. Char. Art. VII, § 39 99.021 Char. Art. VII, § 41 104.31(3) Char. Art. III, § 12 112.061(6), (7), (8) 74-10.1 112.311 et seq. Char. Art. III, § 11 112.313 2-137 112.531-112.534 Ch. 46 112.61 et seq. Ch. 62 ch. 120 102-241 130.01 et seq. Char. Art. V 132.01 et seq. Char. Art. V 159.01 et seq. Char. Art. V 161.55 102-203 ch. 162 2-112 102-613 162.01 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 5 ch. 163 Ch. 2 2-96 102-1 102-37 102-281 102-484, 102-485 163.3161 Ch. 102, Art. XXI 163.3161(1) 2-66 163.3174 2-66 163.3177 102-186 102-375 163.3180 102-106 163.3194 Ch. 102, Art. XXI 163.3202 102-82 163.3213(1) 102-61 163.3213(2)(a) 102-61 163.3215(2) 102-61 163.330 2-102 163.356 2-97, 2-98 163.385 Char. Art. V 165.022 Char. Art. XI, § 58 165.051 Char. Art. XI, § 58 ch. 166 Char. §§ 1-60 Char. Art. I, § 2 Char. Art. II, § 5- 
Char. Art. II, § 7 Char. Art. II, § 9 Char. Art. IX, § 46, Char. Art. IX, § 47 102-82 102-484, 102-485 166.011 90-26 166.021 2-96 70-1 166.021(1) Ch. 2, Art. V 166.021(4) Char. Art. III, § 12 Char. Art. XI, § 53 166.021(5) 1-10 Char. Art. II, § 6 Char. Art. III, § 12 Char. Art. IV, § 14 Char. Art. IV, § 18 166.031 Char. §§ 1-60 166.041 1-7 2-241 Char. Art. X Char. Art. X, § 48 Char. Art. X, § 50 102-37 166.101 et seq. Char. Art. V Char. Art. V, § 19-Char. Art. V, § 22 166.201 et seq. Char. Art. VI 166.221 Char. Art. II, § 7 166.231 Ch. 82, Art. II 82-71 166.231(4) 82-39 166.231(5) 82-39 82-59 82-71 166.231(8) 82-91 166.232 82-71 166.241 2-1 ch. 170 Ch. 74 102-184 ch. 173 2-220 175.101 Ch. 82, Art. IV ch. 177 2-69 102-484, 102-485 102-488, 102-493 102-494, 102-498 177.011 et seq. 102-494 Ch. 102, Art. XXI ch. 180 Ch. 70 70-1 70-45 Ch. 90 180.191(b) 90-137 185.08 Ch. 82, Art. III ch. 190 102-184 ch. 192 et seq. Char. Art. I, § 4 ch. 193 Char. Art. VI 193.116 Char. Art. VI 196.075 82-132 82-133 203.012(3), (7) 74-10.1 ch. 205 Char. Art. II, § 7 Ch. 18, Art. II 205.053 18-27 205.063 18-49 205.162 18-38 212.08 82-91 212.08(15) 82-91 215.43 Char. Art. V 215.431 Char. Art. V 215.84 Char. Art. V 218.37-218.385 Char. Art. V 257.171 Ch. 50 281.33 2-1 286.011 et seq. 2-29 ch. 298 Ch. 30, Art. III 102-184 ch. 316 86-1 86-76 316.001 et seq. Ch. 86 316.008 Ch. 86 316.194 86-72 316.1945 86-72 316.1951 86-72 316.1955, 316.1956 102-151 316.2044(2) 86-76 316.2397(3) 86-74 ch. 318 Ch. 86 86-2 318.18(2) 102-151 ch. 320 102-535 320.8325 102-532 324.031 94-31 335.04 Ch. 74 335.141 Char. Art. II, § 6 337.401 74-10.1 337.407 102-303 339.155 102-106 339.241 Ch. 30, Art. II 364.02(12) 74-10.1 ch. 367 Ch. 90 373.403 et seq. Ch. 30, Art. III 373.451-373.4595 102-202 ch. 381 102-601 381.071 Ch. 38 381.272 90-52 ch. 386 30-4 381.986 18-77 ch. 400 102-51 ch. 403 70-1 102-183 102-202 403.41 Ch. 30, Art. II 403.702-403.7893 Ch. 70 403.850 et seq. Ch. 90 90-26 403.850-403.864 90-161 ch. 418 Ch. 58 ch. 419 102-129 ch. 489 90-165 489.103 90-165 102-351 489.503 102-351 493.325 18-43 ch. 500 102-601, 102-614 ch. 509 102-601, 102-613 102-614 509.013(2) 102-601 509.013(5) 102-601 509.013(8) 102-601 ch. 531 Char. Art. II, § 7 ch. 552 14-182 ch. 553 Ch. 14 553.73 24-9 553.79 24-9 553.80 14-7 24-9 102-351 553.793 102-351 561.01 6-1 561.01 et seq. Ch. 6 561.20(2) 6-7 562.01 6-9 562.165 6-4 562.27 6-5 562.50 6-2 565.02(4) 6-1 588.12 et seq. 10-6 616.12 18-40 627.7415 86-76 ch. 633 2-152 2-161 Ch. 34 633.025 Ch. 34 ch. 650 Ch. 62 62-26 650.02 62-26 704.06 102-203 713.78 86-39 713.78(2)(c) 86-79 713.78(6) 86-75 ch. 718 102-35 ch. 723 18-57 ch. 767 10-13 ch. 775 Char. Art. II, § 8 775.082 1-11 10-21 24-6 54-1 775.083 1-11 10-21 24-6 54-1 775.084 10-21 ch. 790, ch. 791 Char. Art. II, § 7 812.14 90-5 ch. 823 38-2 102-166 823.05 2-125 ch. 828 Ch. 10 828.13 10-15 828.27 Ch. 10 828.30 10-10 831.01 1-16 2-138 839.13 1-16 2-138 843.16 86-75 847.013(4) Char. Art. II, § 7 847.09(1) Char. Art. II, § 7 849.093(1) et seq. 18-57 870.041 et seq. Ch. 22 870.042(2) 22-2 870.045 22-5 870.046 22-3 870.047 22-6 876.05 Char. Art. VII, § 41 ch. 893 94-32 893.138 2-120 ch. 901 Ch. 46 932.701 et seq. 6-5 933.20 et seq. 1-12 ch. 943 2-152 943.10 10-1 943.12-943.14 Ch. 46 943.25 46-12 943.25(13) 46-12  
